1|1| In the name of God, the Beneficent, the Merciful.
1|2| All praise belongs to God, Master of humankind.
1|3| The beneficent, the merciful. 
1|4| Ruler (and owner) of the judgment day.
1|5| We only serve You, and we only ask You for help.
1|6| Guide us to the straight path,
1|7| path of those whom You favored upon them, not those who are the object of (your) anger, and not the lost ones.
2|1| A.L.M. (Alif. Lam. Mim.)
2|2| This is the book, there is no doubt in it, a guide for those who control themselves (against their unlawful desires and disobeying God's commandments),
2|3| those who believe in the unseen and perform the mandatory prayer and spend (in God's way) from what We provided for them,
2|4| and those who believe in what was sent down to you and what was sent down before you and they are sure of the hereafter.
2|5| These are on guidance from their Master, and they are the successful ones.
2|6| For those who disbelieved, it is the same if you warn them or not, they will not believe.
2|7| God sealed their hearts (according to His laws) and their hearing, and over their eyes is a cover and a great punishment will be for them.
2|8| Among the people, some say we believe in God and the last day, but they are not believers.
2|9| (They think) they trick God and those who believed, but they only trick themselves and they do not realize.
2|10| There is a disease in their hearts and God increased their disease and a painful punishment is theirs because they were lying.
2|11| When they are told: do not commit corruption on the earth; they say: we are just reformers.
2|12| Beware that they are the corruptors but they do not realize.
2|13| And when they are told: believe like people who believed; they say: shall we believe like fools who believed? Know that they are the fools but they do not know.
2|14| When they meet those who believed, they say: we believed. And when they are alone with their own devils (like-minded friends) they say: we are with you and we are only making fun of them.
2|15| God makes fun of them and helps them wander blindly in their rebellion.
2|16| They are those who traded the misguidance for the guidance, so their trade was not profitable, and they were not guided.
2|17| Their example is like someone who started a fire, and when it lit up around him, God took away their light and left them in darkness unable to see.
2|18| Deaf, dumb, blind, and they will not return.
2|19| Or like (people in) a heavy rainstorm from the sky with darkness and thunder and lightning in it, they put their fingers in their ears from the fear of the death. God surrounds (and dominates) the disbelievers.
2|20| The lightning almost takes away their sight, and whenever it lights up around them, they walk in it, and when it becomes dark around them, they stand still. If God wanted, He would take away their hearing and their sights. God is capable of everything.
2|21| People, only serve your Master who created you and those before you so that you may control yourselves.
2|22| The One who made the earth a bed and sky a structure for you, and He sent down water (rain) from the sky to bring out (all sorts of) produce as food. So do not make any equals for God, while you know this.
2|23| And if you have any doubt about what We sent down (Quran) to Our servant, then bring a chapter like it, and invite your witnesses besides God if you are truthful.
2|24| So if you do not do, which you will never do, then be cautious of the fire which was prepared for the disbelievers whose fuel is the people and the stones.
2|25| And give good news to those who believed and did good works that they will have gardens which rivers flow through them. Whenever they are given a fruit to eat from there, they say: it is the same thing that we were provided before. For they will be given similar to that, and they will have pure spouses in it and will live in there forever.
2|26| God does not shy away from giving example of a mosquito or something beyond it (bigger or smaller). And as for those who believed, they know that it is the truth and from their Master. And as for those who disbelieved, they say: what did God mean by this example? He misguides many by it, and guides many by it, while He only misguides the disobedient ones with it.
2|27| Those who break their promise to God after committing to it and cut what God ordered to be joined and spread corruption on the earth, they are the losers.
2|28| How do you disbelieve in God, when you were dead (lifeless) and He gave you life then He makes you die and brings you back to life, and then you are returned to Him?
2|29| He is the One who created everything on the earth for you. He then turned to the sky and shaped it into seven skies. He knows everything.
2|30| And when your Master said to the angels that I am placing a successor (and replacement) on the earth, they said: will You place someone who commits corruption and sheds blood while we glorify You with Your praise and sanctify You? He said: I know something that you do not know.
2|31| And He taught Adam the names/attributes, all of them. And then presented them to the angels and said: tell Me the names/attributes of these, if you are truthful.
2|32| The angels said: You are flawless, we only know what You taught us, You are the knowledgeable and the wise.
2|33| He said: Adam, inform them of their names. When Adam told them their names, He said: did I not tell you that I know unseen (secrets) of the skies and the earth, and I know what you disclose and what you hide?
2|34| And when We told the angels to be humble toward Adam, they all humbled except Iblis (Satan) which refused and was arrogant and became one of the disbelievers.
2|35| And We said: Adam, you and your wife live in the garden and eat as much as you want from anywhere (and anything) you want, but do not go near this tree because you become one of the wrongdoers.
2|36| But Satan tricked them and had them both thrown out from where they were. We said: go down, some of you will be enemies of the others, and on the earth you will have a place (to live) and provisions for a while (your lifetime). 
2|37| Then Adam received (and learned) some words from his Master, so He turned to him (and forgave him). Indeed He is the acceptor of repentance and the merciful. 
2|38| We said: go down from here all of you, when guidance comes to you from Me then whoever follows My guidance shall have no fear and no sadness.
2|39| And those who disbelieved and denied Our signs are inhabitants of the fire remaining in there forever.
2|40| Children of Israel, remember My favor that I granted you, and keep your promise to Me so I keep My promises to you, and fear only Me. 
2|41| And believe in what I sent down (Quran) confirming what is already with you (Torah) and do not be the first disbeliever to it, and do not sell My signs for a small price, and be cautious of Me.
2|42| And do not cover the truth with falsehood, and do not hide the truth while you know.
2|43| And perform the mandatory prayer and give to the mandatory charity and bow down with those who bow down.
2|44| Do you instruct people to do good but you forget to do it yourselves, while you read the book? Do you not understand?
2|45| Get help from the patience (and perseverance) and the mandatory prayer, and it is definitely difficult except for those who are humble,
2|46| those who think they meet their God (in the hereafter) and they will return to Him.
2|47| Children of Israel, remember My favor that I granted you, and that I preferred you over all other people.
2|48| Be cautious of a day that no one can do anything for another one, and mediation is not accepted from anyone, and no equivalent (compensation) is taken from anyone, and no one is helped.
2|49| And (remember) when We saved you from Pharaoh’s people who subjected you to severe punishments, killing your sons and letting your women live. In this there was a great test from your Master.
2|50| And when We parted the (red) sea and saved you and drowned Pharaoh’s people while you were watching.
2|51| And (remember) when We made an appointment with Moses for forty nights, then after him (in his absence) you took a calf (as god). You were wrongdoers. 
2|52| We excused you after that, so you may be thankful.
2|53| And (remember) when We gave Moses the book and the criterion (between good and bad), so that you may be guided.
2|54| And (remember) when Moses told his people: you have done wrong to yourselves because you worshiped the calf, so repent to your creator, then kill (the guilty ones among) yourselves, this is better for you in your creator’s view, so that He turns to you (and forgives you).  Indeed He is the acceptor of repentance and the merciful.
2|55| And when you told Moses that we will never believe in you until we clearly see God, then the lightning struck you while you watched.
2|56| And We restored your life after you died, so you may be thankful.
2|57| And We made shades for you with the clouds, and We sent down Manna and Salwa (two kind of edible foods) to you (saying): eat from the good things that We provided for you. They did not do Us wrong, but they were wrong to themselves.
2|58| And (remember) when We said: enter this town, and eat as much as you want from anywhere you want, enter the gates humbly and say remove (and reduce our sins), so that We forgive your mistakes, and We are going to increase the good doers (in rewards and in numbers).
2|59| But those who did wrong changed the word to something other than what was said to them. So We sent down a punishment from the sky to those who did wrong for their disobedience.
2|60| And (remember) when Moses asked for water for his people, We told him to strike the stone with his cane, and then twelve springs flowed out of it. And all people knew from where to drink. Eat and drink from God's provision, and do not do mischief on the earth as corruptors.
2|61| And (remember) when you said: Moses, we will never tolerate (and last) on only one (kind of) food, so call on your Master on our behalf to bring out for us some of what is grown from the earth such as its herb and its cucumber and its garlic and its lentil and its onion. He (Moses) said: do you want to exchange that which is better with something that is worse? Go down to a city (possibly in Egypt) and you will find what you are asking for. And poverty and misery covered them and they were stricken by God’s anger, because they disbelieved in God’s signs and killed the prophets unjustifiably. This is because they rebelled and violated (the law).
2|62| Those who believe and those who are Jewish and the Christians and the Sabians, anyone who believes in God and the last day and does good work, then they have their reward with their Master and they have no fear and no sadness.
2|63| And (remember) when We took your commitment and raised the mountain above you (and told you) to firmly hold on to what We gave you (Our commandments), and remember what is in it, so that you may control yourselves. 
2|64| But you turned back after that, and if it was not for God’s grace and mercy on you, you would have definitely been among the losers.
2|65| Certainly you knew the ones among you who violated the Sabbath, and We told them to be despised monkeys. 
2|66| So We made it an exemplary punishment for those among them and those who succeeded them, and a lesson for those who control themselves.
2|67| And when Moses told his people: God indeed ordered you to sacrifice a cow. They said: are you making fun of us? Moses said: I seek God’s protection from being among the ignorant ones.
2|68| They said: call on your Master on our behalf to clarify for us what (kind of cow) it should be. He said: He (God) says that it should be a cow that is neither too old nor too young, but in between. So, do as you are ordered.
2|69| They said: call on your Master on our behalf to clarify for us what is its color. He said: He (God) says that it is a cow, yellow with its color bright, pleasing the viewers.
2|70| They said: call on your Master on our behalf to clarify for us which one, because all cows look alike to us, and God willing we will be guided.
2|71| He said: He (God) says that a cow that is not trained to plow the land or water the crop, perfect with no blemishes. They said: now you brought us the truth. Then they slaughtered it, but they almost did not do.
2|72| And (remember) when you killed a person, then you disputed about it, but God exposed what you were hiding.
2|73| And We said: strike him (the victim) with part of it (the sacrificed cow), and that is how God brings back the dead to life, and shows you His signs, so you may understand.
2|74| After that your hearts were hardened like stones, or even harder (than a stone). And among the stones, there are some that rivers flow out of them, and some of them crack and water comes out of them, and some of them crumble in fear of God. God is not unaware of what you do.
2|75| Do you hope that they believe you? While some of them heard the word of God and then changed it after they understood it, while they knew (what they were doing).
2|76| And whenever they met those who believed, they said: we believed. And when they met each other in private, they said: why do you tell them about what God disclosed for you, so that they argue with you before your Master with it? Do you not understand? 
2|77| Do they not know that God knows what they hide and what they disclose?
2|78| Some of them are illiterate and they do not know the book except wishful thinking (and perception), and they only guess. 
2|79| So woe to those who write the book with their hands and say that this is from God in order to sell it for a small price. Woe to them for what their hands wrote, and woe to them for what they earn.
2|80| And they say: the fire will never touch us except for a few days. Say: did you take a promise from God? If so, God never breaks His promise, or do you say on God's behalf what you do not know.
2|81| Yes, whoever commits sins and his sins surround (and enclose) him, they will be inhabitants of the fire remaining in there forever.
2|82| And those who believed and did good works will be inhabitants of the garden, remaining in there forever.
2|83| And (remember) when We took a commitment from the children of Israel that you shall not serve anyone but God, and be good to your parents and relatives (and close ones) and orphans and the needy, and speak nicely to people, and perform the mandatory prayer and give to the mandatory charity, but you turned back except a few of you, and you avoided (your commitment).
2|84| And (remember) when We took your commitment that you should not shed each other's blood, and should not drive each other out of your homes, then you accepted it and you testify (to this).
2|85| Yet you are those who kill each other and drive some of you out of their homes, supporting (each other) against them in sins and enmity, and if they come to you as captives, you ask (or give) ransom for them while it was prohibited for you to drive them out. Do you believe in part of the book and disbelieve in (other) parts? So punishment of anyone among you who does this is disgrace in this life, and on the resurrection day they are sent back to the hardest punishment, and God is not unaware of what you do. 
2|86| These are the ones who traded the life of the hereafter for this world's life, their punishment will not be reduced and they will not be helped.
2|87| And We gave Moses the book and followed him up with the messengers. And We gave Jesus, son of Mary, clear proofs and We supported him with the Holy Spirit. Why is it that every time a messenger came to you with that which is against your desires, you were arrogant so you denied some and killed others?
2|88| They said: our hearts are covered (and is unable to understand God’s message). No, but God cursed them for their disbelief, and a few of them believe (or they believe a little).
2|89| And when a book came to them from God confirming what is with them, even though previously they used to ask for victory over those who disbelieved, then when what they recognized came to them, they disbelieved in it. God’s curse is on the disbelievers.
2|90| What they sold themselves (their soul) for it, was bad, that out of jealousy they disbelieved in what God sent down, that which God sends down from His grace to any one of His servants that He wants.  So they were stricken with anger upon anger, and there is a humiliating punishment for the disbelievers. 
2|91| When they were told: believe in what God sent down, they said: we believe in what was sent down to us. And they disbelieve in anything beyond that, while it is the truth confirming what is with them (their Holy Book). Say: why did you kill God's prophets in the past, if you were believers?
2|92| And Moses came to you with clear proofs, then you took a calf (as god) in his absence, and you were wrongdoers.
2|93| And (remember) when We took your commitment and raised the mountain above you, (saying:) firmly take what We gave you, and listen. They said: we heard and we rebelled. And because of their disbelief their hearts were filled with (love of) the calf. Say: what your belief orders you to it is bad, if you are believers.
2|94| Say: if the home of the hereafter with God (paradise) is exclusively for you and no one else, then wish for death (to go to paradise) if you are truthful.
2|95| And they will never wish for death because of what their hands sent ahead (what they have done), and God knows the wrongdoers well.
2|96| And you find them the most eager people for living (long), even from those who are the polytheists. Every one of them loves to be given a life of a thousand years, whereas even if he is given a (long) life it will not save him from the punishment. God sees everything they do.
2|97| Say: anyone who is the enemy of Gabriel (is God’s enemy), because he sent this (Quran) down into your heart with God’s permission, confirming what came before it, and is a guide and good news for the believers.
2|98| Anyone who is the enemy of God and His angels and His messengers and Gabriel and Michael (is a disbeliever), and God is indeed the enemy of the disbelievers.
2|99| And indeed We sent down clear signs to you, and only the disobedient ones disbelieve in it. 
2|100| Is it not (a fact) that every time they make a promise, some of them throws it away (and break it)? In fact most of them do not believe.
2|101| And when a messenger from God came to them confirming what is with them, then some people of the book threw the book of God behind their backs as if they did not know.
2|102| And at the time of Solomon’s rule they followed what the devils were reading out loud. Solomon did not disbelieve but the devils disbelieved, teaching people witchcraft and what was sent down to the two angels in Babylon, Harut and Marut. But neither of the two teaches anyone before saying: we are only a temptation, do not disbelieve. So they learn from them what causes separation between the man and his wife. But they did not harm anyone with it except by God’s permission. And they learn things that harm them and have no benefit for them. And they certainly knew that whoever buys it (witchcraft) there will be no share for him in the hereafter. And what they sold themselves to it is definitely bad, if they knew (the truth).
2|103| And if they believed and were cautious (of God), certainly (their) reward from God would have been better, if they knew.
2|104| You who believe, do not say: Ra’ina  (watch for us), but say: Unzurna (watch over us), and do listen (to this command). And for the disbelievers there will be a painful punishment.
2|105| Those people of the book who disbelieved and the polytheists do not like anything good to be sent down to you from your Master. But God chooses anyone He wants for His mercy. God has enormous grace.
2|106| If We invalidate (or cancel) any sign or make it forgotten, We bring one better than it or like it. Do you not know that God is capable of everything?
2|107| Did you not know that the rule of the skies and the earth belongs to God, and there is no supporter or helper for you other than God?
2|108| Or do you want to ask (for something) from your messenger as it was asked from Moses before? Whoever changes the belief with the disbelief has lost the even (and straight) way.
2|109| Many of the people of the book want to turn you to disbelief after your belief and after the truth is clarified for them because of jealousy in themselves. Forgive and disregard (them) until God gives His order. God is capable of everything.
2|110| And perform the mandatory prayer and give to the mandatory charity. And whatever good you send ahead for yourselves you shall find it with God. God sees everything you do.
2|111| And they said: no one ever enters the garden except anyone who is Jewish or Christians. This is their wish. Say: bring your proof if you are truthful.
2|112| Yes, anyone who submits his manner (of life) to God and is a good doer, then his reward is with his God, and he shall have no fear and no sadness.
2|113| And the Jews said that the Christians are not on anything , and the Christians said that the Jews are not on anything, although they were reading the book. Likewise, those who do not know (the truth) say the same as they say. But God judges between them in what they used to disagree about it, on the resurrection day.
2|114| Who is more wrong than someone who, in God’s places of worship, prevents His name to be mentioned and try to ruin them? They should not enter there except in fear. They have humiliation in this world and have a great punishment in the hereafter.
2|115| The east and the west belong to God, so wherever you turn is God's direction. God is bountiful (and boundless) and knowledgeable.
2|116| And they said: God has taken a son. Never, He is flawless. Everything in the skies and on the earth belongs to Him, all are obedient to Him.
2|117| Originator of the skies and the earth, when He decides on an issue, then He just says for it: be, and it will be.
2|118| And those who do not know said: why does God not talk to us or a sign does not come to us? The same way, those before them said the same thing as they say. Their hearts are alike. We have made the signs clear for people who are sure.
2|119| We sent you with the truth, a giver of good news and a warner. You will not be questioned about the inhabitants of hellfire.
2|120| The Jews and the Christians will never be satisfied with you until you follow their faith. Say: God’s guidance is the (true) guidance. And if you follow their wishes after what came to you from the knowledge, then you have no supporter or helper against God.
2|121| Those whom We gave them the book, and read it the way it is deserved to be read, they believe in it. And whoever disbelieves in it, then they are the losers.
2|122| Children of Israel, remember My favor that I granted you and I preferred you over all other people.
2|123| Be cautious of a day that no one can do anything for another, no equivalent (compensation) is taken from anyone, and mediation will have no benefit for anyone, and they will not be helped.
2|124| And when God tested Abraham through (certain) words, which he fulfilled, He said: I make you a leader for the people. He (Abraham) said: and from my offspring? He said: My promise does not include the wrongdoers.
2|125| And when We made the house (the Ka’aba at Mecca) a place of gathering and safety for the people, and (said): take where Abraham stood (in prayer) as a place of prayer. And We charged Abraham and Ishmael to cleanse My House for those who go around it and for the devoted and those who bow down and show humbleness.
2|126| And when Abraham said: God, make this territory safe, and provide its people who believed in God and the last day with its produce. (God) said: and whoever disbelieves, I let him enjoy for a short while and then I force him to the punishment of the fire, and it is a bad destination.
2|127| And when Abraham and Ishmael raised the foundations of the house (they prayed): our Master, accept from us, indeed You hear all and know all.
2|128| Our Master, make the two of us submitters to You, and from our offspring, a group who are submitters to You, and show us our rituals, and turn to us (and forgive us), indeed You are the acceptor of repentance and the merciful.
2|129| Our Master, raise a messenger in them from among themselves to read them your signs and teach them the book and the wisdom and to purify (and absolve) them. You are the powerful and the wise.
2|130| And who turns away from Abraham’s faith, except someone who fools himself?  And We have certainly chosen him in this world, and in the hereafter he is of the righteous.
2|131| When his Master told him: submit, he said: I submit to the Master of humankind.
2|132| And Abraham and Jacob instructed their sons to it (saying): my sons, indeed God chose the religion (way of life) for you, so do not die except while you are submitted (to God).
2|133| Or were you witnesses when the death came to Jacob, when he said to his sons: who will you serve after me? They said: we will serve your god and the god of your fathers Abraham, Ishmael, and Isaac, the One (and only) god, and we are submitted to Him.
2|134| They are people who have passed away, for them is what they did, and for you is what you did, and you will not be questioned about what they were doing.
2|135| And they said: be a Jew or Christian to be guided. Say: not at all, the faith of monotheist Abraham (is enough to be guided), he was not one of the Polytheists.
2|136| Say: we believed in God, and what was sent down to us, and what was sent down to Abraham and Ishmael and Isaac and Jacob and the tribes (of Israel), and what was given to Moses and Jesus, and what was given to the prophets from their Master, we do not differentiate between any of them, and we are submitted to Him. 
2|137| And if they believe same as what you believed in it, then they are surely guided, and if they turn away, then they are certainly in opposition. God is going to suffice (to protect) you against them, and He hears all and knows all.
2|138| (Best way of life is) God's religion, and who is better than God (in prescribing) religion? And we are His servants.
2|139| Say: do you argue with us about God, while He is our Master and your Master, and our deeds are ours, and your deeds are yours, and we are only devoted to Him. 
2|140| Or do you say that Abraham and Ishmael and Isaac and Jacob and the tribes (of Israel) were Jewish or Christians? Say: do you know better or God? And who is more wrong than someone who hides the testimony that he has from God? God is not unaware of what you do.
2|141| They are people who have passed away, for them is what they did, and for you is what you did, and you will not be questioned about what they were doing.
2|142| The fools among the people say: what turned them away from their qiblah (direction of the mandatory prayer) which they had? Say: the east and the west belong to God, He guides whom He wants to a straight path.
2|143| And like that We made you a moderate (and a fair) group so that you will be witness over the people, and the messenger will be witness over you. And We only appointed the qiblah that you used to face, in order that We know those who follow the messenger from anyone who turns back on his heel. And that was indeed a great (test) except for those whom God guided. And God is not to waste your belief. Indeed, God is gentle and merciful to the people.
2|144| We have seen the turning of your face in the sky, so We make you turn to a qiblah that it pleases you. So turn your face toward the Sacred Mosque (Masjid-el-Haram), and wherever you are (during the mandatory prayer) turn your faces toward it. Those who were given the book know that it is the truth from their Master. And God is not unaware of what they do.
2|145| And even if you bring all the signs to the people of the book, they will not follow your qiblah, and you are not follower of their qiblah, and some of them are not follower of the other's qiblah. And if you follow their desires after that which came to you of the knowledge, you are one of the wrongdoers.
2|146| Those We gave them the book, recognize him (the messenger) like they recognize their sons, and some of them hide the truth while they know.
2|147| The truth is from your Master, so do not be one of the doubters.
2|148| For everyone there is a direction that he turns to it, so compete in (doing) the good. Wherever you are, God brings you all together (for accounting). God is capable of everything.
2|149| And from wherever you go out, turn your face toward the Sacred Mosque (during the mandatory prayer), indeed that is the truth from your Master. God is not unaware of what you do.
2|150| And from wherever you go out turn your face toward the Sacred Mosque (during the mandatory prayer), and wherever you are turn your face toward the Sacred Mosque, so there will not be any reason for the people against you, except those among them who did wrong. And do not fear them, but fear Me, so I complete My favor upon you, and you may be guided.
2|151| As We sent you a messenger from among yourselves who reads to you Our signs and purifies (and absolves) you and teaches you the book and the wisdom and teaches you what you did not used to know,
2|152| so remember Me, that I remember you, and be thankful to Me, and do not ungrateful to Me.
2|153| You who believe, ask for help through patience (and perseverance) and the mandatory prayer, because God is with those who are patient (and persevere)
2|154| Do not say they are dead about those who are killed in God's way. No, they are alive but you do not realize.
2|155| We shall test you with something from the fear and the hunger, and the loss of the wealth and the life and the crops, and give good news to those who are patient (and persevere),
2|156| those who when a tragedy hits them say: we belong to God, and we return to Him.
2|157| The blessing and mercy of their Master is on them, and they are the guided.
2|158| The Safa and the Marwa (located in Mecca) are indeed two of God’s shrines, and there is no blame on anyone to go around them while performing the Hajj (the Pilgrimage) or the Umrah (the visit) of the house (of Ka’aba). And whoever voluntarily does good, then God is indeed appreciative and knowledgeable.
2|159| Those who hide (and do not tell others) what We sent down of the clear proofs and the guidance, after We clarified it for the people in the book, God curses them and those who curse also curse them.
2|160| Except those who repented and straightened out and stated (the truth), so those I will turn to them, and I am the acceptor of repentance and the merciful.
2|161| Those who disbelieved and died while they were disbelievers, are those whom curse of God and the angels and all the people is upon them.
2|162| And they remain in it forever, and the punishment is not reduced for them, and they are not given any delay.
2|163| Your god is the One god, there is no god except Him, the beneficent and the merciful.
2|164| Indeed for those who understand, there are signs in the creation of the skies and the earth, and the alternation (and the difference) between the day and the nights, and the ships that sail on the sea for benefit of the people, and what God sends down from the sky of rain to bring the land back to life after its death, and scattering all kinds of living creatures in it, and changing of the winds and the clouds under control between the sky and the earth.
2|165| And some of the people take equals besides God (to serve), loving them as they love God, while those who believed love God more. And if those who did wrong could see when they see the punishment, (they realize) that all the powers belong to God, and God is severe in punishment.
2|166| When those who were followed disown those who followed (them) and they see the punishment and all their means cut off,
2|167| and those who followed say that if we have another chance, then we disown them as they disowned us. That is how God shows them their deeds as regrets for them, and they will not get out of the fire.
2|168| People, eat from what is lawful and good on the earth, and do not follow Satan's footsteps as he is your clear (and obvious) enemy,
2|169| he only instructs you to the badness and the indecency, and to say what you do not know about God.
2|170| And when it is said to them: follow what God sent down, they say: no, we follow what we found our fathers on it. Even if their fathers did not understand anything and were not guided.
2|171| And the example of (inviting) those who disbelieved is like someone shouting at that which does not hear except a sound or a cry, they are deaf, dumb, and blind so they do not understand.
2|172| You who believe, eat from the good things that We provided for you and be thankful to God if you serve Him.
2|173| He has only forbidden for you the dead (animals) and the blood and meat of the pig (pork) and what is offered up (sacrificed) for other than God. And whoever is forced (to eat them) without being desirous and not exceeding, then there is no sin against him as God is forgiving and merciful.
2|174| Those who hide ( and do not tell others) what God has sent down in the book and sell it for a small price, they fill their stomach with nothing but fire, and God will not speak to them on the resurrection day and will not purify them, and they will have a painful punishment.
2|175| They traded the guidance for the misguidance, and the forgiveness for the punishment. So what is their patience against the fire?
2|176| That is because God sent down the book in truth, and those who disagree about the book are certainly in a great opposition.
2|177| The goodness is not to turn your face toward the east or the west, but good is someone who believes in God and the last day and the angels and the book and the prophets, and he gives the wealth, in spite of his love for it, to the relatives (and close ones) and the orphans and the needy and the traveler (in need) and those who ask, and to free the slaves, and he performs the mandatory prayer and gives to the mandatory charity, and they fulfill their promise when they make a promise, and they persevere (and are patient) in hardship and loss and during the hard times (and the battle). They are those who are telling truth and they are those who control themselves.
2|178| You who believe, fair retaliation is prescribed for you in case of murder, the free for the free, and the slave for the slave, and the female for the female, but anyone who is forgiven in part by his brother (or the person in charge of victim’s state) must follow with good intentions and pay (the ransom) with gratitude. This is a lightening/easement and a mercy from your Master. Whoever exceeds the limits after this will have a painful punishment.
2|179| People of understanding, there is (saving of) life for you in the fair retaliation, so that you may control yourselves.
2|180| It is prescribed to you that when anyone of you is near the death, if he has any good to leave behind, to make a will for (the benefit of) the parents and the relatives (and close ones) with fairness. This is a duty of those who control themselves.
2|181| If anyone changes it (the will) after hearing it, then its sin is only upon those who changed it. God indeed hears all and knows all.
2|182| If anyone fears deviation or sin from the maker of the will, and reconciles between them (the inheritors), there is no sin upon him. God is forgiving and merciful.
2|183| You who believe, fasting is prescribed for you as it was prescribed for those before you, so you may control yourselves.
2|184| (Fasting) is for a limited number of days, and if anyone of you is sick or traveling, then (he should fast) a  number of other days. And for those who are able (and can afford it), there is (the option of) compensation of feeding a needy. And anyone who does good voluntarily, it is better for him. But it is better for you if you fast, if you knew.
2|185| Month of Ramadan is the one in which Quran, a guide for the people and clear evidences of the guidance and the criterion (of right and wrong), was sent down. So anyone of you who sees the month should fast in it. And anyone who is sick or traveling, then (he should fast) a number of other days. God wants ease for you and He does not want difficulty for you, so that you complete the (mandated) number, and so that you magnify God for guiding you, and you may be thankful.
2|186| When My servants ask you about Me, I am indeed near, answering the call of the caller when he calls on Me. So they should answer Me (and My commands) and believe in Me, so they may be on the right way.
2|187| It is made lawful for you to have intercourse with your wives during the fasting night. They are your clothes and you are their clothes (to cover and complement each other). God knew that you betray yourselves, so He turned to you and excused you, so now you may have intercourse with them and look for what God mandated to you. And eat and drink until the white line becomes clear to you from the dark line at dawn, then complete the fast until the nightfall. And do not have intercourse with them while you are in retreat for devotion (worship) into the mosque. That is the limits set by God, so do not go near it. This is how God makes His signs clear to the people, so they may control themselves.
2|188| And do not falsely eat up one another's properties among yourselves, and do not offer it (as bribe) to judges so that you eat up from a portion of people's properties sinfully while you know.
2|189| They ask you about the new moons, say: they are time keeping (a calendar) for the people and for the Pilgrimage (Hajj). It is not goodness that you enter the houses from the rear, but good is someone who controls himself and enters the houses from their doors, and be cautious of God so you may be successful.
2|190| And fight in God's way with those who wage war against you, but do not exceed the limits. God does not like those who exceed the limits.
2|191| And kill them (those who wage war against you) wherever you find them, and drive them out of where they drove you out. Turmoil (and persecution) is worse than murder. And do not fight them at the Sacred Mosque unless they (start to) fight you in there, and if they fight you, then kill them. Such is the payback of the disbelievers.
2|192| And if they stopped, then God is forgiving and merciful.
2|193| And fight them until there is no more turmoil (and persecution) and the way of life is only for God. So if they stopped, then there shall be no enmity except against the wrongdoers.
2|194| The prohibited month is for the prohibited month, and for all that is prohibited there is fair retaliation. If anyone violates against you, then violate against him similar to the violation against you, and be cautious of God and know that God is with those who control themselves.
2|195| And spend in God's way, and do not throw (yourselves) into ruins with your own hands, and do good as God indeed loves the good doers.
2|196| And complete the Hajj (the Pilgrimage of the Ka’aba) and the Umrah (visit of the Ka’aba) for God, but if you are held back, then send the offering (of sacrifice) that is easily available. And do not shave your heads until the offering reaches its destination. If anyone among you is sick or suffers an ailment of his head, then a compensation of fasting, or giving to charity, or a sacrifice. And when you are safe, then anyone who wishes to continue the Umrah on to the Hajj, then the offering (of sacrifice) that is easily available. And anyone who cannot find (or afford) it, should fast three days during the Hajj and seven days on his return (from the Hajj), that is ten (days) in all. This is for anyone whose family does not reside near the Sacred Mosque. And be cautious of God and know that God is severe in punishment.
2|197| The Hajj is in known months, then whoever sets out to the Hajj during them (should know that) there shall be no sexual conduct, and no disobedience (of God commands), and no argument (or altercation) during the Hajj. And whatever good you do, God knows it. And take provision, and indeed the best provision is self control (against unlawful desires and sins). And People of understanding, be cautious of Me.
2|198| There is no blame on you to look for your Master's bounty (through trades), and when you return from (mount) Arafat then remember God at the Sacred Monument. And remember Him, as He guided you, though previously you were of the misguided.
2|199| Then proceed from where the people are proceeding and ask for God’s forgiveness. He is forgiving and merciful.
2|200| And when you completed your rituals then remember God as you remember your fathers, or remember more. And among the people some say: our Master, give us (good things) in this world. There is no share for him in the hereafter.
2|201| And among them, some say: our Master, give us good in this world and good in the hereafter, and protect us from the punishment of the fire.
2|202| They have benefit of whatever they did. God is quick in accounting.
2|203| And remember God in the specified days (during the Hajj). Anyone who hurries up for two days, there is no sin against him and anyone who delays (for two days) there is no sin against him, of course for anyone who controls himself. And be cautious of God and know that you will be gathered before Him.
2|204| And there is one among the people who impresses you with his word about this world’s life, and he calls God to witness about what is in his heart, while he is the most determined enemy.
2|205| When he gains authority (or turns away) he tries, on the earth, to corrupt it and destroys the crops and the offspring. God does not like the corruption.
2|206| And when he is told to be cautious of God, the egotism leads him to the sin. So hell is enough for him, it is a bad resting place.
2|207| While some among people gives his life looking for God's pleasure, and God is gentle to his servants.
2|208| You who believe, enter into submission (to God), all of you, and do not follow the steps of Satan as he is indeed your obvious enemy.
2|209| But if you stumbled after clear proofs came to you, know that God is powerful and wise.
2|210| Do they wait for God and the angels to come to them in shades of the clouds, and then the matter is settled? All matters are returned to God.
2|211| Ask children of Israel: how many clear signs did We give them? And whoever changes God’s favor (God’s instructions) after it came to him, then God is severe in punishment. 
2|212| This world’s life is beautified for those who disbelieved, and they make fun of those who believed, but on the resurrection day those who controlled themselves will be above them. And God provides for whomever He wants without any accounting.
2|213| People were a single community, then God sent the prophets, givers of good news and warners, and He sent down the book with them in truth, to judge between people in what they disagreed about it. And only those who were given it (the book), disagreed about it because of envy between them after the clear proofs came to them. So, God guided those who believed with His permission, regarding what they disagreed about it from the truth. God guides whom He wants to a straight path.
2|214| Did you think that you enter paradise while (tests) has not come to you like (it came) to those who passed away before you? Hardship and suffering happened to them, and they were so shaken that even the messenger and those who believed with him said: when is God’s help?  Know that God’s help is near.
2|215| They ask you about what they should spend. Say: whatever you spend from good (things) is for the parents and the relatives (and close ones) and the orphans and the needy and the travelers (in need). And whatever good you do, God knows about it.
2|216| Fighting is prescribed to you, even though you do not like it. There may be something that you dislike and it is good for you, and there may be something that you like and it is bad for you. God knows and you do not know.
2|217| They ask you about fighting in the prohibited month. Say: fighting in it is a great (sin), but preventing from God’s way and disbelieving him and (preventing from) the Sacred Mosque and driving out its people from there are greater (sins) in God’s view. Turmoil (and persecution) is worse than murder. They will not stop fighting you until they turn you back from your religion, if they can. And anyone of you who turns back from his religion and die while he is a disbeliever, then their works become useless in this world and the hereafter, and they are inhabitants of the fire remaining in there forever.
2|218| Those who believed and those who migrated and tried hard in God's way hope for God’s mercy. And God is forgiving and merciful.
2|219| They ask you about the wine (and alcoholic beverages) and the gambling. Say: there is great sin in both of them and benefits for the people, but their sin are greater than their benefit. They ask you what to spend, say: what you can give away (and let go of). This is how God makes the signs clear for you, so you may think
2|220| about this life and the hereafter. And they ask you about the orphans. Say: improving their affairs is better, and if you associate with them, then they are your brothers. God knows the corruptors from the reformers. If God wanted, He would have brought you hardship. God is powerful and wise.
2|221| Do not marry the polytheist women until they believe, and (marrying) a believing slave woman is better than a polytheist, even if she impresses you. And do not give (your women) in marriage to the polytheist men until they believe, and (marrying) a believing slave man is better than a polytheist, even if he impresses you. These invite into the fire, while God invites to the garden and the forgiveness by His permission. And He makes His signs clear for the people, that they may take notice.
2|222| They ask you about women's menstruation. Say: it is uncomfortable, so keep away from (having intercourse with) women during the menstruation, and do not go near them until they are clean, and when they are clean, then you may approach them from where God instructed you. God indeed loves those who repent and loves those who purify themselves. 
2|223| Your wives are as your plantation (to produce your children), so go to your plantation when you desire, and send (some good) for yourself in advance, and be cautious of God and know that you will meet Him, and give good news to the believers.
2|224| Do not make God object of your oaths (do not swear by God) to hold back from doing good and controlling yourselves and making peace between the people. God hears all and knows all.
2|225| God does not hold you responsible for your useless (and absurd) oaths, but He holds you responsible for what your hearts did (intentionally). God is forgiving and patient.
2|226| For those who swear off their wives (not to have intercourse with them) is a wait of four months. But If they return (and change their mind), God is forgiving and merciful.
2|227| And if they decided to divorce, then God indeed hears all and knows all. 
2|228| Divorced women should wait for three monthly periods, and they are prohibited from hiding what God has created in their wombs if they believe in God and the last day. And their husbands have more right to take them back during this period, if they want to reconcile. And for them (women) is appropriate (rights) similar to that which is their responsibilities, but men are a rank above them (in rights and responsibilities). God is powerful and wise. 
2|229| Divorce is (permitted) twice, then either keeping in fairness, or leaving in kindness. And it is not allowed for you that you take back anything from what you gave them, unless they (both) are afraid of (violating) the limits set by God. And if you are afraid of (violating) the limits set by God, then there is no blame on either of them for what she gives back some of it (for her divorce). These are the limits set by God, so do not violate them, and whoever violates the limits set by God, then they are of the wrongdoers.
2|230| If he divorces her again (for the third time), then after that she is not lawful for him (to remarry her), until she marries another man. Then if he divorces her, there is no blame on either of them if they return to each other (and remarry) if they think they can keep the limits set by God. These are the limits set by God, He makes it clear to people who know.
2|231| And when you divorce women and they reach their waiting period, then either keep them in kindness or let them go in kindness, and do not keep them to harm them so that you violate (God's limits), and anyone who does this has wronged himself. And do not take God’s signs as a joke, and remember God’s favor upon you, and what he sent down to you from the book and the wisdom to advise you with it. Be cautious of God and know that God knows everything.
2|232| And when you divorce women and they reach their waiting period, do not prevent them from marrying their (previous) husbands, if it is agreed between them in a good manner. Anyone of you who believe in God and the last day is advised to this. This is better for you and is more pure, and God knows and you do not know.
2|233| Mothers may nurse their children for two full years, for anyone who wants to complete the nursing. And the father is responsible for her appropriate food and clothing. No one is tasked beyond its capability. A mother should not sustain any loss because of her child, nor should a father because of his child, and the same (responsibility as the father) is on the heir. If they decide to stop (the nursing) after their mutual agreement and consultation, there is no blame on either of them. And if you decide to ask for a nursing mother for your children, there is no blame on you if you properly pay what you offered. Be cautious of God and know that God sees everything you do. 
2|234| And those (men) among you who die and leave their wives behind, (their widows) should wait for four months and ten days. And when they reached their term, then there is no blame on you for whatever they do about themselves appropriately. God is well aware of what you do.
2|235| There is no blame on you for what you hint about it for proposing to women or keep it to yourselves. God knows that you are going to remember them. But do not make secret promises to them unless you speak properly. And do not decide on marriage tie before the prescribed term reaches its end. And know that God knows what is in your minds, so beware of Him, and know that God is forgiving and patient.
2|236| There is no blame on you if you divorced women whom you did not touch them (and did not have sex with them) or set a marriage portion for them. Provide them with appropriate provisions, the wealthy according to his ability and the poor according to his ability, this is a duty upon the good doers.
2|237| And if you divorced them before touching them while you did set a marriage portion for them, then half of what you set (is your duty to pay), unless they forgive it or he who has the tie of marriage in his hands forgives it, and it is closer to self control if you forgive, and do not forget the grace (and generosity) between yourselves. God sees what you do.
2|238| Be mindful of your mandatory prayers especially the middle prayer, and stand before God in devotion.
2|239| If you are afraid, then (pray) on foot or riding, and when you are safe then remember God as He taught you what you did not used to know.
2|240| And those among you who die and leave their wives behind (should have) a will for their wives for expenses of one year, without eviction (from their residence). And if they leave (on their own) then there is no blame on you for whatever they do about themselves appropriately. God is powerful and wise.
2|241| An appropriate provision (and gift) for the divorcee is a duty upon those (husbands) who control themselves.
2|242| That is how God clarifies his signs for you, so you may understand.
2|243| Did you not see those who left their homes, and they were thousands, while they were afraid of the death? God said to them: die. Then He brought them back to life. Indeed, God is gracious to the people, but most people are not thankful.
2|244| And fight in God's way and know that God hears all and knows all. 
2|245| Who is he that lends God a good loan (or who is he that offers God a good deed), so that He multiplies it many times for him? And God tightens and expands, and you will be returned to Him.
2|246| Did you not see that after Moses, the leaders of children of Israel told their prophet: appoint a king for us that we fight in God's way. He said: is it possible that you will not fight if you are prescribed to fight? They said: why should we not fight in God's way while we were driven from our homes and our children? But when the fight was prescribed to them, they turned away (and refused) except a few of them. God knows the wrongdoers.
2|247| And their prophet told them: God has indeed appointed Talut (Saul) as a king for you. They said: how can the rule over us be for him when we are more deserved to the rule than him and he is not given plenty (of wealth). He (their prophet) said: God chose him over you and greatly increased him in the knowledge and the body (physical strength), and God gives His rule to whomever He wants. God is bountiful and knowledgeable.
2|248| Their prophet told them: a sign of his rule is that the ark of covenant comes to you, which contains serenity (and tranquility) from your Master and the remains left by family of Moses and Aaron’s family, the angles carrying it. Indeed, there is a sign in this for you, if you are believers.
2|249| So when Talut (Saul) set out with the troops, he said: indeed God tests you with a river, anyone who drinks from it is not with me, and anyone who did not taste it or anyone who scoops a handful of it then he is indeed with me. So they all drank from it except a few of them. Then when he and those who believed with him crossed it (the river), they said: we do not have the strength to face Goliath and his troops today. Those who thought that they meet God said: many small forces overcame large forces by God’s permission, and God is with the patient ones (and those who persevere).
2|250| When they faced Goliath and his troops, they said: our Master, give us perseverance and solidify our steps and help us against the disbelieving people.
2|251| So they defeated them by God’s permission, and David killed Goliath, and God gave him the rule and the wisdom, and taught him what He wanted. If God does not repel some people by some others, certainly the earth would corrupt, but God is gracious to humankind.
2|252| These are God's signs, We read them to you with the truth, and you are indeed one of the messengers.
2|253| These messengers, We preferred some of them over the others, God spoke to one and He raised ranks of some of them. And We gave Jesus, son of Mary, clear proofs and We supported him with the Holy Spirit. And if God wanted, those after them would not have fought after the clear proofs came to them, but they disagreed, so some of them believed and some of them disbelieved. And if God wanted, they would not have fought, but God does what He wants
2|254| You who believe, spend from what We provided for you before a day comes in which there is no selling (and buying) and no friendship and no mediation. And the disbelievers, they are the wrongdoers.
2|255| God, there is no god except Him, the living and the eternal, He does not take a nap and no sleep. Everything in the skies and on the earth belongs to Him. Who can mediate before Him except with His permission? He knows what is in front of them and what is behind them, while they do not comprehend anything of His knowledge except what He wants. His throne extends over the skies and the earth, and maintaining them does not bother Him. He is the superior, the great.
2|256| There is no compulsion in the way of life (religion is not mandatory), the right is indeed clarified from the wrong, and whoever disbelieves in the rebellious and believes in God has indeed grabbed on to the strong handle that does not break. God hears all and knows all.
2|257| God is protector of those who believed, He gets them out of the darkness into the light, while those who disbelieved, their protector is the rebellious, and he drives them out of the light into the darkness. They are the inhabitants of the fire remaining in there forever.
2|258| Did you not see the one, who God gave him the rule, argued with Abraham about his Master? When Abraham said: my Master is the One who gives life and causes death. He said: I (also) give life and cause death. Abraham said: God indeed brings (rises) the sun from the east, so you make it rise from the west. So the one who disbelieved was stunned. God does not guide the wrongdoing people.
2|259| Or like the one who passed by a village where it was ruined over its roofs (the roofs were collapsed), he said: how does God brings that (village) back to life after its death? Then God made him die for one hundred years, then He raised him (and brought him back to life) and said: how long did you remain (dead)? He said: I remained a day or part of a day.  He said: no, you remained for one hundred years, so look at your food and drink, it did not age (or spoil), and look at your donkey (that is turned to bones), and We make you a sign (of resurrection) for the people, and look at the bones (of your donkey) how We put them back together and We cover it with flesh. So when it was clear to him, he said: I know that God is capable of everything.
2|260| And when Abraham said: my Master, show me how you give life to the dead. He (God) said: do you not believe? He said: yes (I do), but to reassure my heart. He said: take four birds, then turn (familiarize) them to you (and cut them and divide them in pieces), then place a piece  of them on each mountain, then call them, they will come to you in a hurry, and know that God is powerful and wise.
2|261| The example of those who spend their wealth in God's way is like a seed growing seven clusters, in each cluster one hundred seed. God multiplies it for whom He wants. God is bountiful and knowledgeable. 
2|262| Those who spend their wealth in God's way, and do not follow their spending with reproach and annoyance have their reward with their Master and they shall have no fear and no sadness. 
2|263| Nice word and forgiveness is better than charity that is followed by annoyance (and harassment). God is rich (without any needs) and patient.
2|264| You who believe, do not make your charities worthless by the reproach and annoyance, like someone who spends his wealth to be seen by people while he does not believe in God and the last day. His example is like a smooth rock with dust on it, then a heavy rain fell on it and left it bare (with no dust on it), they are not able (to benefit) from anything which they earned. And God does not guide the disbelieving people.
2|265| Example of those who spend their wealth looking for God's pleasure and strengthening themselves is like a garden on a hill which heavy rain falls on it so it gives double of its fruit, and if a heavy rain does not fall on it, then a light rain (suffices). God sees everything you do. 
2|266| Does any one of you like to have a garden of date palm trees and grape vines, which rivers flow through it, which has all kind of fruits in it, and he gets old having weak (or small) children, and a whirlwind with fire inside it strikes it and burns it? This is how God makes His signs clear for you, so you may think.
2|267| You who believe, spend (in God's way) from the good things that you earned and from what We brought out from the earth for you, and do not turn to giving away the bad (part) of it while you would not take it except with your eyes closed (being reluctant) about it. And know that God is rich (has no need) and praiseworthy.
2|268| Satan promises you the poverty and instructs you to the indecency, while God promises you forgiveness and grace from Him. God is bountiful and knowledgeable.
2|269| He gives the wisdom to whom He wants, and whoever is given the wisdom, indeed is given a lot of good, but only the people of understanding (reasonable people) take notice.
2|270| And whatever you spend in charity or you pledge in your pledges, God knows it. And for the wrongdoers there are no helpers.
2|271| If you openly give to charity then it is good, but if you hide it and give it to the poor then it is better for you, and it removes some of your sins from you. God is well aware of what you do.
2|272| Guiding them is not your responsibility, but God guides whom He wants. And whatever of good you spend is for (the benefit of) yourselves, when you only spend looking for God's attention (and His pleasure). And whatever of good you spend will be paid back to you (in full), and you will not be wronged.
2|273| (Charity) is for the poor who are restricted in God's way and cannot travel on the earth, but the ignorant ones assume that they are rich because of their self respect, you know them by their appearance, and they do not ask (beg) people insistently. And whatever of good you spend, indeed God knows about it.
2|274| Those who spend their wealth (in God's way) during the night and the day, secretly or openly, then they have their reward with their Master and they have no fear and no sadness.
2|275| Those who consume usury only stand (or rise) like someone who is driven to madness by Satan’s touch. This is because they said that the sale (and doing business) is like the usury, while God permitted the sale and prohibited the usury. So anyone whom an advice from his Master came to him and he stopped, then his past (profits) is his and his case is with God, and anyone who goes back (to usury), then they will be inhabitants of the fire remaining in there forever. 
2|276| God destroys the usury and increases the charities. And God does not like any disbelieving sinner.
2|277| Those who believed and did good works and performed the mandatory prayer and gave the mandatory charity will have their reward with their Master and they have no fear and no sadness.
2|278| You who believe, be cautious of God and leave what is left of the usury if you are believers.
2|279| If you do not do it (stop usury), then be informed about a war from God and His messenger, and if you repent (from usury) then your principal capital is yours, you will not be wrong and you will not be wronged.
2|280| And if he (the debtor) is having difficulty (financially or otherwise) then postpone until it is easy (for him to repay), and if you are charitable (and forgive the loan) it is better for you if you knew.
2|281| And be cautious of a day when you are returned to God in it, then every person is paid back (in full) for what they earned, and they will not be wronged.
2|282| You who believe, when you borrow from each other for a limited period, then write it (to have a record). And let a writer write it (the loan details) between you in justice. A writer should not refuse to write as God taught him. So he shall write, and the borrower should dictate, and he should be cautious of God, his Master, and should not reduce (or eliminate) anything from it. And if the borrower is retarded or is a child or is unable to dictate, then his guardian should dictate in justice. And ask two witnesses from among your men to witness, and if there are not two men, then one man and two women from the witnesses who are acceptable to you, so if one of the two makes a mistake (or forgets) then the other one of the two may remind the other one. And the witnesses should not refuse (to testify) if they are called upon. And they should not be reluctant to write it no matter how small or large, along with its term. This is fairer in God’s view, and more upstanding for the testimony, and closer that you do not have doubts. Except if it is a face to face transaction that (the actual merchandise or money) changes hands between you, then there will be no blame on you if you do not write it. And take witness when you buy and sell. And the writer and the witness should not be harmed, and if you do (harm them) it is indeed disobedience on your part. And be cautious of God, and God teaches you (what to do). God knows everything.
2|283| If you are traveling and cannot find a writer then take collateral. And if some of you entrusts (a trust to) another, then the trustee should return the trust and he should be cautious of God, his Master. And do not hide (or withhold) the testimony, and anyone who hides it then he is indeed a sinner at heart. And God knows what you do.
2|284| Everything in the skies and on the earth belongs to God, and whether you disclose what is in yourself or you hide it, God holds you accountable for it, and He forgives whom He wants and punishes whom He wants. God is capable of everything.
2|285| The messenger believed in what was sent down to him by his Master, and all the believers believed in God and His angels and His books and His messengers, (saying) we do not differentiate between any of His messengers, and they said: we heard and we obeyed, (we ask for) Your forgiveness our Master, and the final return is to You.
2|286| God does not task any person beyond its capability, whatever (good) it does is for it, and whatever (bad) it does is against it. Our Master, do not hold it against us if we forget or make a mistake. Our Master, do not impose a burden on us as you imposed it on those before us. Our Master, do not impose on us what we cannot bear it and excuse us and forgive us and have mercy on us, You are our protector (and guardian), so help us against the disbelieving people.
3|1| A.L.M. (Alif. Lam. Mim.)
3|2| God, there is no god except Him, the living and the eternal.
3|3| He sent down the book to you with the truth confirming what was before it and He sent down the Torah and the Gospel
3|4| in the past as a guide for the people, and He sent down the criterion. Indeed those who disbelieved in God’s signs, a severe punishment is for them. God is powerful and revengeful.
3|5| Nothing is hidden from God on the earth and in the skies.
3|6| He is the One who shapes you in the wombs as He wants. There is no god except Him, The powerful and the wise.
3|7| He is the One who sent down the book to you, of which some verses are firm and they are the basis of the book, and others are metaphorical. As for those who have perversion in their hearts, they follow the metaphorical ones of it, wishing for disorder and looking for its interpretation, while no one except God knows their interpretation.  And the scholars of knowledge say: we believe in it, all of it is from our Master. But only the people of understanding (reasonable people) take notice.
3|8| Our Master, do not let our hearts deviate after You guided us, and give us mercy from Your presence. You are the giver.
3|9| Our Master, You are gatherer of the people on the day that there is no doubt about it. God does not break the promise.
3|10| Those who disbelieved, their wealth and children will never benefit them against God. They are fuel for the fire.
3|11| Like habit of Pharaoh’s people and those before them, they denied Our signs, so God punished them for their sins. God is severe in punishment.
3|12| Tell those who disbelieved: you are going to be defeated and gathered together in hell, and it is a bad resting place. 
3|13| Indeed there was a sign for you in the two groups that encountered (in the battle of Badr), a group was fighting in God's way, and the other disbelieved. They saw them twice as many, with their own eyes. God supports anyone He wants with His help. There is a lesson in this for those who have insight.
3|14| Love of the desires such as women and children and loads and loads of gold and silver and branded horses (of excellent breed) and the livestock and the crop was made attractive for the people. These are the enjoyments of this world’s life, while the best place to return is with God. 
3|15| Say: shall I inform you about better than that? Those who control themselves will have with their Master gardens which rivers flow through them, remaining in there forever, and pure spouses and pleasure of God. God sees His servants,
3|16| those who say: our Master, we believed, forgive us our sins, and protect us from the punishment of the fire,
3|17| the patients (and persevering) and the truthful ones and the obedient ones and the spenders (in God's way) and the ones asking for forgiveness at the dawn.
3|18| God and the angels and those having knowledge testify that there is no god except Him, standing with the justice. There is no god except Him, the powerful and the wise.
3|19| Indeed, the way of life before God is submission (to Him), and those who were given the book did not disagree except after knowledge came to them, due to jealousy among them. And if anyone disbelieves in God’s signs, God is quick in accounting.
3|20| If they argue with you, say: I submitted my manner (of life) to God, and so did my followers. And say to those who were given the book and the illiterates: did you submit yourselves? If they submit then they are guided and if they refuse then your responsibility is only preaching. God sees His servants.
3|21| Those who disbelieve in God’s signs and kill the prophets unjustly and kill those among the people who order to justice, warn them of a painful punishment.
3|22| They are those whose works became useless in this world and in the hereafter, and there are no helpers for them.
3|23| Did you not see those who were given some benefit of the book, being invited to God's book to judge between them (in their disputes), then a group of them turned away and they opposed?
3|24| This is because they said: the fire will never touch us except for a few days. And what they were fabricating deceived them in their way of life.
3|25| And how will it be when We gather them on a day that there is no doubt in it and every person is paid back (in full) for whatever he earned and they will not be wronged?
3|26| Say: God, owner of the rule, You give the rule to anyone You want and You take away the rule from anyone You want, and You give honor (and dignity) to anyone You want and You humiliate (and disgrace) anyone You want, goodness is in Your hands, and You are capable of everything.
3|27| You make the night pass into the day and You make the day pass into the night, and You bring the living from the dead, and You bring the dead from the living, and You provide for anyone You want without any limit.
3|28| The believers shall not take disbelievers as their supporters (and protectors) in lieu of the believers. And whoever does this, then he is not on anything from God (and has nothing to do with Him), unless you cautiously protect yourself from them. And God warns you about Himself (and His punishment). And the final return is to God.
3|29| Say: whether you hide what is in your minds or you disclose it, God knows it. And He knows what is in the skies and what is on the earth. And God is capable of everything.
3|30| A day that every person finds, all the good it did and all the bad it did, present and wishes for a great distance between itself and between that. God warns you about Himself (and His punishment). God is gentle to His servants.
3|31| Say: if you love God, then follow me, so God will like you and will forgive your sins. God is forgiving and merciful.
3|32| Say: obey God and the messenger. But if they refuse then God does not like the disbelievers.
3|33| God chose Adam and Noah and Abraham’s family and Imran’s family above all other people.
3|34| Some were offspring of the others. God hears all and knows all.
3|35| (Remember) when Imran’s wife said: God, I pledge dedication of what is in my womb to You, so accept it from me, indeed You hear all and know all.
3|36| So when she gave birth to it, she said: God I gave birth to a girl, while God knew better what she gave birth to, and boy is not like girl, and I named her Mary and I place her and her children under your protection from the expelled Satan.
3|37| Her God accepted her with best acceptance, and raised her with good upbringing, and made Zachariah her guardian. Every time Zachariah entered the chamber, he found food with her. He said: Mary, where did this come from for you? She said: from my God, indeed God provides for whom He wants without any limit.
3|38| It was then that Zachariah prayed to his Master, he said: Master, give me a good child from Your presence, You are the hearer of the calls. 
3|39| And the angels told him while he was standing in prayer in the chamber: God gives you good news of Yahya (John the Baptist), who confirms God's word, and a gentleman and innocent, and a prophet from the righteous.
3|40| He (Zachariah) said: God, how can I have a son, when I have reached old age, and my wife is infertile? He (the angel) said: it is like that, God does what He wants.
3|41| He said: God, give me a sign. He said: your sign is that for three days you will only speak to people in sign language, and remember your Master often, and praise Him in the evening and the early morning.
3|42| And (remember) when the angels said: Mary, God chose you and made you chaste and chose you above all the women of humankind.
3|43| Mary, be obedient to your Master, and show humbleness, and bow down with those who bow down.
3|44| This is among the stories of the unseen that we reveal to you. You were not with them when they were drawing their ballots that which one will be the guardian of Mary, and you were not with them when they were disputing.
3|45| (Remember) when the angels said: Mary, God indeed gives you the good news with a word from Him, his name is Jesus Christ, son of Mary, respected in this world and in the hereafter, and one of the close ones (to God).
3|46| And he speaks to the people from the cradle to old age, and he is of the righteous.
3|47| She said: my Master, how could I have a son when no human being has touched me? He (the angel) said: it is like that, God creates what He wants, when He decides on an issue, then He just says for it: be, and it will be.
3|48| And He (God) will teach him the book and the wisdom and the Torah and the Gospel.
3|49| And he will be a messenger for children of Israel (saying): I came to you with a miracle from your Master, I make something in the shape of a bird, out of clay for you, then I blow in it, and with God’s permission it becomes a bird, and I heal the born blinds and lepers and bring back the dead to life with God’s permission, and I tell you what you eat and what you store in your houses, there is a sign in that for you if you are believers,
3|50| and confirming what is before me from the Torah while I make lawful some of the things that were forbidden to you and I brought you a sign from your Master, so be cautious of God and obey me.
3|51| God is your Master and my Master, so serve Him, this is a straight path.
3|52| When Jesus felt their disbelief, he said: who are my helpers to God? The apostles said: we are God’s helpers, we believe in God, and be witness that we are submitted (to God).
3|53| Our Master, we believe in what You sent down and we follow the messenger, so write us down as witnesses.
3|54| They plotted and God planned, but God is the best of the planners.
3|55| (Remember) when God said: Jesus, I make you die, and bring you up to Me, and cleanse you from those who disbelieved, and make those who follow you above those who disbelieved until the resurrection day. Then, your return is to Me, and I judge between you in what you disagreed about it.
3|56| As for those who disbelieved, I punish them severely in this world and in the hereafter, and they have no helpers.
3|57| And as for those who believed and did good works, He paybacks their reward (in full). God does not like the wrongdoers.
3|58| We read that to you from the signs and the wise reminder.
3|59| The example of Jesus with God is like Adam, He created him from dust and then He said to him: be, and he was.
3|60| The truth is from your Master, do not have any doubts.
3|61| And to anyone who argues with you about it after what came to you from the knowledge, say: let us invite our children and your children and our women and your women and ourselves and yourselves, then let us plea and put God’s curse upon the liars.
3|62| This is indeed a true story. There is no god except God, and indeed God is the powerful and the wise.
3|63| And if they refuse, God knows the corruptors.
3|64| Say: people of the book, come to a word that is common between us and between you, (which is) do not serve anything but God, and do not make anything (or anyone) His partner, and some of us do not take others as our masters besides God. And if they refuse, then say: be witness that we are submitted (to God).
3|65| People of the book, why do you argue about Abraham, when the Torah and the Gospel was not sent down until after him? Do you not understand?
3|66| You are those who argued about what you had knowledge of, so why do you argue about things that you have no knowledge of? God knows and you do not know.
3|67| Abraham was neither a Jew nor a Christian, but he was a submitted monotheist and he was not one of the polytheists.
3|68| The closest people to Abraham are those who followed him and this prophet (Muhammad) and those who believed. God is the protector (and supporter) of the believers.
3|69| And a group of the people of the book like to misguide you, but they only misguide themselves and they do not realize.
3|70| People of the book, why do you disbelieve in God’s signs, while you testify?
3|71| People of the book, why do you disguise the truth with falsehood, and you hide the truth while you know?
3|72| And a group of the people of the book said: believe in what was sent down to the believers during the daytime, and disbelieve it at the end of it, so they may return.
3|73| Do not believe in anyone unless he follows your way of life. Say: indeed, the (true) guidance is God's guidance. (They say: do not believe) that anyone is given like what you were given, or they will argue with you before your Master. Say: grace is in God’s hand, He gives it to whomever He wants. God is bountiful and knowledgeable.
3|74| He allocates His mercy to whomever He wants. He has enormous grace.
3|75| Among people of the book, there are some that can be trusted with huge amounts (of money) and they will return it back to you, and there are some that if you trust them even with one dinar (or a penny) they will not return it back to you unless you keep up your demand, because they say: we have no responsibility to the illiterates. They lie from God, and they know.
3|76| Yes, anyone who fulfills his promises and is cautious (of God), then indeed God loves those who control themselves.
3|77| Those who exchange their promise to God and their oaths for a small price, they will have no share (of joy) in the hereafter, and God will neither speak to them nor look at them nor purify them on the resurrection day, and they will have a painful punishment.
3|78| And among them is a group twisting their tongues (and speak in a way) about the book, that you think it is from the book while it is not from the book, and they say that it is from God while it is not from God, and they lie from God while they know.
3|79| It is not (appropriate) for a human being that God gives him the book and the wisdom and the prophethood to say to the people that be my servants besides God, but rather (he says): be servants of your Master because of the book you were teaching and you were studying.
3|80| And he will not instruct you to take the angels and the prophets as your masters. Will he instruct you to disbelief after you have submitted (to God)?
3|81| And when God took a commitment from the prophets: whatever I gave you from book and wisdom, then a messenger came to you confirming what is with you, you shall believe in him and shall help him (and teach your followers to do the same). He said: do you agree and take on this contract? They said: we agree. He said: then be witness and I am with you among the witnesses. 
3|82| Anyone who turns back after that, then they are disobedient.
3|83| Are they looking for other than God's (recommended) way of life while everything in the skies and on the earth, willingly or unwillingly, submitted to Him and they are returned to Him?
3|84| Say: we believed in God, and what was sent down to us, and what was sent down to Abraham and Ishmael and Isaac and Jacob and the Tribes (of Israel), and what was given to Moses and Jesus and the prophets from their Master, we do not differentiate between any of them, and we are submitted to Him.
3|85| Whoever looks for a way of life other than submission (to God), it will never be accepted from him, and in the hereafter he will be of the losers.
3|86| How does God guide a group who disbelieved after their belief, and testified that the messenger is true and clear proofs came to them? God does not guide the wrongdoing people.
3|87| Their punishment is that the curse of God and the angels and all the people is upon them,
3|88| remaining in it forever, their punishment will not be reduced, and they are not given any delay,
3|89| except those who repented and straightened out after that, then God is forgiving and merciful.
3|90| Indeed those who disbelieved after their belief, and then increased their disbelief, their repentance will never be accepted, and they are the misguided.
3|91| Indeed if those who disbelieved and died while disbelievers fill the earth with gold and offer it as ransom, it will never be accepted from any of them. They have a painful punishment, and they have no helpers.
3|92| You will never achieve the goodness until you spend (in God's way) from what you love. And anything that you spend (in God's way) God knows about it.
3|93| All the foods were lawful for children of Israel before the Torah was sent down, except the ones that Israel had forbidden to himself. Say: bring the Torah and read it if you are truthful.
3|94| Anyone who makes up a lie (and attributes it) to God after this, then they are the wrongdoers.
3|95| Say: God spoke the truth, so follow faith of Abraham, a monotheist, and he was not of the polytheist. 
3|96| The first (or best) house set up for the people was the one in Bekkah (Mecca), blessed and a guide for humankind.
3|97| In it there are clear signs, (like) where Abraham stood (for prayer). And whoever enters it, is safe. The Pilgrimage of the house (Hajj) is due to God from the people, if they can afford the journey to it. And whoever disbelieved (should know that) God does not need any being. 
3|98| Say: people of the book, why do you disbelieve in God’s signs, while God is witness over what you do?
3|99| Say: People of the book, why do you obstruct God’s way for anyone who believed, looking for its distortion, while  you are witnesses (to its truth), and God is not unaware of what you do
3|100| You who believe, if you obey a group of those who were given the book, they will turn you to disbelievers after your belief.
3|101| How can you disbelieve while God’s signs are read to you and His messenger is among you? And whoever holds on to God is indeed guided to a straight path.
3|102| You who believe, be cautious of God, the way He is deserved to be cautioned, and do not die except while you are submitted (to God).
3|103| And all of you hold on to the rope of God (Quran), and do not be divided. And remember God’s favor upon you, when you were enemies and He united your hearts, and you became brothers by His favor and when you were on the edge of a pit of fire and He saved you from it. This is how God clarifies His signs for you, so you may be guided.
3|104| And there should be a group of you that invite to the good and instruct to the right (acceptable) and prohibit from the wrong (unacceptable). And they are the successful.
3|105| And do not be like those who divided and disagreed after clear proofs came to them, and for them there is a great punishment.
3|106| On a day that some faces become white (and are honored) and some faces become black (and are ashamed). As for those whose faces turn black (they will be told): did you disbelieve after your belief, so taste the punishment because of what you used to disbelieve.
3|107| And those whose faces turn white will be in God’s mercy, remaining in it forever.
3|108| These are God’s signs that We read them to you in truth, and God does not want any injustice for any being.
3|109| Everything in the skies and on the earth belongs to God, and all affairs are returned to God.
3|110| You are the best group that are brought out for the people, instructing to the right (acceptable) and prohibiting from wrong (unacceptable), and believing in God. And if the people of the book believed, it was better for them, some of them are believers while most of them are disobedient.
3|111| They will never harm you except annoyance, and if they fight you they will turn their backs to you (and run away), and they will not be helped.
3|112| Humiliation is marked on them where ever they are found, unless by (grabbing) rope of God and rope of the people, and they deserve God’s anger, and the poverty is marked on them, that is because they were disbelieving in God’s signs and were killing the prophets wrongfully, and that is because they disobeyed and were exceeding the limits (set by God).
3|113| They are not the same, some of the people of the book rise and read God’s signs during the night and show their humbleness,
3|114| they believe in God and the last day, and they instruct to the right (acceptable) and prohibit from the wrong (unacceptable) and they rush to do good, and they are of the righteous.
3|115| And whatever good they do, it will never be rejected, and God knows those who control themselves.
3|116| Indeed those who disbelieved, their wealth and their children will never be of any use to them against God, and they are inhabitants of the fire remaining in there forever.
3|117| The example of what they spend (in God's way) in this world's life is like an ice cold wind that hits harvest of a group who wronged themselves and destroys it. God did not wrong them, but they wrong themselves.
3|118| You who believe, do not take any confidant besides yourselves, as they will not stop to drive you crazy, and they wish you what agonizes you, hatred has appeared from (words of) their mouths , and what their chests hides is even greater. We have clarified Our signs for you, if you understand.
3|119| You love them while they do not love you, and you believe in all the books (while they do not). When they meet you they say: we believed. And when they are alone, they bite their fingertips because of the anger for you. Say: die with your anger. God knows what is inside the chests.
3|120| If any good happens to you it upsets them and when any bad happens to you, they enjoy it. And if you persevere and control yourselves, their plots does not cause the least bit of harm to you. God surrounds what they do.
3|121| And (remember) when you left your family early in the morning to assign the positions of the believers for the war (battle of Ohod). God hears all and knows all.
3|122| (Remember) when two groups among you intended to be cowardly while God was their protector (and supporter), and believers should put their trust in God.
3|123| And God helped you at (war of) Badr while you were weak, so be cautious of God, that you may be thankful.
3|124| (Remember) when you told the believers: is it not enough for you that your Master helps you with three thousands angels being sent down?
3|125| Yes, if you persevere and control yourselves, and they suddenly come upon you (and attack you), your Master helps you with five thousands striking angels.
3|126| And God only made it as good news for you and to reassure your hearts with it. And the help is only from the powerful and the wise God.
3|127| In order to cut off (and wipe out) a part of those who disbelieved, or to subdue them so they turn back disappointed.
3|128| Nothing is up to you, He either accepts their repentance or punishes them. They are indeed wrongdoers.
3|129| Everything in the skies and on the earth belongs to God, He forgives whom He wants and punishes whom He wants. And God is forgiving and merciful.
3|130| You who believe, do not consume usury multiplying (compounding) it over and over, and be cautious of God, so you may be successful.
3|131| And be cautious of the fire that is prepared for the disbelievers.
3|132| And obey God and the messenger so you may receive mercy.
3|133| And hurry up to forgiveness from your Master and to a garden as wide as the skies and the earth which is prepared for those who control themselves,
3|134| those who spend (in God's way) in richness and in poverty, and suppress their anger and excuse people. And God loves the good doers,
3|135| and those who, when they act indecently or wrong themselves, remember God and then ask forgiveness for their sins, and who forgives sins except God, and do not insist on what they did while they know ?
3|136| Their reward is forgiveness from their Master and gardens which rivers flow through them, remaining in there forever, an excellent reward for the doers.
3|137| Ways (of life) before you have gone by, so travel through the earth to see what the end of the deniers was.
3|138| This (Quran) is a declaration for the people, and a guide and an advice for those who control themselves.
3|139| Do not get weak and do not be sad, while you are the superior if you are believers.
3|140| If you were wounded, the group (of your enemies) was wounded similarly. We alternate these days among the people, so that God knows those who believed and He takes witnesses from among you. God does not like the wrongdoers.
3|141| And so that God refines (by testing) those who believed and He wipes out the disbelievers.
3|142| Or did you think that you enter the garden while God does not know those of you who tried hard (in His way) and those who persevered?
3|143| And you certainly used to wish for the death to meet it in the past, so now you have seen it while you are looking (at it).
3|144| And Muhammad is only a messenger, the messengers have passed away before him. If he dies or is killed, would you turn back on your heels? And whoever turns back on his heel will never cause the least bit of harm to God. And God is going to reward the grateful ones.
3|145| No one dies except by God’s permission, a determined mandate. And whoever wants the reward of this world, We give him from it. And whoever wants from the reward of the hereafter, We give him from it. And We are going to reward the grateful ones.
3|146| And many prophets with many devoted men along side of them fought, and they did not lose courage by what happened to them in God's way and they did not weaken and they did not surrender. And God loves those who persevere.
3|147| And they only said: our Master, forgive our sins and our excesses in our affairs and solidify our steps and help us against the disbelieving people.
3|148| So God gave them the reward of this world and good reward in the hereafter. And God loves the good doers.
3|149| You who believe, if you obey those who disbelieved, they will turn you back on your heels and you turn losers.
3|150| Yes, God is your protector and He is the best helper.
3|151| We are going to cast horror in the hearts of those who disbelieved for what they partnered with God, without Him sending down any reason for it. Their housing is the fire, and it is a bad place for the wrongdoers. 
3|152| And God fulfilled His promise to you when you defeat them with His permission until you slacked off and disputed in the matter and you rebelled after He showed you what you loved. Some of you want this world and some of you want the hereafter. So He turned you away from (following) them to test you, and He has certainly excused you, and God is gracious to the believers.
3|153| (Remember) when you were climbing and not paying attention to anyone, and the messenger was calling you from behind you. So He gave you sadness upon sadness, so that you do not feel sad over what you lost or what inflicted you. God is well aware of what you do.
3|154| After the sadness, He sent down to you a peaceful nap overcoming a group of you while a group were worried about their lives, unjustifiably thinking about God like the thoughts of the ignorance, saying: is any part of the matter up to us? Say: indeed all the matters are up to God. They hide in themselves what they do not reveal to you, they say: if anything about the matter was up to us, we would not be killed here. Say: even if you stayed in your houses, those whom the death was written for them would come out to the place of their death. And God tests what is in your minds to purify what is in your hearts. God knows what is inside the minds.
3|155| Those of you who turned away on the day that the two armies encountered (in the battle of Ohod), indeed Satan made them stumble because of some of what they did, and God has certainly excused them. God is forgiving and patient.
3|156| You who believe, do not be like those who disbelieved and they said about their brothers when they travelled on the earth or were in a war: if they were with us, they would not have died and would not have been killed. So that God makes that a (source) of regret in their hearts. God gives life and causes death. And God sees what you do.
3|157| If you are killed or die in God's way, then forgiveness and mercy from God is better than what they accumulate.
3|158| Whether you die or you are killed, you shall be gathered before God.
3|159| Because of God’s mercy you were gentle with them, and if you were blunt and hard hearted, they would have certainly gone away from around you, so excuse them and ask forgiveness for them and consult them in the affair, and when you decide then put your trust in God. Indeed God loves those who put their trust (in Him).
3|160| If God helps you, no one can overcome you, and if He leaves you then who helps you after Him? And the believers should put their trust in God.
3|161| It is not right for any prophet to cheat, and anyone who cheats brings what he has cheated to the resurrection day, and everyone is paid back (in full) for what they did, and they are not wronged.
3|162| Is anyone who follows God’s pleasure like someone who brings God’s anger upon himself and his place is hell and a bad destination?
3|163| They have (different) ranks with God, and God sees what they do.
3|164| God has certainly favored the believers when He sent a messenger among them from themselves, to read His signs to them and to purify them, and to teach them the book and the wisdom, while they were in clear error in the past.
3|165| Or  when a tragedy hits you while you have hit them with twice that, you said: where is this from? Say: it is from yourselves. God is indeed capable of everything. 
3|166| And what happened to you on a day that the two armies encountered (in battle of Ohod) was with God’s permission and in order to know the believers, 
3|167| and in order to know the hypocrites. And they were told: come, fight in God's way or defend (yourselves). They said: if we knew how to fight, we would certainly follow you. In that day they were closer to the disbelief than to the belief. They say with their mouths what is not in their hearts. And God knows better what they hide.
3|168| To those who stayed behind and said about their brothers that if they had obeyed us, they would not have been killed, say: turn away the death from yourselves if you are truthful.
3|169| And do not think of those who were killed in God's way as dead, but they are alive and have provisions with their Master,
3|170| enjoying from what God gave them from His grace and being happy about those left behind them who have not joined them yet, (knowing that) there is no fear and no sadness for them.
3|171| They are glad about God’s favor and grace, and that God does not waste reward of the believers,
3|172| those who accepted the call of God and His messenger after being wounded, for those among them who did good and controlled themselves there is a great reward. 
3|173| Those who when the people told them that the people have gathered against you, so be afraid of them, it increased their belief and they said: God is enough for us, and He is the best advocate.
3|174| So they returned by a favor and grace from God, and were not injured, and they pursued God’s pleasure. And God has enormous grace.
3|175| It is only Satan that scares his supporters, so do not fear them (Satan’s supporters) and fear Me if you are believers.
3|176| Do not be sad by those who rush into disbelief, indeed they will never harm God a bit. God wants no share (of joy) for them in the hereafter, and a great punishment is theirs.
3|177| Those who bought the disbelief for (the price of) the belief will never harm God a bit, and a painful punishment is theirs.
3|178| Those who disbelieved should not think that whatever time We gave them is good for themselves, We only gave them time so that they increase their sins, and a humiliating punishment is theirs.
3|179| God is not to leave the believers in the state you are in it, until He separates the bad from the good. And God is not to inform you of the unseen, but God chooses from His messengers whom He wants (to reveal the unseen to them), so believe in God and His messengers, and if you believe and control yourselves then a great reward is for you.
3|180| Those who are stingy with what God gave them from His grace should not think that it is good for them. No, it is bad for them. What they were stingy about it, is going to be around their necks on the resurrection day. And inheritance of the skies and the earth belongs to God. And God is well aware of what you do.
3|181| God has certainly heard word of those who said: indeed God is poor and we are rich. We are going to write what they said and their killing of the prophets unjustly, and We say: taste the burning punishment.
3|182| This is for what your hands sent ahead (your deeds), and indeed God is not unjust to His servants.
3|183| Those who said: indeed God charged us that we should not believe in any messenger until he brings us an offering of sacrifice that the fire eats it. Say: indeed messengers before me brought you the clear proofs and with what you said, so why did you kill them if you are truthful?
3|184| So if they denied you, the messengers before you who brought the clear proofs and the scriptures and the enlightening book were also denied.
3|185| Everyone tastes the death, and your reward is paid back on the resurrection day, so whoever is moved away from the fire and is entered the garden has succeeded. This world's life is only the illusion of enjoyment.
3|186| You shall be tested with your wealth and your lives, and you shall hear a lot of  harassment from those who were given the book before you and from those who associated (partners with God), and if you persevere and control yourselves, it is certainly a matter of determination.
3|187| And (remember) when God took a commitment from those who were given the book, that you shall express it for (and make it known to) the people and not hide it. But they threw it behind their backs and traded it for a small price. They made a bad trade.
3|188| Do not think that those who are happy with what they did and love to be praised for what they did not do, are safe from the punishment, and a painful punishment is for them.
3|189| Rule of the skies and the earth belongs to God, and God is capable of everything.
3|190| In the creation of the skies and the earth and the alternation (and the difference) between the night and the day there are signs for the people of understanding (reasonable people),
3|191| those who remember God standing up and sitting down and (lying) on their sides and think about the creation of the skies and the earth (saying): our Master, you did not create this for nothing , glory to You, so protect us from punishment of the fire.
3|192| Our Master, indeed You have humiliated anyone whom You admit into the fire, and there are no helpers for the wrongdoers.
3|193| Our Master, we heard a caller call for the belief (saying) that believe in your Master, so we believed. Our Master, forgive us our sins and remove our bad deeds from us, and make us die with the good ones.
3|194| Our Master, give us what you promised us through your messengers and do not humiliate us on the resurrection day, certainly You do not break the promise.
3|195| Their Master answered them: I do not waste deed of any doer among you whether male or female, you are all from one another, and those who migrated and were driven out of their homes and were harassed in My way and fought and were killed I shall remove their sins from them, and I shall admit them to gardens which rivers flow through them as a reward from God, and God has the best rewards.
3|196| Do not be deceived by moving about the land (and successes) of those who disbelieved,
3|197| (it is) a small enjoyment, but their housing is hell, and it is a bad resting place.
3|198| But those who were cautious of their Master, for them are gardens which rivers flow through them, remaining in there forever as a gift from God, and what is with God is best for the good ones.
3|199| And indeed among the people of the book there are those who believe in God and what was sent down to you and what was sent down to them, humble before God, they do not trade God’s signs for a small price, they will have their reward with their Master. God is indeed quick in accounting. 
3|200| You who believe, persevere and call for perseverance and unite and be cautious of God so that you may be successful.
4|1| You people, be cautious of your Master who created you from a single being, and created its spouse from it, and spread many men and women from them. And be cautious of God, the One you ask by Him, and (beware of your duties to) the blood relatives (and close relatives). God is watching over you.
4|2| Give the orphans their properties and do not substitute the bad for the good, and do not eat up their properties with your properties, as it is a great sin.
4|3| If you are afraid that you may not be fair with the orphans, then marry from the women who are pleasing to you, two, three, or four. But if you are afraid of injustice, then (marry) only one, or what you own. That is more appropriate so you don't deviate from the right course.
4|4| And give women their compensations (marriage portions) dutifully. But if they, on their own accord, give you back any part of it, then consume it as something joyful and wholesome.
4|5| And do not give your properties which God made a source of support for you to the immature ones, but provide for them and clothe them with that, and speak to them nicely.
4|6| Check the orphans until they reach the age of marriage, so if you noticed maturity in them then give their properties back to them, and do not consume it excessively and in a hurry because they are growing up. Anyone who is rich should then he should forgive (his wages), and anyone who is poor then he should reasonably consume (from it). And when you return their properties to them, take witness upon them. And God is enough for accounting.
4|7| For men is a share of what their parents and the relatives leave behind, and for women is a share of what their parents and the relatives leave behind, no matter a little of it or a lot, a preset share.
4|8| And when during the distribution relatives (and close ones) and orphans and needy are present, provide them from it, and speak to them nicely.
4|9| Those should fear, whom if they leave helpless offspring behind them, they would be afraid about them, so they should be cautious of God and they should say right (and appropriate) word.
4|10| Indeed those who consume the orphans' properties wrongfully only consume fire into their stomachs, and they are going to enter (and burn in) a burning fire.
4|11| God instructs you regarding your children that: for a male is the same portion as two females and if they are all women and more than two, they get two third of what is left, and if she is only one, then she gets half. And for the parents, for each one of them is one sixth of what is left if he has a child, and if he does not have a child and his inheritors are (only) his parents then one third is for the mother (and the rest is for the father), and if there are siblings for him then one sixth is for the mother, after fulfilling any will he instructed it or paying off any debt. You do not know whether your parents or your children have more benefits for you. This is a mandate from God. God is knowledgeable and wise.
4|12| And half of what your wives leave is for you if they don't have a child, and if they have a child then one quarter of what they leave is for you, after fulfilling the will that they instructed to it or paying off any debt. And one quarter of what you leave is for them if you don't have a child, and if you have a child then one eighth of what you leave is for them, after fulfilling the will that you instructed to it or paying off any debt. And if a man or a woman who is to be inherited from has no direct heir and he has a brother or a sister, for each one of them is one sixth, and if more than two, then they all share in a third, after fulfilling the will that he instructed to it and paying off any debt without causing any loss. This is an instruction from God, and God is Knowledgeable and patient.
4|13| These are limits set by God, and whoever obeys God and His messenger, He admits him into gardens which rivers flow through them remaining in there forever, and this is the great victory.
4|14| And whoever disobeys God and His messenger and violates His limits, He admits him into a fire remaining in there forever, and a humiliating punishment is for him.
4|15| And those among your women who commit the indecency, then call four witnesses against them from among you, and if they testified, then keep them in the houses until the death takes them or God makes a way for them.
4|16| And if two men among you commit it (the indecency), then harass them both and if they repent and straighten out then stay away from them. God is acceptor of repentance and merciful.
4|17| (Accepting) the repentance is only on God for those who do something bad out of ignorance and then repent soon after, then God turns to them (and forgives them), and God is knowledgeable and wise.
4|18| And the repentance is not for those who do the bad deeds until the death comes to one of them, then he says indeed I repent now, and it is not for those who die while they are disbelievers, We prepared a painful punishment for them.
4|19| You who believe, it is not lawful for you to inherit women (or from women) unwillingly, and you do not make it difficult for them so that you take back part of what you gave them unless they commit an obvious indecency. And treat them nicely. And if you dislike them, then perhaps you dislike something while God puts a lot of good in it.
4|20| If you decide to replace a wife in lieu of a wife, and you gave one of them lots of valuables, then do not take anything from her. Do you take it with a false accusation and an obvious sin?
4|21| And how do you take it while you have gone into each other (and had sex) and they took a strong commitment (marriage contract) from you?
4|22| Do not marry what your fathers married among the women (their ex-wives) except what has passed, indeed it is indecent and disgusting and a bad way.
4|23| Forbidden to you (for marriage) are your mothers, and daughters, and sisters, and sisters of your fathers, and sisters of your mothers, and daughters of your brothers, and daughters of your sisters, and your stepmothers who nursed you, and your stepsisters by nursing, and mothers of your wives, and your stepdaughters in your guardianship from you wives whom you had sex with them but if you did not have sex with them then there is no blame on you, and the wives of your sons from your backs (your own sons not your stepsons), and two sisters together (at the same time), except what has passed. God is forgiving and merciful.
4|24| And (forbidden to you are) all married women except what your right hands own, God's prescription for you, and what is beyond that is made lawful for you, that you look for them with your wealth for marriage and not fornication/adultery. So for what you enjoyed from them (consummation of marriage), give them their compensations (marriage portions) as a mandate. And there is no blame on you for what you mutually agree about it after the mandate. Indeed God is knowledgeable and wise.
4|25| And anyone among you who cannot afford to marry the free chaste believing woman, then (marry) from your believing maids among what your right hands own. God best knows your belief, you are from one another. So marry them with permission of their owners (and their families) and give them their compensations (marriage portions) nicely for marriage and not fornication/adultery and not taking them as lovers. And when they are married, if they commit an indecency, then their punishment is half of what is for a free married woman. This is for anyone of you who fears committing fornication, but if you are patient it is better for you. God is forgiving and merciful.
4|26| God wants to clarify for you and to guide you to ways of those before you, and to turn to you (and forgive you). God is knowledgeable and wise.
4|27| God wants to turn to you, but those who follow the lusts want you to deviate, a great deviation.
4|28| God wants to reduce your (burdens), as the human being is created weak.
4|29| You who believe, do not falsely eat up one another's properties among yourselves, but let there be trade among you with your mutual satisfaction. And do not kill yourselves (each other). God is merciful to you.
4|30| Anyone who does this due to aggression and wrongdoing, We are going to enter (and burn) him in a fire, and that is easy for God.
4|31| If you avoid the big ones that you are prohibited from it, We remove your sins from you and admit you into a noble place. 
4|32| And do not wish for what God graced some of you over others with it. Men have a share of what they did, and women have a share of what they did. And ask God from His grace. God knows everything.
4|33| For everyone We appointed inheritors for what the parents and the relatives left behind, and those you contracted by your oath, so give them their share. God is indeed witness over everything.
4|34| Men are caretakers of women because of what God graced some over the others and for what they spend from their wealth. So good women are loyal, looking after what God takes care of in the absence (of their husband). And those whom you are afraid of their disloyalty (in their marital duties), then advise them, and keep away from them in beds, and (if that or nothing else worked) then spank them (fairly and not out of anger), but if they agreed with you, then do not look for a way against them. God is superior and great. 
4|35| And if you are afraid of separation between them, then select an arbitrator from his family and an arbitrator from her family. If they want to make things right, God reconciles between them. God is knowledgeable and well aware.
4|36| And serve God and do not associate anything with Him (as partner), and be good to your parents and to the relatives (and close ones) and the orphans and the needy and the close neighbors and the distant neighbors and the companions by the side and the traveler (in need) and those whom your right hands own. Indeed God does not like selfish show offs.
4|37| Those who are stingy and instruct people to stinginess and hide what God gave them from His grace, (know that) We prepared a humiliating punishment for the disbelievers,
4|38| and those who spend their wealth to be seen by the people and do not believe in God and the last day, (Satan is their companion) and anyone who has Satan as a companion, then he has a bad companion.
4|39| What would be against them if they believed in God and the last day and spent (in God's way) from what God provided them? God is knowledgeable about them.
4|40| God does not wrong even the least bit, and if there is any good, He multiplies it and gives a great reward from Himself.
4|41| And how would it be when We bring a witness from every group and We bring you as a witness against these?
4|42| On that day, those who disbelieved and rebelled against the messenger wish that the earth was leveled with them, and they do not hide any saying (or anything) from God.
4|43| You who believe, do not get close to the mandatory prayer while you are intoxicated until you know what you say, and not after orgasm until you wash except when you are traveling on the road, and if you are sick or on a journey or one of you comes from toilet or you had (sexual) contact with a woman and could not find water, then perform dry ablution using clean soil (or stone or sand) rubbing it to your faces and hands. God is pardoning and forgiving.
4|44| Did you not see those who were given some benefit of the book buying the misguidance and wishing that you lose the (right) way?
4|45| God knows your enemies better, and God is enough as a protector and God is enough as a helper.
4|46| Some of those who are Jewish change (the meaning/pronunciation of) the word from its places and they say: we heard and we rebelled, and hear without listening, and Ra’ina (keep an eye on us, but with a slight twist would mean our fool or our evil) twisting their tongue as a slander to the religion. And if they had said we heard and we obeyed and listen and Unzurna (watch over us), it would have been better and more appropriate for them. But God cursed them for their disbelief, and they do not believe except a few/little.
4|47| You who are given the book, believe in what We sent down confirming what is with you before We wipe out faces and turn them backward, or curse them as We cursed the violators of the Sabbath. God’s command shall be done.
4|48| God does not forgive associating partner with Him, and He forgives other than that for anyone He wants. And whoever associates partner with God then he has made up (and committed) a great sin.
4|49| Did you not see those who (think they) absolved themselves? But it is God who absolves anyone He want, and they are not wronged in the least.
4|50| See how they make up lies (and attribute them) to God, and that in itself is sufficient as an obvious sin.
4|51| Did you not see those who were given some benefit of the book believing in the false gods (and superstition) and the rebellious and saying about those who disbelieved: these are more guided to the (right) way than the believers.
4|52| They are those whom God cursed them, and anyone cursed by God then you will never find a helper for him.
4|53| Or do they have any share of the rule? In that case they will not give a tiny bit to the people. 
4|54| Or are they jealous of the people for what God gave them from His grace? We have given Abraham’s family the book and the wisdom, and we gave them a great kingdom.
4|55| Some of them believed in him and some of them turned away from him, and burning fire of hell is enough (for them).
4|56| Those who disbelieved in Our signs, We will enter (and burn) them in a fire, every time their skins is roasted, We replace their skins with another skin so that they taste the punishment. God is powerful and wise.
4|57| And those who believed and did good works, We are going to admit them into gardens which rivers flow through them, remaining in there forever and ever. They have pure spouses in there, and We admit them into an abundant shade.
4|58| Indeed God orders you to return the trust to their owners, and when you judge between the people, judge with justice. Indeed what God advises you to it is excellent. God hears all and sees all.
4|59| You who believe, obey God and obey the messenger and those of you who are in charge of affairs (the authorities), but if you dispute about anything (with authorities), then return it to God and the messenger if you believe in God and the last day. This is better and has a better outcome.
4|60| Did you not see those who claim that they believe in what was sent down to you and what was sent down before you, but they want to be judged by the rebellious while they were certainly instructed to reject it, and Satan wants to misguide them far from the (right) path.
4|61| And when they are told to come to what God sent down and to the messenger, you see the hypocrites totally turn away from you.
4|62| And how is it that when a tragedy strikes them for what their hands sent ahead, then they come to you swearing by God: we only wanted good and success (for you). 
4|63| They are those whom God knows what is in their hearts, so stay away from them and advise them, and speak to them with eloquent words (reaching) into their souls.
4|64| We did not send any messenger except that he is obeyed by God’s permission. And if they had come to you when they wronged themselves and asked for God’s forgiveness and the messenger had asked for their forgiveness, they would have certainly found God as acceptor of repentance and merciful.
4|65| But no, by your Master that they do not believe until they make you judge in what happened between them (and in their disputes), then they do not find any difficulty in themselves about what you decide, and they submit completely.
4|66| And if We had prescribed to them to kill yourselves (or each other) or leave your homes, only a few of them would have done it. But if they did what they were advised to it, it would have been better and more strengthening for them.
4|67| Then We would certainly give them a great reward from Us,
4|68| and We would certainly guide them to a straight path.
4|69| And whoever obeys God and the messenger, then they are with those whom God favored upon them, among the prophets and the truthful ones and the witnesses (or the martyrs) and the righteous, and they are good friends.
4|70| That is the grace from God, and God is sufficient for knowing.
4|71| You who believe, use your precaution (and be careful) and go out in groups or go out all together. 
4|72| And indeed among you in one who shall slow down, and if a disaster strikes you he says: God has favored upon me that I was not present with them.
4|73| And if God’s grace happens to you, he shall say as if there was no friendship between you and him: I wish I was with them so I would achieve a great victory.
4|74| So those who sell this world's life for the hereafter should fight in God's way, and whoever fights in God's way, whether he is killed or he is victorious, then We will give him a great reward.
4|75| And what is with you that you do not fight in God's way and the weak men and women and children, those who say: our Master, take us out of this town whose inhabitants are the wrongdoers, and appoint a protector for us from Your presence and appoint a helper for us from Your presence.
4|76| Those who believed fight in God's way and those who disbelieved fight in the way of the rebellious, so fight against supporters of Satan, as Satan’s plan is indeed weak.
4|77| Did you not see those who were told: withhold your hands (and do not fight) and perform the mandatory prayer and give to the mandatory charity, but when fighting was prescribed for them, a group of them feared men as they feared God or even feared more and said: our Master, why did you prescribe fighting for us, why did you not postpone it for a short while? Say: enjoyment of this world is small and the hereafter is best for anyone who controls himself, and you will not be wronged a bit.
4|78| The death catches up with you wherever you are, even if you are in strongly built towers. And if something good happens to them, they say: this is from God. And if something bad happens to them, they say: this is from you. Say: everything is from God. What is the matter with these people that they do not understand this saying?
4|79| Anything good that happens to you is from God, and anything bad that happens to you is from yourself. And We sent you as a messenger for the people, and God is sufficient as a witness.
4|80| Whoever obeys the messenger then he has indeed obeyed God, and whoever turns back, We did not send you as their guardian.
4|81| And they say: obedience. But when they leave you, a group of them contemplate by night in other than what you say, but God writes what they contemplate by night, so stay away from them and put your trust in God. God is enough as an advocate.
4|82| Do they not think about the Quran? And if it was from other than God, they would find a lot of contradictions in it.
4|83| And when any news of safety or fear comes to them, they publicize it, while if they had referred it to the messenger and those among them who are in charge, then those among them who can find it out (the truth) would certainly know it. And if it was not for God’s grace and mercy on you, you would have certainly followed Satan, except a few (of you). 
4|84| So (Muhammad) fight in God's way, you are only responsible for yourself, and persuade the believers (to fight). Perhaps God holds back the harm of those who disbelieved. God is most strong and most punishing.
4|85| Anyone mediates a good mediation (in a good cause) has a share of it, and anyone who mediates a bad mediation (in a bad cause) has a portion of it. God has control over everything.
4|86| And when you are greeted with a greeting, then greet with better than that or return it. God takes everything into account.
4|87| God, there is no god except Him. He shall gather you in the resurrection day that there is no doubt about it. Whose saying is truer than God?
4|88| What is it with you that you divided into two groups regarding hypocrites while God set them back because of what they did? Do you want to guide someone whom God misguided (according to His laws) while whomever God misguides, you will never find a way for him.
4|89| They want you to disbelieve as they disbelieved so you are equal, so do not take any supporter from them until they migrate in God's way. If they turn back (to disbelief and fight you) then take them and kill them wherever you find them. And do not take any protector or helper from them.
4|90| Except those who join a group that there is an agreement between you and them, or those who come to you with their hearts holding them back from fighting you or fighting their people. If God wanted, He would give them power over you and they would fight you, so if they kept away from you and did not fight you and offered you peace, then God did not make any way for you against them (and you should make peace with them).
4|91| You find others who want to be safe from you and be safe from their people, but every time they are returned to the temptation, they fall into it. So if they do not keep away and do not offer peace and do not hold back their hands, then take them and kill them wherever you find them, and those are whom We gave you a clear reason against them.
4|92| It is not for a believer to kill a believer except by a mistake. And anyone who kills a believer by a mistake should set a believing slave free and pay full compensation to his family unless they forgive it. And if he was from a group who were your enemy and he was a believer, then setting a believing slave free. And if he was from a group that there is an agreement between you and them, then paying full compensation to his family and setting a believing slave free. And anyone who cannot find (a slave or afford one) then fasting for two consecutive months as repentance from God. God is knowledgeable and wise.
4|93| And whoever kills a believer intentionally then his punishment is hell, remaining in there forever, and God’s anger and curse is upon him and He prepared a great punishment for him.
4|94| You who believe, when you travel in God's way, then make it clear (and investigate thoroughly), and do not say to someone who offers you peace (or admits to submission) you are not a believer, looking for the wealth of this life. Whereas there are many spoils with God. That is how you were before, so God favored upon you, so make it clear. God is well aware of what you do.
4|95| Those among the believers who sit around except those who are disabled, and those who try hard with their wealth and their lives in God's way are not equal. God preferred those who try hard with their wealth and their lives in rank over those who sit around. And God promised good things to each one, while God preferred those who try hard over the ones who sit around with a great reward,
4|96| ranks and forgiveness and mercy from Him. God is forgiving and merciful.
4|97| When angels take the life of those who were wrong to themselves, they say: what were you up to? They say: we were weak on the earth. They say: was not God’s earth vast enough so that you migrate in it? Those are whom their residence is hell, and it is a bad destination.
4|98| Except the weak among men and women and children who cannot evade and they are not directed to a way. 
4|99| And perhaps God excuses them. God is pardoning and forgiving.
4|100| And whoever migrates in God's way finds many refuge and plenty on the earth. And whoever leaves his house migrating for God and His messenger, then the death reaches him (and he dies), then his reward has fallen upon God. And God is forgiving and merciful.
4|101| When you travel throughout the earth there is no blame on you if you shorten your mandatory prayer if you are afraid that those who disbelieved may harm you. Indeed the disbelievers are your obvious enemy.
4|102| And when you (Muhammad) were among them and you established the mandatory prayer for them, then a group of them should stand with you and should take their arms, then when they prostrated, then they should go behind you and other group that has not prayed should come to pray with you while taking precaution and (carrying) their arms. Those who disbelieved wish that you neglect from your arms and your things so that they attack you, a single (and sudden) attack. And there is no blame on you if you put down your arms if you are annoyed by rain or you are sick, but take precaution. Indeed God prepared a humiliating punishment for the disbelievers.
4|103| When you finished your mandatory prayer then remember God standing and sitting and (lying) on your sides. And when you are safe then perform the mandatory prayer. The mandatory prayer is indeed prescribed for the believers at specified times.
4|104| Do not slack off in the pursuit of the enemy. If you are suffering, they are also suffering as you are suffering, while you hope from God what they do not hope. God is knowledgeable and wise
4|105| We sent down the book to you with the truth, so you judge between people by what God showed you, and do not be an opponent for (the sake of) traitors.
4|106| And ask God’s forgiveness. God is indeed forgiving and merciful.
4|107| And do not argue about those who betray themselves. God does not like the sinning traitor.
4|108| They want to hide (their treachery) from the people and they do not hide it from God while He is with them when they contemplate at night saying things that does not please Him. God is fully aware of what they do.
4|109| Here you are, you are those who argue for them in this world’s life, so who argues for them with God on the resurrection day, or who will be an advocate for them?
4|110| Anyone who does a bad deed or wrongs himself, then asks God’s forgiveness, finds God forgiving and merciful.
4|111| Whoever commits a sin, he only does it against himself. God is knowledgeable and wise.
4|112| Anyone who commits a mistake or a sin, then accuses an innocent (person) of it, then he has carried (the guilt of) a false accusation and a clear sin.
4|113| And if it was not for God’s grace and mercy upon you (Muhammad), a group of them intended to misguide you, whereas they only misguide themselves, and do not harm you at all. And God sent down the book and wisdom to you and taught you what you did not know. And God’s grace upon you is great.
4|114| There is no good in most of their whisperings, except anyone who instructs to charity or doing what is right or improving among people. And whoever does that looking for God’s pleasure, then We will give him a great reward.
4|115| Anyone who opposes the messenger after the guidance became clear to him and follows other than the believers’ way, then We turn him to what he turned to and We make him enter (and burn in) hell, and it is a bad destination.
4|116| God does not forgive associating partner with Him, and forgives other than that for anyone He wants. Anyone who associates partner with God then he has lost (the way), a far away losing.
4|117| They only call upon female (gods) instead of Him, and they only call upon the rebellious Satan.
4|118| God cursed him (Satan), and he said: I shall take a fixed portion of your servants,
4|119| and I shall misguide them and I shall make them desire (excessively) and I shall instruct them to cut off the ears of livestock, and I shall instruct them to change God’s creation. And anyone who takes Satan as protector instead of God has lost, an obvious losing.
4|120| He (Satan) promises and makes them desire (excessively), and Satan promises nothing except deception.
4|121| Their housing is hell, and they will not find any way to escape from it.
4|122| Those who believed and did good works, We are going to admit them into gardens which rivers flow through them, remaining in there forever and ever. God’s promise is true, and whose word is truer than God?
4|123| It is not according to your wish or people of the book’s wish, anyone who does bad deed will be penalized for it and will not find any protector or helper for him other than God.
4|124| And anyone who does of the good deeds, whether male or female, and is a believer, then they enter the garden, and they will not be wronged a bit.
4|125| And whose way of life is better than someone who submitted his manner (of life) to God and is a good doer and follows the faith of monotheist Abraham? And God took Abraham as a friend.
4|126| Everything in the skies and on the earth belongs to God, and God surrounds (dominates) everything.
4|127| They ask your opinion about women, say: God gives His opinion to you regarding them and (that is in) what is read to you from the book regarding the female orphans whom you do not give them what is prescribed for them and you like to marry them, and the week among children, that you should carry out justice for the orphans. And whatever good you do, God knows about it.
4|128| And if a woman is afraid of her husband’s disloyalty (in performing his marital duties) or desertion, there is no blame on them if they make things right between them by settlement (and compromise), and settlement is better, even though the souls are filled with greed and stinginess. And if you do good and control yourselves, God is well aware of what you do. 
4|129| You can never be fair between the women even if you are eager, therefore do not turn all the likeness (to one) so as to leave the other hanging. And if you make peace and control yourselves, God is forgiving and merciful.
4|130| And if they separate, God enriches them both from His plenty. God is bountiful and wise.
4|131| Everything in the skies and on the earth belongs to God. Indeed, We instructed those who were given the book before you and you to be cautious of God. And if you disbelieve, still everything in the skies and on the earth belongs to God. God is without any needs and praiseworthy.
4|132| Everything in the skies and on the earth belongs to God, and God is enough as an advocate.
4|133| You people, He will remove you and brings others if He wants. God is capable of that.
4|134| Anyone who wants the reward of this world, then the reward of this world and the hereafter is with God. God hears and sees everything.
4|135| You who believe, be maintainers of justice and witnesses for God even if it is against yourselves or the parents or the relatives (and close ones) whether he is rich or poor. God has priority over them, so do not follow the desire to deviate from justice. And if you are equivocal or avoid (the testimony), God is well aware of what you do.
4|136| You who believe, believe in God and His messenger and the book that He sent down to His messenger and the book that He sent down in the past. And whoever disbelieves in God and His angels and His books and His messengers and the last day has lost (the way), a far away losing.
4|137| Those who believed then disbelieved then believed and then disbelieved then increased their disbelief, God is not to forgive them or to guide them to a (right) way.
4|138| Give news to the hypocrites that there is a painful punishment for them,
4|139| those who take the disbelievers as protectors instead of the believers. Are they looking for respect (and honor) through them? Indeed all the respect belongs to God. 
4|140| And He has sent down to you in the book that when you hear God’s signs are denied or ridiculed, then do not sit with them until they enter into a conversation other than it. You are like them if you do not. God is collector of all the hypocrites and the disbelievers in hell.
4|141| Those (hypocrites) who wait for you, and if there is a victory for you from God, they say: were we not with you?  And if there is a share (of victory) for the disbelievers, they say: did we not have power over you and yet we protected you from the believers. God judges between you on the resurrection day. And God will never make a way for the disbelievers over the believers.
4|142| Indeed the hypocrites (think that they) trick God, while He tricks them, and when they perform the mandatory prayer they perform it lazily to be seen by the people and they seldom remember God.
4|143| Indecisive in between that, not being of these and not of those. And whoever is misguided by God (according to His laws), you will never find a way for him.
4|144| You who believe, do not take the disbelievers as protectors instead of the believers. Do you want to give God a clear reason against you?
4|145| Indeed the hypocrites will be in the lowest level of the fire, and you will not find any helper for them,
4|146| except those who repented and straightened out and held on tight to God, and were sincere to God in their way of life, then they are with the believers, and God gives the believers a great reward.
4|147| What would God do with punishing you if you are thankful and you believe? God is appreciative and knowledgeable.
4|148| God does not like nasty talks in the public except by one who is wronged, and God hears all and knows all.
4|149| If you do good openly or hide it, or you excuse a bad deed, then God is pardoner and capable.
4|150| Those who disbelieve in God and His messengers and they want to separate between God and His messengers and they say: we believe in some and disbelieve in others, and they want to take a path between that,
4|151| they are truly the disbelievers, and We prepared a humiliating punishment for the disbelievers.
4|152| And those who believed in God and His messengers and do not make distinction between any of them, We will give them their reward. God is forgiving and merciful.
4|153| The people of the book ask you to send down to them a book from the sky. Indeed they asked for greater than this from Moses and they said: show us God openly. So the lightning took them for their wrongdoing. Then they took the calf (for worship) after the clear proofs came to them, but We excused them for that, and We gave Moses a clear mandate.
4|154| And We lifted the mountain above them because of their commitment and We told them: enter the gate humbly. And We told them: do not violate the Sabbath. And we took a firm commitment from them.
4|155| So for their breaking their commitment and their disbelief in God’s signs and their killing of the prophets wrongfully and their saying: our hearts are covered, but rather God set a seal upon them because of their disbelief, so they do not believe except a few/little.
4|156| And for their disbelief and their saying a great false accusation against Mary,
4|157| and their saying: we killed Jesus Christ the son of Mary, God’s messenger, while they did not kill him and did not crucify him but it was so appeared to them, and indeed those who disagree about it are in doubt about it, having no knowledge of it except following the speculation, and certainly they did not kill him,
4|158| but rather God lifted him up to Him. God is powerful and wise.
4|159| And one is not among people of the book unless before his death he believes in it, and on the resurrection day he (Jesus) is a witness against them.
4|160| So because of wrongdoings of those who are Jewish, We forbade them some of the good things that were lawful for them, and for their holding back many (people) from God's way,
4|161| and their taking the usury while it has been forbidden to them, and their eating up people’s wealth (and money) falsely, and We prepared a painful punishment for the disbelievers among them.
4|162| But the scholars of knowledge among them, and the believers believing in what was sent down to you and what was sent down before you, and the performers of mandatory prayer, and the givers of the mandatory charity, and the believers in God and the last day, We are going to give them a great reward.
4|163| Indeed We revealed to you as We revealed to Noah and the prophets after him and We revealed to Abraham and Ishmael and Isaac and Jacob and the tribes (of Israel) and Jesus and Job and Jonah and Aaron and Solomon, and We gave David the Psalms (Zabur),
4|164| and messengers whom We have told you their stories before, and messengers whom We did not tell you their stories. And God spoke to Moses in a conversation.
4|165| Messengers are givers of good news and warners, so there would be no reason for the people against God after the messengers. And God is powerful and wise.
4|166| But God testifies to what He sent down to you, that He sent it down with His knowledge, and the angels testify too, but God is enough as a witness.
4|167| Those who disbelieved and obstructed God's way have indeed lost (the way), a far away losing.
4|168| Indeed those who disbelieved and did wrong, God is not to forgive them and He certainly does not guide them to a (right) way,
4|169| except way of hell, remaining in there forever and ever, and that is easy for God.
4|170| People, the messenger has brought you the truth from your Master, so believe, it is better for you, and if you disbelieve, (know that) whatever is in the skies and on the earth belongs to God, and God is knowledgeable and wise.
4|171| People of the book, do not exaggerate in your religion (way of life) and do not say anything from God except the truth. Jesus Christ, son of Mary, was only a messenger of God, and His word which He conveyed to Mary, and a spirit from Him. So believe in God and His messengers, and do not say: three (or trinity). Stop, that is better for you. God is the only one god, He is flawless (and beyond) that there is a child for Him. Everything in the skies and in the earth belongs to him, and God is enough as an advocate.
4|172| Christ never refrained from being a servant of God, and neither did the closest angels. And whoever refrains from being His servant and is arrogant then He is going to gather them all to Himself (for accounting).
4|173| As for those who believed and did good works then He pays them their full reward and more from His grace. And as for those who refrained and were arrogant then He punishes them with a painful punishment and they will not find any protector or helper other than God for them.
4|174| People, a proof has come to you from your Master, and We sent down a clear light (Quran) to you.
4|175| As for those who believed in God and held on tight to Him then He is going to admit them into His mercy and grace, and He guides them to a straight path.
4|176| They ask your opinion, say: God gives His opinion to you regarding one with no direct heir. If a man dies having no child but has a sister, then half of what he leaves is hers, while he inherits (everything) from her if she has no child. And if there are two sisters then two third of what he leaves is theirs, and if there are multiple brothers and sisters, then for the male is as much as two females. God explains for you, that you don't make mistake. And God knows everything.
5|1| You who believe, fulfill the agreements. Four legged livestock are made lawful for you except what is read out to you, and the hunting is not being lawful while you are forbidden (during the Hajj). God orders what He wants.
5|2| You who believe, do not dismiss God's rituals or the prohibited month or the offering (of sacrifice) or the collared offering or those going to the sacred house (Ka’aba) looking for their Master’s grace and pleasure. When you are allowed (after the Hajj) then you may hunt. And the hatred of those who prevented you from the Sacred Mosque should not make you misbehave so that you exceed the limits. And cooperate based on the goodness and self control and do not cooperate based on the sin and enmity, and be cautious of God, as God is severe in punishment.
5|3| The dead, and the blood, and the meet of the pig, and what is offered up for (sacrificed for) other than God, and the strangled, and the beaten to death, and the dead because of a fall, and the dead by being gored, and what the wild animal ate except what you slaughtered (before it dies), and what is sacrificed on the stones (altars of idols), and what is divided by the lottery arrows  are forbidden to you. These are disobedience. Today those who disbelieved lost hope about your religion (way of life), so do not fear them, but fear Me. Today I completed your religion for you and I finished my favor upon you and I chose the submission (Islam) as a religion for you. If anyone is forced by hunger, not intentionally committing a sin, then God is forgiving and merciful.
5|4| They ask you about what is permitted for them. Say: the good things are made lawful for you, and what you taught your trained hunting animals (to catch) according to what God taught you. So eat from what they catch for you and mention God’s name on it, and be cautious of God as God is quick in accounting.
5|5| Today the good things are made lawful for you, and food of those who were given the book is lawful for you, and your food is lawful for them, and the chaste among the believing women and the chaste among those who were given the book before you (are lawful) when you pay their compensations (marriage portions) for marriage and not for fornication (or prostitution) and not taking them as lovers. Whoever rejects the belief, indeed his work becomes useless and he is among the losers in the hereafter.
5|6| You who believe, when you intend to perform the mandatory prayer, wash you faces and your hands to the elbows and wipe your head and (wipe/wash) your feet to the ankles, and if you had orgasm, then clean yourself, and if you were sick or on a journey, or one of you came from toilet, or you had (sexual) contact with a woman and could not find water then perform dry ablution using clean soil (or stone) rubbing your faces and hands with it. God does not want to make it difficult for you, but He wants to make you clean and to finish His favor upon you, so you may be thankful.
5|7| And remember God’s favor upon you, and His commitment that He bound you with it when you said: we hear and we obey. And be cautious of God, as indeed God knows what is inside the chests (minds).
5|8| You who believe, be maintainers for God (and His commandments) and be witnesses with justice, and do not let the hatred of any group make you misbehave and that you act unjustly, be just as it is closer to self control, and be cautious of God as indeed God is well aware of what you do.
5|9| God promised forgiveness and a great reward to those who believed and did good works.
5|10| And those who disbelieved and denied Our signs, they are inhabitants of the hellfire.
5|11| You who believe, remember God’s favor upon you when a group intended to stretch out their hands (to initiate an attack) against you, but He withheld their hands from you, and be cautious of God. And the believers should put their trust in God.
5|12| Indeed God took a commitment from the children of Israel and We raised twelve leaders from them, and God said: I am with you, if you perform the mandatory prayer and give to the mandatory charity and believe in My messengers and assist them and lend God a good loan (or offer God a good deed), then I shall remove your sins from you and shall admit you into gardens which rivers flow through them, and anyone of you who you disbelieves after that has indeed lost the even (right) way.
5|13| And because of their breaking their commitment, We cursed them and We made their hearts hard. They change the word from its places (and context) and forgot a part of what they were reminded of it. You will always notice betrayal from them, except a few of them, but pardon them and overlook. God loves the good doers.
5|14| And from those who said we are Christians, We took their commitment, but they also forgot a part of what they were reminded of it, so We caused animosity and hatred among them until the resurrection day. And God will inform them about what they were doing.
5|15| People of the book, Our messenger has come to you to clarify for you much of what you were hiding from the book and to eliminate much of it. Indeed a light and a clear (and clarifying) book has come to you from God.
5|16| God guides anyone who follows His pleasure with it to ways of peace and well-being and brings them out of the darkness into the light with His permission and guides them to a straight path.
5|17| Those who say that God is indeed the Christ, son of Mary, have certainly disbelieved. Say: who has any power against God if He had decided to wipe out the Christ, son of Mary, and his mother and everyone on the earth? And the rule of the skies and the earth and whatever in between them belongs to God, He creates what He wants, and He is capable of everything.
5|18| The Jewish and the Christians said: we are children of God and His loved ones. Say: then why does He punish you for your sins? Not at all, but you are human beings among what He created, He forgives anyone He wants and punishes anyone He wants. And rule of the skies and the earth and whatever in between them belongs to God, and the final return is to Him.
5|19| People of the book, Our messenger has come to you, after a period without any of the messengers, to clarify for you, so that you do not say: no giver of good news and no warner came to us. So a giver of good news and a warner has come to you. God is capable of everything.
5|20| And when Moses told his people: my people, remember God’s favor upon you when He made prophets from among you, and made you kings, and He gave you what He did not give to any (other) among humankind.
5|21| My people, enter the holy land which God prescribed for you and do not turn on your backs, for you turn to losers.
5|22| They said: Moses, indeed there are tyrant people in there and we will never enter it until they go out of it, and when they go out of it then we enter.
5|23| Two men from among those who feared (God) and God favored upon both of them said: enter upon them through the gate, and when you enter it, you are winners, and put your trust in God if you are believers.
5|24| They said: Moses, we will never ever enter it as long as they are in it, so you and your Master go and fight, we sit here.
5|25| He (Moses) said: my Master, I have only control of myself and my brother, so separate us from the disobedient people.
5|26| He (God) said: then it is indeed forbidden to them for forty years, they will wander in the earth, so do not be sad for the disobedient people.
5|27| And read to them the true story of the two sons of Adam, when they both  offered offering of sacrifice, then it was accepted from one of them and it was not accepted from the other. He said: I shall kill you. And the other said: God only accepts from those who control themselves.
5|28| If you stretch out your hand toward me to kill me, I will not stretch out my hand toward you to kill you, I fear God, Master of humankind.
5|29| I want you to get my sin and your sin, so you will be among inhabitants of the fire, and that is punishment of the wrongdoers.
5|30| Then his soul permitted him killing of his brother, so he killed him and became of the losers.
5|31| Then God sent a crow digging up the ground to show him how to hide his brother’s dead body. He said: shame on me, am I unable to be like this crow to hide my brother’s corpse? Then he became regretful.
5|32| Because of that, We prescribed to children of Israel that: anyone who kills a person, other than for (murdering) a person or for corruption on the earth, then it is like he killed all the people, and anyone who saves it then it is like he saved the life of all the people. And Our messengers have certainly brought them the clear proofs, then indeed many of them were excessive on the earth after that.
5|33| The only punishment of those who wage war against God and His messenger spreading corruption in the land is to be killed or to be crucified or have their hands and feet cut off from the opposite side or be sent to exile from the land. That is their disgrace in this world, and they have great punishment in the hereafter,
5|34| except those who repented before you overpower them, and know that God is indeed forgiving and merciful.
5|35| You who believe, be cautious of God and look for the mean toward Him and try hard in His way so you may be successful.
5|36| If those who disbelieved had all that is on the earth and the like of it with it, in order to ransom with it from the punishment of the resurrection day, it will not be accepted from them and a painful punishment is for them.
5|37| They want to get out of the fire but they cannot get out of it, and an eternal punishment is for them.
5|38| The male thief and the female thief, cut their hands as an exemplary punishment from God for what they did. God is powerful and wise.
5|39| But anyone who repents after his wrongdoing and corrects (the situation), then God accepts his repentance, God is indeed forgiving and merciful.
5|40| Did you not know that rule of the skies and the earth belongs to God, punishing anyone He wants and forgiving anyone He wants? God is capable of everything.
5|41| Messenger, do not be sad by those who race to the disbelief among those who said we believe with their lips but their hearts did not believe. And some of those who are Jewish listen to the lies, listening to other people who did not come to you, changing the word from its places (and context) saying: if you are given this then accept it, and if you were not given it then stay away from it. And anyone whom God wants to test him, then you will never have any power for him against God. They are those whom God did not want to cleanse their hearts, there is disgrace for them in this world and a great punishment is for them in the hereafter.
5|42| They listen to the lie and they eat up the illegal possessions. So if they come to you, then judge between them or stay away from them, and if you stay away from them, they will never harm you a bit. And if you judge, then judge between them with justice. God loves those who are just.
5|43| How can they make you judge while they have the Torah with them which has God's instruction in it? Then they turn away (from your judgment) after that, they are not the believers.
5|44| We sent down the Torah, there is light and guidance in it. The prophets, those who submitted (to God), and the devoted ones and the religious scholars judge those who were Jewish with it, because they were made guardians of God's book and they were witnesses to it, so do not fear people but fear Me, and do not sell my signs for a small price. And anyone who does not judge by what God sent down, then they are the disbelievers.
5|45| And We prescribed for them in it, that the life for the life, and the eye for the eye, and the nose for the nose, and the ear for the ear, and the tooth for the tooth, and for the wounds is fair retaliation. And anyone who donates it (giving up the retaliation) then that is a compensation for him (for his sins). And anyone who does not judge by what God sent down, then they are the wrongdoers.
5|46| And after them We sent Jesus, son of Mary, confirming what was before him in the Torah, and We gave him the Gospel, in which there is guidance and light, and confirms what was there before it from the Torah, and a guide and an advice for those who control themselves.
5|47| And people of the Gospel should judge by what God sent down in it. And anyone who does not judge by what God sent down, then they are the disobedient.
5|48| And We sent down the book to you in truth, confirming what was before it from the book and safeguarding over it, so judge between them by what God sent down and do not follow their desires, away from that which came to you of the truth. For each of you We made statute and procedure, and if God wanted, He would have made you a single community, but He shall test you with what He gave you, so compete in the good. You all return to God, then He informs you about what you used to disagree about it.
5|49| And judge between them by what God sent down and do not follow their desires and beware of them that they do not tempt you away from some of what God sent down to you. And if they turn away, then know that God wants to make them suffer for some of their sins. And indeed most of the people are disobedient.
5|50| Are they looking for the judgment of the ignorance? Whose judgment is better than God for people who are certain?
5|51| You who believe, do not take the Jewish and the Christians as your protectors as they are protectors of each other, and whoever among you takes them as supporter then indeed he is one of them. God does not guide the wrongdoing people.
5|52| You see those who have disease in their hearts rush toward them saying: we are afraid that a disaster happens to us. But perhaps God brings the victory or a situation from Himself that they become regretful of what they hid in themselves.
5|53| And those who believed say: are these those who swore their most solemn oaths by God that they are with you? Their works became useless and they became losers.
5|54| You who believe, anyone among you who turns back from his way of life (is not important to God), so God brings about people whom He loves and they love Him, (they are) humble toward the believers and powerful against the disbelievers, they try hard in God's way and are not afraid of blame of anyone who blames. That is God’s grace, He gives it to anyone He wants. God is bountiful and knowledgeable.
5|55| Your supporter/friend is only God and His messenger and those who believed, those who perform the mandatory prayer and they give to the mandatory charity and/while they bow down (or while they are submissive).
5|56| And anyone who turns to God and His messenger and those who believed (for friendship), then indeed God’s party are the winners.
5|57| You who believe, among those who were given the book before you and the disbelievers, do not take those who took your way of life as a joke and a game as friends . And be cautious of God if you are believers.
5|58| And when you call for the mandatory prayer they take it as a joke and a game, that is because they are a group who do not understand.
5|59| Say: people of the book, do you resent us only because we believed in God and what was sent down to us and what was sent down from before, while most of you are disobedient?
5|60| Say: shall I inform you of worse than this as a penalty from God? Whoever God cursed and was angry at him and He made some of them into the monkeys and the pigs and servants of the rebellious. They are in a bad position and far lost from the even (right) way. 
5|61| And when they come to you they say: we believe. But they have entered in disbelief and they have left with it, and God fully knows what they were hiding.
5|62| And you see many of them race in the sin and the hostility and their eating up the illegal possessions. What they were doing was certainly bad.
5|63| And why the devoted ones and the religious scholars do not prohibit them from their sinful talks and their eating up the illegal possessions? What they were doing was certainly bad.
5|64| And the Jewish said: God’s hand is tied. Their hands are tied and they are cursed for what they said. But His hands are wide open, He spends as He wants. And what was sent down to you from your Master shall increase rebellion and disbelief of many of them. And We placed the animosity and the hatred between them until the resurrection day. Every time they ignite a fire for the war, God extinguishes it, and they spread corruption on the earth, whereas God does not like the corruptors.
5|65| And if people of the book believed and were cautious (of God), We would have removed their sins from them and admitted them into gardens of delight.
5|66| And if they had carried out the Torah and the Gospel and what was sent down to them from their Master, they would have certainly eaten from above them and from beneath their feet (as reward). Among them is a moderate group, while what most of them do is bad.
5|67| Messenger, preach what was sent down to you from your Master, and if you do not do that, then you have not preached His message. God defends you against the people. Indeed God does not guide the disbelieving people.
5|68| Say: people of the book, you are on nothing until you uphold the Torah and the Gospel and what was sent down to you from your Master. And what was sent down to you (Muhammad) from your Master shall increase rebellion and disbelief of many of them, so do not feel sorry for the disbelieving people.
5|69| Indeed those who believe and those who are Jewish and the Sabians and the Christians, anyone who believes in God and the last day and does good work then he has no fear and no sadness.
5|70| Indeed We took a commitment from children of Israel and We sent messengers to them, but every time a messenger brought them what they did not like themselves, then they denied some (of them) while killing some.
5|71| And they thought that there will not be a test, so they turned blind and deaf (to the truth), then God turned to them (and forgave them), but many of them turned blind and deaf, and God sees what they do.
5|72| Those who said that the Christ, son of Mary, is God have certainly disbelieved, while Christ said: children of Israel, serve God my Master and your Master. Indeed whoever associates (any partner) with God, then God has certainly forbidden the garden to him and his place is in the fire, and there is no helper for the wrongdoers.
5|73| Those who said that God is one of three (Trinity) have certainly disbelieved. There is no god except the one god. And if they do not stop what they say, a painful punishment shall happen to those among them who disbelieved.
5|74| So why do they not repent to God and ask His forgiveness, as God is forgiving and merciful.
5|75| The Christ, son of Mary, was only a messenger that the messengers have passed away before him, and his mother was truthful, they both used to eat food. Look how We make the signs clear to them, then look how they deviate.
5|76| Say: do you serve something other than God that does not have power of any harm or any benefit for you? And God hears all and knows all.
5|77| Say: people of the book, do not exaggerate unjustifiably in your religion (way of life), and do not follow the desires of people who were lost in the past and misguided many and lost the even (right) way.
5|78| Those who disbelieved among children of Israel were cursed by the tongue of David and Jesus, son of Mary. That is because they disobeyed and they used to exceed the limits.
5|79| They were not stopping one another from unacceptable which they did it. What they were doing was indeed bad.
5|80| You see many of them turning (for support) to those who disbelieved. Indeed what their own self sent ahead for them was bad, to make God angry with them and they remain in punishment forever. 
5|81| And if they had believed in God and the prophet and what was sent down to him, they would not have taken them as supporters but most of them are disobedient.
5|82| You shall find that the people with most animosity for those who believed are the Jewish and those who associated (polytheists), and you shall find nearest of them to friendship for those who believed are those who say we are Christians, that is because among them are priests and monks, and they are not arrogant.
5|83| And when they listen to what was sent down to the messenger, you see their eyes are full of tears because of what they recognized from the truth, they say: our Master, we believe so write us with the witnesses.
5|84| And why should we not believe in God and what came to us from the truth, and we  hope for our Master to admit us with the righteous people?
5|85| So because of what they said, God gave them gardens which rivers flow through them remaining in there forever, and that is reward of the good doers.
5|86| And those who disbelieved and denied our signs, they are inhabitants of the hellfire.
5|87| You who believe, do not make good things that God made lawful for you unlawful, and do not exceed the limits. God does not like those who exceed the limits.
5|88| And eat from good lawful things that God provided for you, and be cautious of God, the One you believe in Him.
5|89| God does not hold you responsible for your useless oaths, but He holds you responsible for your binding oaths. Then its penalty is to feed ten needy with the average of what you feed your family or to clothe them or to free a slave, and anyone who did not find then he should fast for three days. This is penalty of your oaths that you swore. And keep your oaths. That is how God clarifies His signs for you so you may be thankful.
5|90| You who believe, the wine (and alcoholic beverages) and the gambling and the statues (of idols) and the fortune-telling arrows are only filthy work of Satan, so avoid it that you may be successful.
5|91| Satan only wants to create animosity and hatred among you with the wine (and alcoholic beverages) and the gambling, and to keep you away from God's remembrance and the mandatory prayer, so will you stop it?
5|92| And obey God and obey the messenger and be careful. And if you turn away then know that Our messenger's responsibility is only the clear preaching (and delivering the message).
5|93| There is no blame on those who believed and did good works for what they ate, when they were cautious and believed and did good works, then they were cautious and believed, then they were cautious and did good. And God loves the good doers. 
5|94| You who believe, God shall test you with something of the hunt that is within the reach of your hands and your spears, so that God knows who fears Him secretly. So whoever exceeds the limits after that then there is a painful punishment for him.
5|95| You who believe, do not kill the game (in hunting) while you are forbidden (during the Hajj). Anyone of you who kills it intentionally, then his punishment is the livestock like what he killed, as judged by two just persons among you, as an offering to reach the Ka'aba, or penalty of feeding some needy or the equivalent of that in fasting, so he may taste the consequence of his action. God excuses what is passed, and anyone who returns (to such actions) then God revenges from him, and God is powerful and revengeful.
5|96| Hunting from the sea (fishing) and eating it was made lawful for you, as an enjoyment for you and for those who travel, while hunting in the land was forbidden to you as long as you are forbidden (during the Hajj). And be cautious of God, the One you will be gathered to Him.
5|97| God made the Ka’aba, the sacred house, a source of support and a safe station for the people, and so are the sacred months and the offering (of sacrifice) and the collared offerings. That is for you to know that God knows what is in the skies and what is in the earth, and God knows everything.
5|98| Know that God is severe in punishment, and that God is forgiving and merciful.
5|99| The responsibility of the messenger is only to preach, and God knows what you disclose and what you hide.
5|100| Say: the bad and the good are not equal even if abundance of the bad surprises you, so people of understanding (reasonable people) be cautious of God that you may be successful.
5|101| You who believe, do not ask about things that if they are disclosed to you, they upset you, and if you ask about them when Quran is being sent down, they will be disclosed to you, God excused it, and God is forgiving and patient.
5|102| A group (of people) before you have asked them, then they became disbelievers in them.
5|103| God did not make Bahirah or Sa'ibah or Wasilah or Hami (unlawful), but those who disbelieved attribute lies to God, and most of them do not understand.
5|104| And when they are told to come to what God sent down and to the messenger, they say what we found our fathers on it, is enough for us, even though their fathers did not know anything and they were not guided.
5|105| You who believe, you are responsible for yourselves, whoever is misguided does not harm you when you are guided. You all return to God, then He informs you of what you were doing.
5|106| You who believe, when the death gets to any of you, take two witnesses from just persons among yourself during making of the will, or from other than yourselves if you are traveling in the land and the tragedy of death hits you. If you have doubt, hold them after the mandatory prayer so they swear by God that: we will not sell it for any price even if it is for our relatives (or close ones), and we will not hide God’s testimony, in that case we will be among the sinners.
5|107| And if it is discovered that they are guilty of sin (for lying or betrayal) then let two others stand in their position, from those who are more deserving than the previous two, and swear by God that: our testimony is truer than their testimony and we did not overstep (the truth), otherwise we are among the wrongdoers.
5|108| That is more likely that they give the testimony correctly or they fear that their oaths will be disproved after other oaths. And be cautious of God and listen. And God does not guide the disobedient people.
5|109| On a day that God gathers the messengers and says: how were you responded? They say: we do not know, indeed You are knower of the unseen.
5|110| And when God said: Jesus, son of Mary, remember My favor upon you and your mother when I supported you with the Holy Spirit and you spoke with the people in the cradle and in old age, and when I taught you the book and the wisdom and the Torah and the Gospel, and when you made something from the clay in the shape of a bird with My permission, then you blew into it and it became a (real) bird with My permission, and you healed the born blinds and the lepers with My permission, and when you brought back the dead (to life) with My permission, and when I withheld children of Israel from you when you brought them the clear proofs but the disbelievers among them said: this is nothing but obvious magic.
5|111| And when I revealed to the apostles to believe in Me and in My messenger, they said: we believe, and be witness that we are submitted.
5|112| When the apostles said: Jesus, son of Mary, can your Master send down a table for us from the sky? He (Jesus) said: be cautious of God if you are believers.
5|113| They said: we want to eat from it and to reassure our hearts and to know that you have told us the truth and to be among the witnesses for it.
5|114| Jesus, son of Mary said: God, our Master, send down a table to us from the sky so it will be a feast for the first of us to the last of us and a sign from You, and provide for us as you are the best of the providers.
5|115| God said: I send it down to you, then anyone among you who disbelieves after that, I punish him, a punishment that I have not punished anyone else among humankind.
5|116| And when God said: Jesus, son of Mary, did you tell the people: take me and my mother as two gods besides God? He (Jesus) said: You are flawless, it is not for me to say what I have no right, if I had said it You would have known that, You know what is in my mind, but I do not know what is in Your mind, indeed You are knower of the unseen.
5|117| I did not tell them except what you instructed me to it, that serve God, my Master and your Master, and I was a witness over them as long as I was among them, and when You took me back, You became the observer over them, and You are witness to everything.
5|118| If You punish them, indeed they are Your servants, and if You forgive them, indeed You are the powerful and the wise.
5|119| God said: this is a day that the truthful benefit from their truthfulness, for them there are gardens which rivers flow through them, remaining in there forever and ever. God is pleased with them, and they are pleased with Him. That is the great victory.
5|120| Rule of the skies and the earth and whatever is in them belongs to God, and He is capable of everything.
6|1| All praise belongs to God Who created the skies and the earth and made the darkness and the light, yet those who disbelieved set up equals to their Master.
6|2| He is the One who created you from clay, then He set a time, a finite period that is with Him, yet you still doubt.
6|3| He is God in the skies and on the earth, He knows your secret and what you make public and He knows what you do.
6|4| And any sign of their Master's signs come to them, they turn away from it.
6|5| They have denied the truth when it came to them, so the news of what they were ridiculing it will come to them.
6|6| Did they not see how many of a generation before them We destroyed which We made them powerful on the earth such that We did not make you that powerful? And We sent plenty of rain on them from the sky and We made rivers flow underneath them, then We destroyed them for their sins and We created another generation after them.
6|7| And if We had sent down a book to you on paper so that they had touched it with their hands, then those who disbelieved would have said: this is only an obvious magic.
6|8| And they said: why has not an angel been sent down to him? And if We had sent down an angel, the matter would have certainly been decided and they would not be given any delay.
6|9| If We had made him an angel, We would have certainly made him as a man, and We would have confused for them what is already confusing.
6|10| And messengers before you have been certainly ridiculed then those of them who ridiculed were surrounded by what they were ridiculing it.
6|11| Say: travel throughout the earth and see what the end of the deniers was. 
6|12| Say: to whom belongs whatever is in the skies and on the earth? Say: to God. He prescribed the mercy upon Himself. He shall gather you on the resurrection day, that there is no doubt about it. Those who lost their souls do not believe.
6|13| And whatever inhabits in the night and in the day belongs to Him, and He hears all and knows all.
6|14| Say: should I take a protector other than God, creator of the skies and the earth, and He feeds and He is not fed? Say: indeed I am ordered to be the first of (or the best of) the ones who submitted and not to be of the polytheist. 
6|15| Say: indeed I am afraid of the punishment of a great day if I disobey my Master.
6|16| Anyone whom (punishment) is kept away from him on that day, indeed He had mercy on him, and that is the clear victory.
6|17| And if God touches you with a harm then no one can eliminate it except Him, and if He touches you with good (no one can hold it back), He is capable of everything
6|18| He is the dominant over His servants, and He is the wise and the well aware.
6|19| Say: what thing is greatest testimony? Say: God, a witness between me and you, and this Quran was revealed to me in order that I warn you and whoever it reaches with it. Do you testify that there are other gods with God? Say: I do not testify. Say: He is the only one god, and I am free of what you associate (with Him).
6|20| Those whom We gave them the book, know him (Muhammad) as they know their children. Those who lost their souls do not believe.
6|21| And who is more wrong than someone who makes up a lie (and attributes it) to God or denies His signs. Indeed the wrongdoers do not succeed.
6|22| On a day that We gather them all together, then We say to those who associated (partners with Us): where are your partners, those you used to claim?
6|23| Then there would be no excuse for them except saying: by God our Master, we were not polytheist.
6|24| See how they lied to themselves, and what they used to make up abandoned them.
6|25| And some of them (pretend to) listen to you, but We placed a cover on their hearts so they do not understand it and made their ears hard of hearing, and if they see every sign they do not believe in it, until when they come to you and they argue with you. Those who disbelieved say: This (Quran) is nothing but stories of the earlier ones.
6|26| And they prohibit (others) from it and they keep away from it, and they only destroy themselves and they do not realize.
6|27| And if you see when they are made to stop by the fire, then they said: we wish we are sent back and we would not deny our Master's signs and we would become of the believers.
6|28| No, but what they used to hide in the past became apparent to them, and if they are sent back, they would go back to what they were forbidden from it, and indeed they are liars.
6|29| And they said: there is nothing but our worldly life and we will not be raised.
6|30| And if you see when they are made to stop before their Master, He says: is not this the truth? They say: yes, by our Master. He says: so taste the punishment because of what you used to disbelieve.
6|31| Those who denied the meeting of God have lost, until when the hour suddenly comes to them, and they say: our regret about what we neglected in it and they carry their burdens on their back. Know that what they carry is bad.
6|32| And this world’s life is only a play and an amusement, and certainly the home of the hereafter is better for those who control themselves. Do you not understand?
6|33| We know that what they say, certainly makes you sad and indeed they do not deny you but the wrongdoers reject God’s signs.
6|34| And messengers before you were certainly denied, but they persevered about what they were denied and they were harassed until We gave them Our help. And no one can change God’s words. And certainly the news of the messengers has come to you.
6|35| And if their shunning is difficult for you, then make a tunnel in the earth or a ladder to the sky if you can, so that you bring them a miracle. If God wanted, He would assemble them to the guidance, so do not be of the ignorant.
6|36| Only those who listen will accept. And the dead, God raises them then they are returned to Him.
6|37| And they said: why a miracle of his Master was not sent down to him? Say: indeed God is able to send down a miracle, but most of them do not know.
6|38| There is no creature on the earth or no bird flying with its two wings unless they are communities like you. We did not leave anything out of the book (Quran). And they will be gathered to their Master.
6|39| And those who denied Our signs are deaf and dumb in the darkness. God misguides anyone He wants and He places anyone He wants on a straight path (according to His law).
6|40| Say: what do you think, if God’s punishment comes to you or the hour comes to you, would you call upon other than God if you are truthful?
6|41| No, but you only call on Him, then if He wants He eliminates what you called Him on, and you forget what you associate (with Him).
6|42| And We have certainly sent (messengers) to communities before you, then We took them with the suffering and the hardship so they may be humble.
6|43| So why did they not humble when Our suffering came to them? Instead their hearts became hardened and Satan beautified for them what they were doing. 
6|44| So when they forgot what they were reminded of it, We opened doors of everything for them until they were happy about what We gave them, until We suddenly took them and then they lost hope.
6|45| So root of the group who did wrong was cut off, and all praise belongs to God, Master of humankind.
6|46| Say: what do you think, if God takes your hearing and your eyes and seals your hearts, which god other than God brings it back to you? See how We explain the signs and they still turn away.
6|47| Say: what do you think if God’s punishment comes to you suddenly or openly, will anyone be destroyed except the wrongdoing people?
6|48| We do not send the messengers except as givers of good news and warners, so anyone who believes and straightens out should have no fear and no sadness.
6|49| And those who denied Our signs, the punishment touches them because they used to disobey.
6|50| Say: I do not tell you that God’s treasures are with me, and I do not know the unseen, and I do not tell you that I am an angel, I only follow what is revealed to me. Say: are the blind and the one who sees equal? Do you not think? 
6|51| And with it (Quran) warn those who fear that they will be gathered to their Master, that they have no protector or mediator other than Him, so that they may control themselves.
6|52| And do not drive away those who call on their Master in the morning and in the evening wanting His attention (and His pleasure). Their account is not on you at all and your account is not on them at all, so if you drive them away then you are of the wrongdoers.
6|53| And that is how We tested some of them by the others, so that they say: are these the ones whom God favored upon them among us? Does not God know the thankful ones better?
6|54| And when those who believe in Our signs come to you, say: peace (and well-being) upon you. Your Master prescribed the mercy for Himself, that anyone of you who did something bad out of ignorance then he repented afterward and straightened out, He is indeed forgiving and merciful.
6|55| And that is how We explain the signs, in order to expose way of the guilty ones.
6|56| Say: I am forbidden to serve those you call on other than God. Say: I do not follow your desires, then I have lost (the right path) and will not be of the guided.
6|57| Say: I am on a clear proof from my Master while you deny that, what you want to rush it is not with me (in my power), the decision (and making rule) only belongs to Go, He tells the truth and He is best of the deciders.
6|58| Say: if what you want to hurry about it was with me then the matter was decided between me and you, and God best knows the wrongdoers.
6|59| And keys of the unseen are with Him and no one knows it except Him, and He knows what is in the land and in the sea and no leaf falls unless He knows about it, and there is no seed in darkness of the earth, and nothing wet and nothing dry unless it is in a clear book.
6|60| He is the One who takes you at night (during sleep) and knows what you did during the day, then He raises you in it until a limited time is finished, then your return is to Him, then He informs you of what you were doing.
6|61| He is dominant over His servants, and He sends guardians for you until when the death comes to one of you and Our messengers (angels) take him back, and they do not fall short.
6|62| Then they are returned to God, their true protector/master. Know that the command (and making rules) belongs to Him and He is the quickest of the accountants.
6|63| Say: who saves you from darkness of the land and the sea when you call on him humbly and secretly, (saying) if you save us from this, we will be of the thankful?
6|64| Say: God saves you from it and from every distress, yet you associate (partners with Him)!
6|65| Say: He is able to raise a punishment against you from above you or from under your feet or to tangle you in sects and to make you taste each other’s violence. See how We explain the signs so they may understand.
6|66| And your people denied it (Quran) while it is the truth, say: I am not your advocate.
6|67| For all news there is a settlement, and you will know (when it happens).
6|68| And when you see those who enter into (confusing/useless/false or mocking) discussion about Our signs, then stay away from them until they enter into a conversation other than it. And if Satan makes you forget, then do not sit with the wrongdoing people after remembering.
6|69| And nothing of their account is on those who control themselves, but it is a reminder so that they may control themselves.
6|70| And leave those who took their way of life as a play and an amusement, and this world's life deceived them. And remind with it that a person is subjected to punishment (or is disgraced) by what it does and it has no protector and no mediator other than God, and if it offers as compensation all compensations, it would not be taken from it. They are those who are subjected to punishment (or are disgraced) for what they did. There is drink of boiling water and a painful punishment for them because of what they used to disbelieve.
6|71| Say: should we call on other than God, that which does not benefit us and does not harm us, and to be turned on our heels (to disbelief) after God guided us, like someone whom the devils infatuated and left him baffled on the earth, and he has companions who invite him to the guidance (saying): come to us. Say: God’s guidance is the (only true) guidance, and we are ordered to submit to the Master of Human kind,
6|72| and to perform the mandatory prayer and to be cautious of Him, and He is the One you will be gathered to Him.
6|73| And He is the One who created the skies and the earth in truth, and on the day that He says: be, then it will be. His word is the truth. And on a day that the trumpet is blown, the rule belongs to Him. Knower of the unseen and the visible, and He is the wise and the well informed.
6|74| And (remember) when Abraham said to his father Azar: do you take idols as gods, I see you and your people are in an obvious mistake.
6|75| And that is how We showed Abraham kingdom of the skies and the earth, so that he will be one of those who are certain.
6|76| So when the (darkness of) night covered him, he saw a star and he said: this is my Master. But when it disappeared he said: I do not like things that disappear.
6|77| So when he saw the moon rising, he said: this is my Master. But when it disappeared he said: if my Master does no guide me, I will be of the misguided people.
6|78| And when he saw the sun rising, he said: this is my Master, this is greater. But when it disappeared he said: my people, I am free of what you associate (with Him) 
6|79| I have turned my attention as a monotheist to the One who created the skies and the earth, and I am not of the polytheist.
6|80| And his people argued with him. He said: do you argue with me about God while He has guided me, and I am not afraid of what you associate with Him, unless my Master wants anything, my Master’s knowledge includes everything, will you not take notice?
6|81| And why should I fear what you associate (with God), while you do not fear associating (partners) with God when He did not sent down any reason for that to you. So which of the two groups has more right to safety, if you knew?
6|82| Those who believed and did not mix up their belief with wrongdoing, they are those who have safety and they are guided.
6|83| And that is Our reason that We gave Abraham against his people. We raise ranks of anyone We want. Your Master is indeed wise and knowledgeable.
6|84| And We gave him Isaac and Jacob, We guided them all, while previously We guided Noah, and among his descendants, David and Solomon and Job and Joseph and Moses and Aaron. And that is how We reward the good doers.
6|85| And Zachariah and Yahya (John the Baptist) and Jesus and Elias were all among the righteous.
6|86| And Ishmael and Al-Yasa'a (Elisha) and Jonah and Lot, and We preferred all of them over all other people.
6|87| And from their fathers and their descendants and their brothers, We chose some of them and guided them to a straight path.
6|88| That is God’s guidance, with it He guides anyone of His servants He wants, and if they had associated partner (with Him) what they were doing would have certainly become useless for them.
6|89| They are those whom We gave them the book and the authority and the prophethood. But if these disbelieve in it, then We would entrust it to a group who would not be disbelievers in it.
6|90| These are those whom God guided, so follow their guidance. Say: I do not ask any wages for it, this (Quran) is only a reminder for humankind.
6|91| They did not value God, His true worth, when they said: God did not send down anything to any human being. Say: who sent down the book that Moses brought it, a light and guidance for the people? You put it on papers, disclosing some of it while hiding most of it, while you were taught what you and your fathers did not know. Say: God (sent it down). Then leave them playing in their useless discussions.
6|92| And this book (Quran), which We sent it down is blessed, confirming that which was before it, and so that you warn (the people of) the mother town (Mecca) and around it. And those who believe in the hereafter believe in it, and they guard their mandatory prayer.
6|93| And who is more wrong than someone who makes up a lie (and attributes it) to God, or says that it was revealed to me while nothing was revealed to him, and anyone who says: I am going to send down like what God sent down. And if you see when the wrongdoers are in the tug of the death and the angels open their hands (saying): eject your souls, today you are punished a humiliating punishment for what you were unjustifiably saying against God and for being arrogant about His signs (and not accepting them).
6|94| And you have certainly come to Us individually as We created you the first time, and you left behind your backs whatever We gave you, and We do not see your mediators with you, those you claimed were partners (of God) in you. Indeed, you are cut off and what you were claiming abandoned you.
6|95| God is indeed splitter of the seed and the pit, He brings out the living from the dead and brings out the dead from the living. That is your God, so how do you deviate?
6|96| Splitter of the mornings, and He made the night for rest and the sun and the moon for calculation (as in a calendar). That is determination of the powerful and the knowledgeable.
6|97| And He is the One who made the stars for you to guide you with them in darkness of the land and the sea. We have certainly explained the signs in detail for people who know.
6|98| And He is the One who created you from a single being, then a settlement place and a depository. We have certainly explained the signs in detail for people who understand.
6|99| And He is the One who sent down rain from the sky, then We bring out (and grow) all kinds of plants with it, then We bring out the green (sprouts) from it, bringing out bunches of grain from it, and from date-palm and its pollen, bunches of dates hanging low and near, and gardens of grapes and the olives and the pomegranates, alike and unlike. Look at its fruit when it bears fruit and it ripens. Indeed there are signs in that for people who believe.
6|100| They made partners of the Genie (Jinn) for God, while He created them, and they falsely attributed sons and daughters to Him without any knowledge. He is flawless and is above what they describe.
6|101| Originator of the skies and the earth, how can He have a child while He had no spouse? And He created everything, and He knows everything.
6|102| That is God, your Master. There is no God except Him, creator of everything, so serve Him. He is advocate of everything.
6|103| The visions do not comprehend Him, while He comprehends the visions, and He is nice and well informed.
6|104| Enlightenment has come to you from your Master, so anyone who is enlightened, it is for himself, and whoever is blind it is against it. And I am not your keeper.
6|105| That is how We explain the signs, and let them say you studied, while We make it clear for people who know.
6|106| Follow what is revealed to you from your Master. There is no god except Him, and stay away from the polytheists.
6|107| If God wanted, they would not have set up associates (with Him), and We did not make you their guardian and you are not their advocate.
6|108| Do not insult those who call on others (or those whom they call) other than God, because they will insult God out of enmity and without knowledge. That is how We beautified for every community their action. Then their return is to their Master, and He informs them of what they were doing.
6|109| They solemnly swear by God that if a miracle comes to them, they shall believe in it. Say: the miracles are only with God. And what makes you realize that even if it comes, they would not believe.
6|110| And We turn over their hearts and their eyes, as they did not believe in it the first time, and We leave them wandering in their rebellion.
6|111| Had We sent down the angels to them, and the dead spoke to them, and gathered everything in front of them, they would not have believed unless God wanted, but most of them are ignorant.
6|112| And like that We appointed for every prophet as enemy, humans and Jinn devils, inspiring each other the fancy word as a deception. And if your Master wanted, they would not have done it, so leave them and what they fabricate,
6|113| so that the hearts of those who do not believe in the hereafter lean toward it and in order to be pleased with it (those fancy words), and so they commit what they commit.
6|114| Should I look for a judge other than God, when He is the One who sent down the book to you which is explained in detail? And those whom We gave them the book know that it is truly sent down by your Master, so do not be of the doubters
6|115| And the word of your Master finished in truth and justice. No one can change His words. And He hears all and knows all.
6|116| And if you obey most of those on the earth, they misguide you from God's way. They follow nothing but the speculation, and they only guess.
6|117| Your Master knows best who is lost from His way, and He knows best who are the guided.
6|118| So eat form that which God’s name was mentioned on it, if you believe in His signs.
6|119| What is it with you that you do not eat from what God’s name was mentioned on it, when He has explained to you in detail what is forbidden to you, except when you are forced to it? And indeed many misguide others with their desires without any knowledge. Indeed your Master knows best those who exceed the limits.
6|120| And stay away from obvious and hidden sin. Those who earn the sin are going to be punished for what they used to commit.
6|121| And do not eat form what God’s name was not mentioned on it, and it is certainly disobedience. And the devils certainly inspire their friends to argue with you, and if you obey them, you are certainly polytheists.
6|122| Or, is someone who was dead and We made him alive and put a light for him to walk among the people with it, like someone who was in the darkness and cannot come out of it? That is how what they were doing was beautified for the disbelievers.
6|123| And that is how We placed in every town its greatest criminals to plot in it. And they do not plot except against themselves, and they do not realize. 
6|124| And when a sign came to them, they said: we will never believe until we are given same as what was given God's messengers. God knows best where to place His message. Those who are guilty are going to suffer lowliness before God and a severe punishment for what they were plotting.
6|125| So anyone whom God wants to guide him, He opens his chest to submission, and whoever He wants to misguide him, He makes his chest tightly closed as if he climbs up to the sky. This is how God puts the filth on those who do not believe.
6|126| This is straight path of your Master. We have explained in detail the signs for people who take notice.
6|127| For them is the peaceful home with their Master, and He is their protector because of what they were doing.
6|128| And on a day that He gathers them all (saying): you clan of the Jinn, you have seduced many human beings. And their friends among the human beings say: our Master, some of us profited from others, and we reached our appointed time that You appointed for us. He says: the fire is your residence, remaining in there forever unless God wants (to save you). Your Master is indeed wise and knowledgeable.
6|129| And that is how We make some of the wrongdoers support the others for what they were doing.
6|130| You clan of Jinn and humans, did not messengers from among you come to you telling you My signs, and warning you about the meeting of this day of yours? They say: we testify against ourselves. And this world's life deceived them, and they testify against themselves that they were disbelievers.
6|131| That is because your Master is not destroyer of the towns wrongfully (or for their wrongdoing) while their inhabitants are unaware.
6|132| And for everyone is ranks according to what they did, and your Master is not unaware of what they do.
6|133| And your Master is rich (and without any needs) and full of mercy. If He wants, He destroys you and replaces you with what He wants, just as He produced you from other people’s descendants. 
6|134| Indeed what you are promised certainly comes, and you cannot escape it.
6|135| Say: my people, do what you are capable of, and I do (what I can), and you will know who has the home of the hereafter. Indeed the wrongdoers do not succeed.
6|136| And they put aside a share for God from the crops and the livestock that He created, and they said by their claim that this is for God and this is for our partners (of God). Then what was for their partners (of God) did not reach God, but what was for God reached their partners. What they judge is bad. 
6|137| And that is how their partners (of God) made the killing of their children attractive for many of the polytheists, to ruin them and to confuse them about their way of life. And if God wanted, they would not have done it. So leave them and what they fabricate.
6|138| They said by their claim that these livestock and crops are forbidden and no one should eat them except anyone we want, and livestock that (riding on) their back was forbidden, and livestock that they do not mention God's name over it, fabricating (lies) against Him. He is going to punish them for what they were fabricating.
6|139| And they said: what is in the wombs of these livestock is exclusively for our men and is forbidden to our women, but if it is dead (at birth) then they are partners in it. He is going to punish them for their assertion. Indeed He is wise and knowledgeable.
6|140| Those who foolishly killed their children without any knowledge, and forbade what God provided them fabricating (lies) against God, they have lost. They have erred and they were not guided.
6|141| And He is the One who created gardens trellised and non-trellised, and the dates and the produce with different taste, and the olives and the pomegranates, like and unlike. Eat from its fruit when it bears fruit, and gives its dues on the day of harvest, and do not be excessive, for indeed God does not like the excessive ones.
6|142| And among the livestock are transporting and covering. Eat from what God provided you and do not follow Satan's footsteps, indeed he is an obvious enemy for you.
6|143| Eight in pairs (four pairs), two of the sheep and two of the goats. Say: did He forbid the two males or the two females, or what is in the wombs of the two females? Tell me with knowledge if you are truthful.
6|144| And two of the camels and two of the cows. Say: did He forbid the two males or the two females, or what is in the wombs of the two females? Or were you present when God instructed you to this? Who is more wrong than someone who makes up a lie (and attribute it) to God to misguide people without any knowledge? Indeed God does not guide the wrongdoing people.
6|145| Say: I do not find, in what was revealed to me, anything forbidden to an eater who eats it, except if it is dead or poured out blood or meat of pig which is filthy or it is offered up for other than God which is indeed disobedience. And anyone who is forced without being desirous and not exceeding, then your Master is forgiving and merciful.
6|146| And to those who are Jewish, We forbade everything that have claws, and from the cows and from the sheep We forbade them their fat except what their backs carried or the intestines or what is mixed with bone. That is how We punished them for their aggression and We are certainly truthful.
6|147| If they denied you, then say: your Master has plenty of mercy, but His fury is not turned back from the guilty group.
6|148| Those who associate (partner with God) are going to say: if God wanted, we and our fathers would not have associate, and we would not have forbidden anything. That is how those before them lied until they tasted Our fury. Say: is there any knowledge with you, then bring it out for us, you follow nothing but the speculation and you only guess.
6|149| Say: the profound reason belongs to God, so if He wanted He would have guided you all.
6|150| Say: get your witnesses together, those who testify that God forbade this. If they testify, then do not testify with them, and do not follow the desires of those who denied Our signs and those who do not believe in the hereafter and they make equals with their Master.
6|151| Say: come, I read to you what your Master declared inviolable, do not associate anything with Him, and be good to your parent, and do not kill your children because of poverty as We provide for you and for them, and do not go near indecencies whether it is apparent or it is secret, and do not kill anyone except justifiably (in the due process of law) as God made it (life) sacred. This is what He instructed you to it, so that you may understand.
6|152| And do not go near property of the orphans except in the best way until he reaches his maturity, and give measure and weight with justice. We do not task any person beyond its capability. And when you speak, be just even if it is about your relatives (and close ones). And fulfill your promise to God. This is what He instructed you to it so that you may notice.
6|153| And this is My straight path, so follow it and do not follow other ways to separate you from His way. This is what He instructed you to it so that you may control yourselves.
6|154| We gave Moses the book to finish (our favor) upon the one who did good, and as an explanation for everything and a guide and a mercy so they may believe in meeting their Master.
6|155| And this book (Quran) which We sent it down is blessed, so follow it and be cautious (of God) so you may receive mercy.
6|156| That you do not say: the book was only sent down to two groups before us, and we were certainly unaware of their studies.
6|157| Or you do not say: if the book was sent down to us, we would have certainly been more guided than them. A clear proof and a guide and a mercy has come to you from your Master. So who is more wrong than someone who denies God’s signs and turns away from them? We are going to punish those who turn away from Our signs, a bad punishment for what they were turning away from.
6|158| Are they waiting that the angels come to them or your Master comes or some of your Master's signs come? A day that some of your Master's signs come, a person will not benefit from its belief if it did not believe from before or if it did not earn any good by its belief. Say: wait, indeed we are waiting too.
6|159| Indeed those who divided their religion and became sects, you have nothing to do with them. Their affair is only with God, then He informs them of what they were doing.
6|160| Whoever comes with a good deed, he has ten times as much as that, and whoever comes with a bad deed, then he is only punished like that, and they are not wronged.
6|161| Say: indeed my Master guided me to a straight path, a lasting way of life, the faith of monotheist Abraham, and he was not of the polytheists.
6|162| Say: indeed my mandatory prayer and my ritual and my life and my death are only for God, Master of humankind.
6|163| There is no partner for Him, and I am ordered to that, and I am the first of (or the best of) the submitted.
6|164| Say: shall I look for a Master other than God, while He is the Master of everything? And every person earns only against itself, and no bearer bears the burden of another, so your return is to your Master and then He informs you about what you used to disagree about it.
6|165| He is the One who made you successors on the earth, and raised some of you above others in ranks, to test you in what He gave you. Your Master is indeed quick in the punishment, and He is indeed forgiving and merciful.
7|1| A.L.M.S. (Alif. Lam. Mim. Sud.)
7|2| A book (Quran) was sent down to you, and there should not be any difficulty about it in your chest, to warn with it, and (it is) a reminder for the believers.
7|3| Follow what was sent down to you from your Master and do not follow any masters other than it/Him, you take a little notice.
7|4| And how many towns did We destroy, that Our punishment came to them by night or while they were resting (during daytime)?
7|5| When Our punishment came to them, their call was only to say: indeed we were wrongdoers.
7|6| We shall question those who (messengers) were sent to them, and We shall question the messengers.
7|7| And We shall tell them with knowledge (what they did), and We were not absent.
7|8| And on that day measuring will be true, and anyone whose measure is heavy then they are the successful ones.
7|9| And anyone whose measure is light then they are those who brought loss upon themselves because they used to be wrong to Our signs.
7|10| And We have certainly established you firmly on the earth, and We put means of life (and survival) for you in there. You give little thanks. 
7|11| And We have certainly created you, then formed you, then We said to the angels: be humble to Adam. They all humbled except Iblis (Satan) who was not one of the humble ones.
7|12| He (God) said: what prevented you that you did not humble when I ordered you? He said: I am better than him, You created me from fire while You created him from clay.
7|13| He (God) said: go down from it, and it is not for you to be arrogant in it, so get out, you are of the belittled ones.
7|14| He (Satan) said: give me time until the day that they are raised.
7|15| He (God) said: indeed you are of those given a delay.
7|16| He (Satan) said: because you misled me, I shall sit for them in your straight path.
7|17| Then I shall come to them from in front of them and from behind them and from their rights and from their lefts, and you will not find most of them thankful.
7|18| He (God) said: get out of it disgraced and banished, those among them who follow you, I shall fill hell from all of you.
7|19| And you Adam, you and your spouse reside in the garden and eat from wherever you want, but do not get close to this tree because you become one of the wrongdoers.
7|20| And Satan seduced them both to make apparent to them what was hidden from them of their shame (of their genitals) and said: your Master only prohibited you from this tree so that you do not become angels or become immortals.
7|21| And he swore to them: I am indeed among the advisers for you.
7|22| And he made them fall by deception. Then when they both tasted the tree, their shame appeared to them and they began covering themselves with leaves of the garden, and their Master called them: did I not prohibit you from that tree and told you two that Satan is your clear enemy?
7|23| They both said: our Master, we did wrong to ourselves, and if you do not forgive us and have mercy on us, we shall be of the losers.
7|24| He (God) said: go down, some of you will be enemies of the others, and there is a settlement and necessities of life for you on the earth for a while.
7|25| He said: you live in it and you die in it and you will be brought out of it.
7|26| Children of Adam, indeed We sent down clothing to you to cover your shame and as a decoration, while the clothes of self control (against unlawful desires and sins) is better. That is among God's signs, so they may take notice.
7|27| Children of Adam, do not let Satan seduce you as he drove your parents out of the garden, stripping them off from their clothing to show them their shame. Indeed he and his tribe see you from where you do not see them. Indeed We made the devils friends (and masters) for those who do not believe.
7|28| And when they commit an indecency, they say: we found our fathers doing it and God ordered us to it. Say: God does not order to indecency, do you say about God what you do not know?
7|29| Say: my Master orders to justice. And turn your attentions (toward Him) in every place of worship and call on Him being sincere to Him in the religion. Just as He created you, you return (to Him)
7|30| He guided some, and some deserved the misguidance. Indeed they took the devils as their friends (and masters) instead of God and they think they are guided.
7|31| Children of Adam, wear your beautiful thing at every place of worship and eat and drink, but do not be excessive as God does not like the excessive ones.
7|32| Say: who did forbid God's beautiful things and the good provisions that He produced for His servants? Say: in this world's life it is for those who believed, and exclusively theirs on the resurrection day. That is how We explain the signs for people who know.
7|33| Say: my Master only forbade the indecencies whether it is openly or it is in secret, and sins, and undue oppression, and that you associate with God that which He did not send down any reason for it, and that you say about God what you do not know.
7|34| For every group there is an appointed time (to believe), and when their appointed time comes they cannot put it back an hour nor put it forward.
7|35| Children of Adam, if messengers from among you come to you telling you My signs then anyone who controls himself and straightens out, then they have no fear and no sadness. 
7|36| And those who denied Our signs and were arrogant about them, they are inhabitants of the fire remaining in there forever.
7|37| Who is more wrong than someone who makes up a lie (and attributes it) to God or denies His signs? They get their share from (what is written in) the book, so that when Our messengers (angels of death) come to them to take back their life, saying: where are those whom you were calling on besides God? They say: they abandoned us. And they testify against themselves that they were disbelievers.
7|38| Say: enter the fire among the communities of Jinn and humans who have passed away before you. Every time a group enters, its sister (that went in before it) curses it until they all get in there. The later ones say about the earlier ones: our Master, these misguided us, so give them double punishment of the fire. He (God) says: double for all, but you do not know.
7|39| And the earlier ones say to the later ones: there is no advantage for you  over us, so taste the punishment for what you used to do.
7|40| Indeed gates of the heaven do not open for those who denied Our signs and were arrogant about them, and they do not enter the garden until a camel passes through the eye of the needle, and that is how We punish the guilty ones.
7|41| Their resting place is hell and above them is a covering, and that is how We punish the wrongdoers.
7|42| And those who believed and did good works are inhabitants of the garden remaining in there forever, We do not task any person beyond its capability. 
7|43| And We remove whatever resentment that is in their chests, and beneath them rivers flow, and they say: all praise belongs to God, the One who guided us to this, and we were not guided if God did not guide us, certainly our Master's messengers have brought the truth. And they are called out that this is the garden that you inherited it for what you were doing.
7|44| And inhabitants of the garden call out inhabitants of the fire: we have found that what our Master promised us is true, so did you find what your Master promised is true? They say: yes. Then an announcer among them announced that God's curse is on the wrongdoers,
7|45| those who obstruct God's way and look for its distortion and they are disbelievers in the hereafter.
7|46| And between the two of them there is a barrier. And on the heights there are men who recognize everyone by their appearance, and they call out to inhabitants of the garden that have not entered it yet but they hope (to do so): peace (and well-being) upon you, 
7|47| And when their eyes are turned towards inhabitants of the fire, they say: our Master, do not put us with the wrongdoing group.
7|48| And inhabitants of the heights call out men whom they recognize from their appearance saying: your population (and great number) and your being arrogant is of no use to you.
7|49| Are these the ones whom you swore that God does not grant them mercy? Enter the garden, you have no fear and you will not be sad.
7|50| And inhabitants of the fire call out inhabitants of the garden that send us some water or some of what God provided for you. They say: God forbade these to the disbelievers,
7|51| those who took their way of life as a play and an amusement and this world's life deceived them. Today, We forget them as they forgot about meeting of this day of theirs, and because they used to reject Our signs.
7|52| And We brought them a book which We explained it in detail based on knowledge, a guide and a mercy for believing people. 
7|53| Are they waiting for its realization? A day that its realization comes, those who previously forgot it say: our Master's messengers brought us the truth, are there any mediators to mediate for us, or will we be sent back so that we do differently than what we were doing? Indeed they brought loss upon themselves and what they used to make up abandoned them.
7|54| Indeed your Master is God, the One who created the skies and the earth in six stages then He settled on the throne, He covers the day with the night, which it quickly looks for it, and the sun and the moon and the stars are governed by His command. Know that the creation and the command is His. Blessed is God, Master of humankind.
7|55| Call on your Master humbly and privately. He does not like those who exceed the limits.
7|56| And do not commit corruption on the earth after it is set in order, and call on Him in fear and in hope. God’s mercy is indeed close to the good doers.
7|57| He is the One who sends the wind as good news before His mercy, so that it carries heavy clouds, and We drive it to a dead land, then We send down the rain from it, then We bring out all kind of produce with it. That is how We bring out the dead (back to life), so that you may take notice.
7|58| And the good land brings out its plants with its Master’s permission, but the bad land only brings out sparsely. This is how We explain Our signs for thankful people.
7|59| We have certainly sent Noah to his people, and he said: my people, serve God, you have no god other than Him, indeed I am afraid of the punishment of a great day upon you.
7|60| The leaders of his people said: indeed we see you are clearly in error.
7|61| He said: my people, there is no error in me but I am a messenger from the Master of Human kind.
7|62| I preach you my Master's message and I advise you and I know from God what you do not know.
7|63| Or are you surprised that a reminder from your Master came to you, by a man from among you, to warn you and so that you control yourselves and you may receive mercy?
7|64| They denied him, so We saved him and those with him in the Ark and We drowned those who denied Our signs. They were a blind group.
7|65| And to (people of) Aad (We sent) their brother Hud, he said: my people, serve God, you have no god other than Him, will you not be cautious?
7|66| The leaders of those who disbelieved among his people said: indeed we see you are a fool and we think you are of the liars.
7|67| He said: my people, there is no foolishness in me, but I am a messenger from the Master of Human kind.
7|68| I preach you my Master's message and I am an honest adviser to you.
7|69| Or are you surprised that a reminder from your Master came to you, by a man from among you, to warn you? And remember when He made you successors after people of Noah and increased your stature in the creation. Remember God’s favor so you may be successful.
7|70| They said: did you come to us, so that we serve God alone, and give up what our fathers used to serve, so bring us what you promised us if you are truthful.
7|71| He (Hud) said: filth and anger from your Master have fallen on you, do you argue with me about names which you and your fathers named them, when God did not send down any reason for it? So wait and I wait with you.
7|72| So We saved him and those with him by a mercy from Us and We cut off the root of those who denied Our signs and they were not believers.
7|73| And to (people of) Thamud (We sent) their brother Salih. He said: my people, serve God, you have no god other than Him, a clear proof has come to you from your Master, this is God’s female camel, as a sign for you, so leave her to eat in God’s earth and do not harm her otherwise a painful punishment takes you.
7|74| And remember when He made you successors after Aad and settled you on the earth, where you build palaces in its plains and carve out houses in the mountains, so remember God’s favor, and do not commit mischief on the earth as corruptors.
7|75| The leaders of those who were arrogant among his people said to those who believed among those who were weak: do you know that Salih is sent by his Master? They said: we believe in what he was sent with it.
7|76| Those who were arrogant said: we disbelieve in what you believe in it.
7|77| Then they killed the female camel and disregarded order of their Master and said: Salih, bring us what you promised us (the punishment), if you are one of the messengers.
7|78| So the earthquake took them, and they became motionless bodies (and died) in their houses.
7|79| Then he (Salih) turned away from them and said: my people, I have certainly preached the message of my Master to you and advised you, but you do not like the advisers.
7|80| And (remember) Lot when he said to his people: do you commit the indecency that none of humankind did it before you?
7|81| Indeed you approach men lustfully instead of women. Yes, you are an excessive group.
7|82| The only answer of his people was that they said: drive them out of your town, indeed they are people who pretend to be (or want to remain) pure.
7|83| So We saved him and his family except his wife who was of those staying behind.
7|84| And We poured down a rain (of stone) on them. So see what the end of guilty ones was.
7|85| And to (people of) Midian (We sent) their brother Shu'aib. He said: my people, serve God, you have no god other than Him, a clear proof has come to you from your Master, so give full measure and weight and do not undervalue peoples' things and do not commit corruption on the earth after it is set in order, this is best for you if you are believers.
7|86| And do not sit on every road, threatening and obstructing God's way for anyone who believes in it, and look for its distortion. And remember when you were a few then he increased you, and see what the end of the corruptors was.
7|87| And if there is a group of you who believed in what I was sent with it, and a group who did not believe, then be patient until God judges between us, and He is the best of the judges.
7|88| The leaders of those who were arrogant among his people said: Shu'aib, we shall drive you and those who believed with you out of our town or you should return to our faith. He said: even if we were despising that? 
7|89| We have made up a lie (and attributed it) to God if we returned  to your faith after He saved us from that, and it is not for us to return to that, unless God our Master wants. Our Master’s knowledge includes everything. We trust in God. Our Master, decide between us and our people in truth, You are best of the deciders.
7|90| And the leaders of those who disbelieved among his people said: If you follow Shu'aib, then you would be losers.
7|91| So the earthquake took them, and they became motionless bodies (and died) in their houses.
7|92| Those who denied Shu'aib became as if they did not live in there. Those who denied Shu'aib, they were losers.
7|93| So he turned away from them and he said: my people, I have certainly preached my Master's message to you and advised you, so how can I be sorry for disbelieving people?
7|94| And We did not send any prophet to any town unless We took its resident in hardship and distress, so they may be humble.
7|95| Then We replaced the hardship with the comfort until they (thrived and) ignored (Us) and they said: the distress and the prosperity have touched our fathers too. So We suddenly took them without them realizing.
7|96| And if people of the towns had believed and controlled themselves, We would have certainly opened blessings of the sky and the earth to them, but they denied so We took them for what they were doing.
7|97| Do people of the towns feel safe that Our punishment will not come to them at night while they sleep?
7|98| Or do people of the towns feel safe that Our punishment will not come to them during daytime while they play?
7|99| Do they feel safe about God’s plan? Only the people who are losers feel safe about God’s plan. 
7|100| Or does it not point out to those who inherited the earth after its (previous) people, that if We want We would make them suffer for their sins and would seal their hearts so they do not hear (the truth).
7|101| These are the towns that we tell you their stories, and their messengers have certainly brought them the clear proofs, but they were not to believe in what they denied in the past. That is how God puts a seal on the hearts of the disbelievers.
7|102| And We did not find most of them (true) to their promise, and We found most of them to be disobedient.
7|103| Then after them, We sent Moses to Pharaoh and his assembly with Our signs, but they did wrong to them (Our signs), so see what the end of the corruptors was.
7|104| And Moses said: Pharaoh, I am a messenger from the Master of Human kind.
7|105| It is my duty that I only say the truth about God, I have brought you clear proof from your Master, so send the children of Israel with me.
7|106| He (Pharaoh) said: if you brought a miracle, then bring it if you are truthful.
7|107| So he threw down his cane and it turned into a visible serpent.
7|108| And he took out his hand (from his vest) and it was white to the viewers.
7|109| The assembly of Pharaoh’s people said: he is a knowledgeable magician.
7|110| He wants to drive you out of your land, so what do you instruct?
7|111| They said: put him and his brother off (for a while) and send gatherers to the cities,
7|112| to bring you every knowledgeable magician.
7|113| The magicians came to Pharaoh and said: is there any reward for us if we are the winners?
7|114| He said: yes, and you shall be of the close ones (to me).
7|115| They said: Moses, do you throw or are we the throwers?
7|116| He said: you throw. So when they threw, they bewitched people’s eyes and frightened them and they brought a great magic.
7|117| And We revealed to Moses: throw your cane, and it suddenly swallows whatever they fake.
7|118| So the truth was proved and whatever they were doing was invalidated.
7|119| So they were defeated there, and they turned belittled.
7|120| And the magicians fell, showing humbleness.
7|121| They said: we believed in the Master of Human kind,
7|122| Master of Moses and Aaron.
7|123| Pharaoh said: did you believe in Him before I give you permission? This is a plot which you planned in the city to drive its people out of it, but you will know (the consequences).
7|124| I shall cut off your hands and feet from opposite (sides) then I shall crucify all of you.
7|125| They said: indeed we return to our Master,
7|126| you are only taking revenge from us because we believed in our Master’s signs when it came to us. Our Master, give us perseverance (and patience) and make us die as submitters.
7|127| And the assembly of Pharaoh’s people said: do you leave Moses and his people to commit corruption in the land and abandon you and your gods? He said: we are going to kill their sons and let their women live, and we are dominant over them.
7|128| Moses said to his people: ask God for help and persevere (and be patient), the earth belongs to God, He gives it as inheritance to whomever He wants among His servants, and the end is for those who control themselves.
7|129| They said: we were harassed before you come to us and after you came to us. He said: perhaps your Master destroys your enemy and make you the successors in the land to see how you do.
7|130| And We certainly took Pharaoh’s people by famine and shortage of the produce, so that they may take notice.
7|131| Then when something good came to them, they said: this is because of us. And when something bad happened to them, they attributed it to bad omen of Moses and those with him. Know that their bad omen is only from God but most of them do not know.
7|132| And they said: whatever miracle you bring us to bewitch us with it, we will not believe in you.
7|133| So We sent them the flood and the locusts and the gnat and the frogs and the blood, as distinct miracles, but they were arrogant and they were a guilty group.
7|134| And when the plague fell upon them, they said: Moses, call on your Master for us because of what He promised you, that if you remove the plague from us, then we shall believe in you and we shall send the children of Israel with you.
7|135| So when We removed the plague from them for a period of time which they reached it, then they break (their promise).
7|136| So We took revenge from them and drowned them in the sea, because they denied Our miracles and they were negligent of them.
7|137| And We made the group who were weakened inherit east of the land and its west which We blessed it. And the good word (promise) of your Master fulfilled for the children of Israel because of their patience (and perseverance), and We destroyed what Pharaoh and his people were building and what (structures) they were erecting.
7|138| And We made the children of Israel cross the sea, then they came upon a group that worshiped their idols. They said: Moses, make a god for us like their gods. He said: indeed you are ignorant people,
7|139| indeed what these are (engaged) in it will be destroyed and what they are doing is useless.
7|140| He said: should I look for a god other than God for you, while He preferred you over all other people?
7|141| And (remember) when We saved you from Pharaoh’s people, who imposed the worst punishment on you, killing your sons and letting your women live. And in that there was a great test from your Master.
7|142| We made an appointment with Moses for thirty nights and We completed it with ten (more), so appointment of his Master completed in forty nights. And Moses told his brother Aaron: be my successor among my people (in my absence), and do right, and do not follow the way of the corruptors.
7|143| And when Moses came to Our appointment and his Master spoke to him, he said: my Master, show me (yourself) that I look at you. He (God) said: you will never see Me, but look at the mountain and if it stays in its place then you will see Me. So when his Master displayed Himself to the mountain, He pulverized it, and Moses fell unconscious, and when he woke up, he said: You are flawless, I repent to You, and I am the first (or the best) of the believers.
7|144| He (God) said: Moses, I chose you over the people with My message and with My word, so take what I gave you and be of the thankful ones.
7|145| And We wrote about everything on the tablets for him, an advise and an explanation of everything. So take them with strength and order your people to take it in the best manner. I am going to show you the home of the disobedient ones.
7|146| I am going to turn those who are unjustifiably arrogant on the earth away from My signs. And even if they see every miracle they would not believe in it, and if they see the right way, they would not take that way, while if they see the wrong way, they would take that way. That is because they denied Our signs and they were negligent of them.
7|147| And those who denied Our signs and the meeting of the hereafter, their works would become useless. Are they rewarded except for what they were doing? 
7|148| And people of Moses, after him (in his absence), took (as god) a body of a calf made from their ornaments which made a sound. Did they not see that it does not speak to them and does not guide them to a way? They took it (as god), and they became wrongdoers.
7|149| And when they regretted and saw that they have made a mistake, they said: if our Master does not have mercy on us and forgive us, we shall be among the losers.
7|150| When Moses returned to his people, angry and sorrowful, he said: you succeeded me badly after me, were you rushing your Master’s order? He threw down the tablets and took his brother by the head dragging him toward himself. He (Aaron) said: son of my mother, the people weakened me and almost killed me, so do not make the enemies happy about me, and do not put me with the wrongdoing group.
7|151| He said: my Master, forgive me and my brother and admit us into Your mercy, and You are the most merciful of the merciful ones.
7|152| Those who took the calf (as god) are going to receive their Master’s anger and humiliation in this world's life. That is how We punish those who make up lies (and attribute them to God).
7|153| And those who did bad, then repented afterward and believed, indeed your Master is forgiving and merciful after that.
7|154| And when Moses' anger subsided, he took the tablets, and there was guidance and mercy in its text for those who were afraid of their Master.
7|155| And Moses selected seventy men from his people for Our appointment. So when the earthquake took them, he said: my Master, if You wanted, You could have destroyed them and me before this, do You kill us for what the fools among us did, this is only a test from You, misguiding anyone You want with it and guiding anyone You want, You are our protector (and supporter), so forgive us and have mercy on us, and You are the best of the forgivers.
7|156| And prescribe good in this world and in the hereafter for us, for we turned to You.  He (God) said: I inflict My punishment on whomever I want, and My mercy includes everything, so I am going to prescribe it for those who control themselves and give the mandatory charity and those who believe in Our signs.
7|157| Those who follow the messenger (Muhammad), the illiterate prophet, the one they find him written in the Torah and the Gospel that is with them, he instructs them to what is right and prohibits them from what is wrong, and he makes the good thing lawful for them and prohibits them from the bad things, and he removes their burden and the shackles that is on them from them. So those who believed in him and assisted him and helped him and followed the light (Quran) that was sent with him, they are the successful ones.
7|158| Say: people, I am God's messenger to all of you, the One that the rule of the skies and the earth belongs to Him, there is no god except Him, He gives life and causes death. So believe in God and His messenger, the illiterate prophet, the one who believes in God and His words, and follow Him/him so that you may be guided.
7|159| And a group of Moses’ people guide to the truth, and they carry out justice with that.
7|160| And We divided them (children of Israel) into twelve tribes of nations, and We revealed to Moses when his people asked him for water: strike the stone with your cane. Then twelve springs flowed out of it, and all people knew their drinking place, and we shaded over them with the clouds, and We sent down the Manna and the Salwa (two kind of edible foods) to them. Eat from good things that We provided you. And they did not do wrong to Us, but they were wrong to themselves.
7|161| And (remember) when they were told: reside in this town and eat from it, wherever you want, and say: remove (and reduce our sins), and enter the gate humbly. I forgive your mistakes. We are going to increase the good doers.
7|162| But those who did wrong among them changed word to something other than what they were told, so We sent them a punishment from the sky because they used to do wrong.
7|163| Ask them about the town that was present by the sea, when they overstepped in Sabbath. When their fishes come to them appearing on the surface of the sea on their Sabbath day, and on non Sabbath days they would not come to them. That is how We tested them because they were disobeying.
7|164| And when a group of them said: why do you preach people whom God kills them or punishes them with a severe punishment? They said: as an apology to your Master and so that they may control themselves.
7|165| And when they forgot what they were reminded with it, We saved those who prohibited from the bad, and We took those who did wrong with a harsh punishment because they were disobeying.
7|166| And when they violated what they were prohibited from it, We told them: be driven away monkeys.
7|167| And (remember) when your Master declared that He shall raise against them those who inflict bad punishment on them until the resurrection day. Indeed God is quick in punishment and indeed He is forgiving and merciful.
7|168| And We divided them on the earth as nations. Some of them were righteous and some of them were other than that, and We tested them with the good and the bad so that they may return.
7|169| Then successors succeeded after them who inherited the book, taking material of this world and saying: it is going to be forgiven for us. And if material, same as that, comes to them, they take it (again). Was not the book’s commitment taken from them that they should not say anything about God except the truth, and they studied what is in it? The home of the hereafter is better for those who control themselves. Do you not understand?
7|170| And those who hold to the book and perform the mandatory prayer, indeed We do not waste the reward of the righteous. 
7|171| And (remember) when We raised the mountain over them as if it was a canopy, and they thought that it falls on them, (We said): take what We gave you firmly and take notice of what is in it, so that you may control yourselves.
7|172| And (remember) when your Master took from the backs of the children of Adam, their descendants, and made them testify against themselves, (and He asked): am I not your Master? They said: yes, we testify. So that on the resurrection day you do not say: we were unaware of this.
7|173| Or you (would not) say: it was only our fathers who associated (partner with God) in the past, and we were descendents after them, do You destroy us for what the followers of falsehood did?
7|174| That is how We explain the signs, so that they may return.
7|175| And read to them story of the one whom We gave him Our signs, then he stepped away from it, so Satan followed him and he became of the deceived ones.
7|176| And If We wanted, We would have elevated him with it (Our signs), but he held on to the earth and followed his desires. His example is like the dog, if you attack it, it pants and if you leave it, it pants. That is example of the people who denied Our signs. So tell the stories, so that they may think.
7|177| The example of the people who denied Our signs and were wrong to themselves is awful.
7|178| Whoever God guides, then he is guided, and whoever He misguides, then they are the losers.
7|179| And We have certainly created many of Jinn and humans for hell. They have hearts that they do not understand with it, and they have eyes that they do not see with it, and they have ears that they do not hear with it. They are like animals, no they are even more lost. They are the negligent ones.
7|180| And the good names (and attributes) belong to God, so call on Him by them, and leave those who altercate about His names, they are going to be punished for what they were doing.
7|181| And among those whom We created, a group guides to the truth and they carry out justice with it.
7|182| And those who denied Our signs, We are going to gradually lead them (to destruction and punishment) from where they do not know.
7|183| And I give them time. Indeed My plan is sound.
7|184| Or did they not think that their friend is not mad?  He is only a clear warner.
7|185| Or did they not look at the kingdom of the skies and the earth and everything God created, and that perhaps their term is getting close? So in what saying do they believe after that (Quran)?
7|186| Whoever God misguides, then there is no guide for him, and He leaves them wandering in their rebellion.
7|187| They ask you about the hour: when is its anchor (arrival)? Say: its knowledge is only with my Master, He shall only displays it at its time, it is heavy on the skies and on the earth, it only comes to you suddenly. They ask you as if you are well informed about it. Say: its knowledge is only with God, but most people do not know.
7|188| Say: I do not have power of any benefit or any harm for myself, except what God wants, and if I knew the unseen, I would want a lot of the good things, and nothing bad would touch me, I am only a warner and a giver of good news for people who believe. 
7|189| He is the One who created you from a single being, and He made its spouse from it to find tranquility in it. So when he covered her (and had intercourse with her), she carried a light load and went on with it, then when it became heavy, they called on God their Master: if You give us a good child, we shall be of the thankful ones.
7|190| But when God gave them a good child, they set up partners for Him in what He gave them. God is above what they associate (with Him).
7|191| Do they associate something (with Him) that does not create anything and they are created?
7|192| And they cannot be of any help for them and they cannot help themselves.
7|193| And if you invite them (the polytheists) to the guidance, they will not follow you. It is the same for you whether you invite them or you are silent.
7|194| Those whom you call on besides God are servants like you, so call on them and they should answer you if you are truthful.
7|195| Do they have feet to walk with them, or do they have hands to grab with them, or do they have eyes to see with them, or do they have ears to hear with them? Say: call on your associates (for God), then plot against me and do not wait.
7|196| My protector is God, the One who sent down the book, and He protects the righteous.
7|197| And those whom you call besides Him cannot help you and they cannot help themselves.
7|198| And if you invite them (the polytheists) to the guidance, they do not hear, and you see them looking at you while they do not see.
7|199| Take to the pardon (and excuse them) and order what is right, and stay away from the ignorant ones.
7|200| And if a temptation from Satan tempts you, then look for God’s protection, indeed He hears all and knows all.
7|201| Indeed those who control themselves, when a transient (thought) from Satan touches them, they remember (God) then they become insightful.
7|202| And their bothers (and friends) help them in the error, and they will not stop short.
7|203| And when you did not bring them a sign, they said: why did you not choose it? Say: I only follow what is revealed to me from my Master, this (Quran) is enlightenment from your Master and a guide and a mercy for people who believe.
7|204| And when the Quran is read, then listen to it and keep quiet, so that you may receive mercy.
7|205| And remember your Master in yourself (in your mind), humbly and in fear and without being loud in words, in the morning and the evening, and do not be of the negligent ones.
7|206| Indeed those who are with your Master are not arrogant in His servitude, and they glorify Him, and they show humbleness for Him.  
8|1| They ask you about extras (left in war), say: extras are for God and the messenger. So be cautious of God and set the matters straight between you, and obey God and His messenger if you are believers. 
8|2| Believers are only those who when God is mentioned, their hearts trembles, and when His signs are read to them, it increases their belief and they put their trust in their Master,
8|3| those who perform the mandatory prayer and spend out of what We provided for them.
8|4| They are the true believers. They have ranks with their Master and forgiveness and a noble provision.
8|5| As your Master rightly made you go out of your home, while indeed a group of the believers disliked it.
8|6| They argue with you about the truth after it was made clear, as if they are driven to the death while they are watching.
8|7| And (remember) when God promised you that one of the two groups will be yours, and you liked the unarmed (group) to be yours, while God wanted to prove the truth with His words and to cut off the root of the disbelievers.
8|8| So that He proves the truth and eliminates the falsehood, even if the guilty ones dislike it.
8|9| (Remember) when you asked for your Master’s help and He answered you: I am your helper with one thousand angels, in rows.
8|10| God only made it as good news and to reassure your hearts with it. Help (and victory) is only from God. God is indeed powerful and wise.
8|11| And (remember) when He made you doze off as (a sign of) security from Him, and sent down rain from the sky to cleanse you with it, and to remove Satan’s filth from you, and to reinforce your hearts, and to solidify the footsteps with it. 
8|12| (Remember) when your Master revealed to the angels: I am with you, so strengthen the believers, I am going to put fear into the hearts of those who disbelieved, so strike them above the neck, and chop off all their fingertips.
8|13| That is because they opposed God and His messenger, and whoever opposes God and His messenger, then indeed God is severe in punishment.
8|14| That is how it is, so taste it, and the punishment of the fire is for the disbelievers.
8|15| You who believe, when you encounter those who disbelieved advancing (in war), then do not turn your backs to them (to flee).
8|16| Anyone who turns his back on them on such a day, except to return back for fight or to retreat to join other troops, has indeed incurred the anger of God and his place is hell and it is a bad destination.
8|17| You did not kill them, but God killed them, and you did not shoot when you shot, but God shot. He tests the believers with a good test from Himself. God hears all and knows all.
8|18| That is how it is, and God weakens the plot of the disbelievers.
8|19| If you look for victory, indeed the victory came to you, but if you stop (hostilities), that is better for you. If you return (to your old ways), We also return (and will not help you), and your forces will never be of benefit to you at all, no matter how numerous. And God is with the believers.
8|20| You who believe, obey God and His messenger, and do not turn away from him while you hear (him).
8|21| And do not be like those who said we hear, while they do not listen.
8|22| The worst creatures in God’s view are the deaf and the dumb, those who do not understand. 
8|23| If God knew of any good in them, He would make them listen, and (even) if He made them listen, they would turn back and they avoid.
8|24| You who believe, answer the call of God and His messenger when he calls you to what gives you life, and know that God comes between the person and his heart, and you will be gathered to Him.
8|25| And be cautious of a trial that does not exclusively happen to those who did wrong among you. And know that God is severe in punishment.
8|26| And remember when you were only a few, weak in the land, afraid that people may kidnap you, then He sheltered you and He supported you with His help, and provided you with the good things so that you may be thankful.
8|27| You who believe, do not betray God and the messenger, and do not betray your trusts while you know.
8|28| And know that your wealth and children is a test, and indeed a great reward is with God.
8|29| You who believe, if you are cautious of God, He puts a criterion (of right and wrong) for you and removes your sins from you and forgives you. God has the enormous grace.
8|30| And (remember) when those who disbelieved plotted against you to imprison you or to kill you or to drive you out, and they plotted and God planned and God is the best planner.
8|31| And when Our signs are read to them, they say: we have certainly heard, if we want we would say similar to this, this is nothing but stories of the earlier ones.
8|32| And when they said: God, if this is the truth from You, then shower us with stones from the sky and bring us a painful punishment.
8|33| And God is not to punish them while you are among them, and God is not their punisher while they ask for forgiveness.
8|34| And what is for them that God should not punish them while they hold (people) back from the Sacred Mosque and they are not its guardians? Its guardians are only those who control themselves, but most of them do not know.
8|35| And their mandatory prayer in the house (Ka’aba) was nothing but whistling and clapping, so taste the punishment for what you used to disbelieve.
8|36| Indeed those who disbelieved spend their wealth to obstruct God's way. So they are going to spend it, then it becomes regret for them, then they are defeated, and those who disbelieved are gathered in hell.
8|37| So that God separates the bad from the good, and then He places the bad upon each other, piling them up together, and then puts it into hell. They are the losers.
8|38| Tell those who disbelieved that if they stop, what has passed is forgiven for them, and if they return (to it), then way of (dealing with) the earlier ones has preceded
8|39| And fight them until there is no more turmoil (and persecution) and all of the religion is only for God. And if they stop, then indeed God sees what they do.
8|40| And if they turn away, then know that God is your protector, what a good protector and what a good helper.
8|41| And know that one fifth of anything you gain as spoil is for God and the messenger and for the relatives (and close ones) and the orphans and the needy and the traveler (in need), if you believe in God and what We sent down to Our servant on the day of distinction, the day the two armies encountered (in the battle of Badr). God is capable of everything.
8|42| When you were on the nearer side of the valley (Medina) and they were on the further side and the caravan was below you, if you had made an appointment, you would have certainly disagreed about the appointment, but (you met) so that God finishes a matter that was to be done, so anyone who was killed, was killed with clear proof, and anyone who lived on, lived on with clear proof. Indeed God hears all and knows all.
8|43| (Remember) when God showed them to you as a few in your dream, while if God had shown them to you as many, then you would have lost your courage and would have disputed about the matter, but God saved (you). Indeed He knows what is inside the minds.
8|44| And when you encountered, He showed them as a few in your eyes, and reduced you in their eyes, so that God finishes a matter that was to be done. All affairs are returned to God.
8|45| You who believe, when you encounter a group (of your enemies), be firm and remember God very much, so that you may be successful.
8|46| And obey God and His messenger, and do not dispute, so that you lose heart and your power goes away, and persevere as indeed God is with those who persevere.
8|47| And do not be like those who came out of their houses boastfully and showing off to the people to obstruct God's way. God surrounds whatever they do.
8|48| And when Satan made their actions attractive for them and said: no one among the people can defeat you today, and I am at your side. But when the two groups came in to view, he turned around on his heels and said: I have nothing to do with you, indeed I see what you do not see, indeed I fear God, and God is severe in punishment.
8|49| (Remember) when the Hypocrites and those who have disease in their hearts said: their religion deceived these. And anyone who trusts in God (should know that) God is the powerful and the wise.
8|50| And if you could see when the angles take the life of those who disbelieved striking their faces and their backs (saying): taste the punishment of burning,
8|51| that is for what your hands sent ahead, and indeed God is not wrong to His servants.
8|52| Same as Pharaoh’s people and those before them, they disbelieved in God’s signs, so God took them (into punishment) for their sins. God is powerful, and severe in punishment.
8|53| That is because God was not to change a favor that He granted a group until they change themselves. God hears all and knows all.
8|54| Same as Pharaoh’s people and those before them, they denied the signs of their Master, so We destroyed them for their sins and We drowned Pharaoh’s people, for they were all wrongdoers.
8|55| The worst creatures in God’s view are those who disbelieved and they do not believe.
8|56| Those whom you contracted among them, then they break their promise every time, and they are not cautious (of God).
8|57| So if you defeat them in war, then frighten anyone behind them with them, so that they may take notice.
8|58| And if you fear betrayal of any group, then throw back at them the same way (and break the treaty). Indeed God does not like the betrayers.
8|59| And those who disbelieved should not think that they are ahead, indeed they cannot incapacitate (or escape from God).
8|60| And prepare whatever forces and saddled horses (and other equipments and ammunition) you can against them to frighten with it the enemies of God and your enemies and others beside them whom you do not know but God knows them. And anything you spend in God's way is paid back to you and you will not be wronged.
8|61| And if they incline to peace, then you incline to it too, and trust in God. Indeed He hears all and knows all.
8|62| And if they want to trick you, then God is enough for you. He is the One who strengthened you with His help and with the believers.
8|63| And He united their (believers) hearts. If you had spent all that is on the earth, you would not have united their hearts, but God united them, He is powerful and wise.
8|64| Prophet, God is enough for you and anyone of the believers who followed you.
8|65| Prophet, encourage the believers to the fight. If there are twenty of you persevering, they defeat two hundreds, and if there are a hundred of you, they defeat a thousand of those who disbelieved, for indeed they are people who do not understand.
8|66| Now, God reduced (your task) for you because He knows that there is a weakness in you. So if there are a hundred of you persevering, they defeat two hundreds, and if there are a thousand of you, with God’s permission they defeat two thousands. God is with the persevering ones.
8|67| It is not for a prophet to have captives, until he thoroughly overcomes on the earth. You want materials of the world while God wants the hereafter (for you). God is powerful and wise.
8|68| If it was not for previous instruction from God, then a great punishment would have afflicted you for what you took.
8|69| So eat from lawful good things that you gained as spoil (of war), and be cautious of God. God is forgiving and merciful
8|70| Prophet, tell the captives who are in your hands: if God knows any good in your hearts, He gives you better than what was taken from you, and He forgives you. God is forgiving and merciful.
8|71| And if they want to betray you, they have certainly betrayed God in the past, so He gave you power over them. God is knowledgeable and wise.
8|72| Indeed those who believed and migrated and tried hard with their possessions and their lives in God's way, and those who placed and helped (them), some of them are supporters (and friends) of the others. And those who believed and did not migrate, there is nothing upon you for their protection until they migrate. But if they ask for your help in the religion, then the help is your responsibility, except against a group that there is an agreement between you and them. God sees what you do.
8|73| Some of those who disbelieved are supporters (and friends) of the others. If you do not do that, there will be turmoil (and persecution) and great corruption on the earth.
8|74| Those who believed and migrated and tried hard in God's way, and those who placed and helped (them), they are the true believers, for them there is forgiveness and noble provisions.
8|75| And those who believed afterward and migrated and tried hard with you, then they are of you. And in the book of God, some blood relatives (and close relatives) have preference over others. God knows everything.
9|1| (A declaration of) God and His messenger being free (of any blame) toward those you contracted among the polytheists.
9|2| So (you polytheists,) travel in the land for four months and know that you cannot escape God, and God humiliates the disbelievers.
9|3| And a declaration from God and His messenger to the people on the day of the greatest Pilgrimage (Hajj): indeed God and His messenger are free of (any obligation for) the polytheists. So if you repent, it is better for you, and if you turn away, know that you cannot escape God. And give the news of a painful punishment to those who disbelieved.
9|4| Except those you contracted among the polytheists, then they did not fall short, and they did not support anyone against you. So complete their contract until their term. God loves those who control themselves.
9|5| So when the forbidden months passed, then kill the polytheists wherever you found them and take them and surround them and sit and wait for them in every place of ambush. But if they repent and perform the mandatory prayer and give to the mandatory charity, then open their way (leave them alone). God is forgiving and merciful.
9|6| And if any of the polytheist asks you for protection, then protect him so that he hears God's word, then escort him to a safe place for him. That is because they are a group who do not know.
9|7| How can there be a contract for the polytheists with God and with His messenger, except those you contracted near the Sacred Mosque? So long as they are straight (and true) with you, then you should be straight with them. God loves those who control themselves.
9|8| How is it (a contract) while if they overcome you, they do not respect ties of relationship with you or any treaty? They please you with (words of) their mouths while their hearts refuse, and most of them are disobedient.
9|9| They sold God’s signs for a small price, then they obstructed (people) from His way. What they were doing was bad.
9|10| They do not respect the ties of relationship or treaty about a believer. They are those who exceed the limits.
9|11| If they repent and perform the mandatory prayer and give to the mandatory charity, then they are your brothers in the religion. And We explain the signs for people who know.
9|12| If they break their oaths after their commitment and taunt you in your religion (and way of life), then fight the leaders of the disbelief as indeed there is no oath for them, so that they may stop.
9|13| Why do you not fight a group who broke their oaths and intended to drive out the messenger, and they started (to fight you) in the first place? Do you fear them? Whereas God is more deserving that you fear Him, if you are believers.
9|14| Fight them, God punishes them by your hands and He humiliates them and helps you against them and He heals the chests of believing people.
9|15| And He removes their hearts' anger, and God accepts repentance of anyone He wants. God is knowledgeable and wise.
9|16| Or did you think that you are left alone while God does not yet know those of you who tried hard, and did not take any confidant other than God and His messenger and the believers? God is well informed of what you do.
9|17| It is not for polytheists to maintain (and improve) God’s places of worship while they are witnesses against themselves in the disbelief. Their works is useless, and they will reside in the fire eternally.
9|18| God’s places of worship should only be maintained (and improved) by those who believe in God and the last day and perform the mandatory prayer and give to the mandatory charity and fear none except God, then perhaps they are of the guided. 
9|19| Do you make giving water to the pilgrims and taking care of the Sacred Mosque equal to (the deeds of) someone who believed in God and the last day and tried hard in God's way? They are not equal in God’s view. God does not guide the wrongdoing people.
9|20| Those who believed and migrated and tried hard in God's way with their possessions and their lives have greater rank with God, and they are the victors.
9|21| Their Master gives them good news of His mercy and His pleasure and gardens of everlasting delight for them,
9|22| remaining in there forever and ever. Indeed great reward is with God.
9|23| You who believe, do not take your fathers and your brothers as your protector (or guardian) if they preferred the disbelief over the belief. And those among you who take them as protectors (or guardians) are the wrongdoers.
9|24| Say: if your fathers and your sons and your spouses and your family (and tribe members) and the wealth that you acquired and the business that you are afraid of its decline and the homes that pleases you are dearer to you than God and His messenger and trying hard in His way, then wait until God gives His command. God does not guide the disobedient people.
9|25| God has certainly helped you in many places. And at the time of Hunain, when your great number impressed you but it was of no use to you at all, and the land with its vastness tightened around you, then you turned back escaping.
9|26| Then God sent down tranquility to His messenger and to the believers, and He sent down troops that you could not see them, and He punished those who disbelieved. That is payback of the disbelievers.
9|27| Then after that, God accepts the repentance of anyone He wants, and God is forgiving and merciful.
9|28| You who believe, indeed the polytheists are unclean, so they should not come near the Sacred Mosque after this year of theirs, and if you are afraid of poverty (because of this), then God will enrich you from His grace if He wants. God is knowledgeable and wise.
9|29| Fight those among the people of the book who do not believe in God and the last day and they do not forbid what God and His messenger have forbidden and they do not adopt the right way of life, until they pay the tax from their hand and they are compliant.
9|30| The Jewish said: Ezra is son of God. And the Christians said: Christ is son of God. This is their word from their mouth and it is like saying of those who disbelieved before them. May God fight them, they have deviated.
9|31| They took their religious scholars and their monks and the Christ, son of Mary, as their masters besides God while they were ordered to only serve the One god. There is no god except Him. He is flawless from what they associate.
9|32| They want to extinguish God’s light with (words of) their mouths, while God refuses anything other than completing His light (and revelation), even though the disbelievers dislike it.
9|33| He is the One who sent His messenger with the guidance and the true way of life in order to inform him about all of the religion (God's recommended way of life), even though the polytheists dislike it. 
9|34| You who believe, indeed many of the religious scholars and the monks eat up people’s wealth falsely and obstruct God’s way. And give the news of a painful punishment to those who store gold and silver and do not spend it in God's way.
9|35| On a day that they (their gold and silver) are heated in the fire of hell, and their foreheads and their sides and their back is branded with it, (they are told) this is what you stored for yourselves, so taste what you used to store.
9|36| Indeed the number of month before God is twelve months in God's book since the day He created the skies and the earth. Four of them are sacred (fighting is forbidden in them). This is the lasting way of life. Do not wrong yourselves in them. And fight the polytheists together as they fight you together. And know that God is with those who control themselves.
9|37| Postponement (of the sacred months) is only an increase in the disbelief, which those who disbelieved are misguided by it. They make it lawful one year and forbid it another year, to make up the number that God made sacred, therefore they make lawful what God made unlawful. Their bad deeds are beautified for them, and God does not guide the disbelieving people.
9|38| You who believe, what is with you that when you are told to march forward in God's way, you hold on to the earth (and do not move)? Are you satisfied with this world’s life instead of the hereafter? The enjoyment of this world’s life against the hereafter is a little.
9|39| If you do not march forward, He punishes you with a painful punishment, and He replaces you with other people, and you do not harm Him at all. And God is capable of everything.
9|40| If you do not help him, God has helped him when those who disbelieved drove him out (of Mecca), he was one of two when they were in the cave, and he said to his friend: do not be sad, God is indeed with us. So God sent down His tranquility to him and strengthened him with troops that you do not see them, and He made the word of those who disbelieved the lowest and God’s word the highest. God is the powerful and the wise.
9|41| March forward, lightly or heavily (equipped) and try hard with your possessions and your lives in God’s way. This is better for you if you knew.
9|42| Had there been an immediate gain and an easy journey they would have certainly followed you, but the far distance was hard for them, and they are going to swear by God: we would certainly come out with you if we could. They destroy themselves, and God knows they are definitely liars.
9|43| God excused you (Muhammad), why did you permit them (to stay behind) before it becomes to you those who were truthful and you know the liars?
9|44| Those who believe in God and the last day do not ask your permission to try hard with their possessions and their lives. God knows those who control themselves.
9|45| Only those who do not believe in God and the last day and their hearts are in doubt ask your permission (to be excused from fighting). So they waver (back and forth) in their doubt. 
9|46| If they wanted to go out (with you), they would have prepared for it, but God disliked sending them, so He held them back, and it was said: sit with the sitting ones.
9|47| If they had come out among you, they would have added nothing to you but trouble, and they would have actively participated among you looking for turmoil (and disorder), and some among you would have listened for them (and spied for them). God knows the wrongdoers.
9|48| They have certainly looked for turmoil (and disorder) in the past, and they turned the issues upside down for you, until the truth came and God’s command became clear, and they disliked it.
9|49| And some among them say: permit me (to stay behind), and do not test me. (know that) They fell in the test already. And indeed hell surrounds the disbelievers.
9|50| If any good happens to you, it upsets them. And if you suffer a tragedy, they say: we took (care of) our affairs earlier (by not going to war), and they turn away while they are happy.
9|51| Say: nothing would ever happen to us except what God wrote down for us (according to His laws), and He is our protector. And the believers should trust in God. 
9|52| Say: are you waiting for one of the two goods for us (victory or getting killed in God's way), while we wait for you that God strikes you with a punishment from Him or with our hands, so wait and we wait with you.
9|53| Say (to the hypocrites): spend willingly or unwillingly, it will never be accepted from you, because indeed you are disobedient people.
9|54| And nothing prevented their spending from being accepted, except that they disbelieved in God and His messenger, and they only come to the mandatory prayer lazily, and they only spend unwillingly.
9|55| So do not be impressed with their wealth and their children, God only wants to punish them with it in this world’s life, and they die while they are disbelievers.
9|56| And they swear by God that indeed they are of you while they are not of you, but they are scared people.
9|57| If they find a shelter or a cave or a place to enter (for hiding) they would definitely turn to it while they rush.
9|58| And some of them criticize you regarding (distribution of) the charities, if they are given from it they are happy, and if they are not given from it then they get angry.
9|59| (And it would be better) If they were happy with what God and His messenger gave them, and had said: God is sufficient for us, God is going to give us from His grace and (so is) His messenger, and we are fond of God.
9|60| The (mandatory) charities are only for the poor and the needy and the processors of it and those whose hearts are interested (in submission) and (for freeing) the slaves and those in debt and in God's way and the traveler (in need), a mandate from God. God is knowledgeable and wise.
9|61| And some of them are those who harass the prophet and they say: he is all ears. Say: it is better for you that he is all ears, as he believes in God and believes in the believers and he is a mercy for those of you who believed. And those who harass the messenger of God have a painful punishment.
9|62| They swear by God for you to please you, while God and His messenger are more deserving to be pleased, if they were believers,
9|63| Did they not know that whoever opposes God and His messenger then indeed fire of hell is for him, remaining in there forever? That is the great humiliation.
9|64| The hypocrites are afraid that a chapter is sent down about them informing them of what is in their hearts. Say: make fun, indeed God brings out what you are wary of.
9|65| And if you ask them, they shall say: we were only kidding and playing. Say: were you making fun of God and His signs and His messenger?
9|66| Do not apologize, indeed you disbelieved after your belief. If We excuse a group of you, We will punish a group, because they were guilty.
9|67| The hypocrite men and the hypocrite women are like each other, they instruct what is wrong (unacceptable) and prohibit from what is right (acceptable), and they withhold their hands. They forgot God, so He forgets them. The hypocrites are indeed the disobedient ones.
9|68| God promised fire of hell to the hypocrite men and the hypocrite women and the disbelievers, remaining in there forever. It is enough for them. And God cursed them and an everlasting punishment is for them.
9|69| Like those before you who were more powerful than you and had more wealth and children, so they enjoyed their share and you enjoyed your share as those before you enjoyed their share, and you engaged (in idle talks and thoughts) as they engaged. Their works is useless in this world and the hereafter, and they are the losers. 
9|70| Did not the story of those before them come to them, people of Noah and Aad and Thamud, and people of Abraham and inhabitants of Midian (people of Shu'aib) and the turned over cities? Their messengers brought them the clear proofs, so God was not to wrong them, but they were wrong to themselves.
9|71| And the believing men and the believing women are friends of each other, they instruct to the right (acceptable) and prohibit from the wrong (unacceptable) and they perform the mandatory prayer and give to the mandatory charity and obey God and His messenger. They are those whom God is going to be merciful to them. God is powerful and wise.
9|72| God promised the believing men and the believing women gardens which rivers flow through them, remaining in there forever, and beautiful houses in eternal gardens. And pleasure of God is greater. This is the great victory. 
9|73| Prophet, try hard against the disbelievers and the hypocrites, and be firm against them. Their housing is hell, and it is a bad destination.
9|74| They swear by God that they did not say, while they have certainly said the word of the disbelief, and they disbelieved after their submission, and they tried for what they did not get. They were only resentful because God and His messenger enriched them from His grace. So if they repent, it would better for them, and if they turn away, God punishes them with a painful punishment in this world and the hereafter, and there is no protector or helper for them on the earth.
9|75| Some of them promised God that if He gives us from His grace, we shall give to charity and we shall be of the righteous.
9|76| So when God gave them from His grace, they became stingy with it and they turned away and they opposed.
9|77| So He made hypocrisy emerge in their hearts until the day they meet Him, because they broke what they promised God and because they were lying.
9|78| Did they not know that God knows their secret and their whisper and that God knows the unseen?
9|79| Those who criticize the volunteers among the believers in (giving to) charities, and they ridicule those who find nothing (to give) except their effort, God ridicules them and a painful punishment is for them.
9|80| Whether you (Muhammad) ask forgiveness for them or you do not ask forgiveness for them, even if you ask forgiveness for them seventy times, God will never forgive them. That is because they disbelieved in God and His messenger, and God does not guide the disobedient people.
9|81| Those who stayed behind were happy with their sitting, contradicting God's messenger and they disliked trying hard with their possessions and their lives in God's way and said: we will not march out in the heat. Say: fire of hell is much hotter, if they would understand.
9|82| They should laugh a little and should cry a lot for payback of what they were doing.
9|83| So if God returns you to a group of them, then they ask your permission for coming out (with you to fight), then say: you will never ever come out with me and you will never fight any enemy with me, indeed you were happy with sitting (at your homes) the first time, so sit with those who stayed behind.
9|84| And do not ever pray for anyone of them who dies, and do not stand at his grave. They disbelieved in God and His messenger and died while they were disobedient.
9|85| And do not be impressed by their wealth and their children, as God only wants to punish them with it in this world, and they die while they are disbelievers.
9|86| And when a chapter was sent down (saying) that believe in God and try hard with His messenger, wealthy men among them ask your permission, and they say: leave us be with the sitting ones.
9|87| They were happy being with those who remained behind, and their hearts was sealed so they do not understand.
9|88| But the messenger and those who believed with him tried hard with their possessions and their lives. And the good things are for them and they are the successful ones.
9|89| God prepared gardens which rivers flow through them for them, remaining in there forever. That is the great victory.
9|90| And those making excuses among the desert Arabs came in order to be given permission to them (to stay behind), and those who lied to God and His messenger sat (in their homes). Those who disbelieved among them are going to suffer a painful punishment.
9|91| There is no blame on the weak, or on the sick, or on those who do not find anything to spend when they act in good faith toward God and His messenger. And there is not any way against the good doers, and God is forgiving and merciful.
9|92| And not (any blame) on those who when they came to you to provide them with mounts (animals for riding), you said I cannot find anything to mount you on it, and they turned back with their eyes full of tears, sorrowful that they do not find anything to spend.
9|93| The way is only against those who ask your permission and they are rich. They were happy to be with those who remained behind, and God sealed their hearts so they do not know.
9|94| They apologize to you when you return to them. Say: do not apologize, we would never believe you, God has informed us about you. And God and His messenger are going to see your actions, then you are returned to knower of the unseen and the visible, then He informs you of what you were doing.
9|95| When you return to them, they are going to swear by God for you, so that you stay away from them. So stay away from them, indeed they are filthy, and their housing is hell as payback for what they were doing.
9|96| They swear for you so that you are pleased with them, but even if you are pleased with them, God is not pleased with the disobedient people. 
9|97| The desert Arabs are the worst in disbelief and hypocrisy, and more likely that they do not know the limits which God sent down to His messenger. God is knowledgeable and wise.
9|98| Some of the desert Arabs consider what they spend as a fine, and wait for a disaster for you. The bad disaster is for them. And God hears all and knows all.
9|99| And some of the desert Arabs believe in God and the last day, and consider what they spend as (a means of) closeness to God and the messenger’s praying (for them). Know that it is (a means of) closeness for them. God is going to admit them into His mercy. God is forgiving and merciful.
9|100| And God is pleased with the first pioneers among the migrants and the helpers, and those who followed them with goodness, and they are pleased with Him, and God prepared gardens which rivers flow through them for them, remaining in there forever and ever. That is the great victory.
9|101| Some of those around you from the desert Arabs are hypocrites, and some of the people of the city (of Medina) insist on hypocrisy, and you do not know them, but We know them. We are going to punish them twice then they are returned to a great punishment.
9|102| And others who confessed to their sins and they mixed good deed and bad, perhaps God accepts their repentance. God is indeed forgiving and merciful.
9|103| Take charity from their wealth to cleanse them and to purify them with it, and pray for them as your prayer is indeed comforting to them. God hears all and knows all.
9|104| Did they not know that it is God who accepts the repentance from His servants, and takes the charities, and that God is the acceptor of repentance, the merciful?
9|105| Say: do (what you want), as God and His messenger and the believers are going to see your action, and you are going to be returned to knower of the unseen and the visible, then He informs you of what you were doing.
9|106| And others who expect God’s order. He either punishes them or accepts their repentance. God is knowledgeable and wise.
9|107| And (there are) those who built a mosque for harm and disbelief and for division among the believers, and as an outpost for those who previously fought God and His messenger, and they swear that we only wish the best, but God testifies that they are liars.
9|108| Never stand in there, as a mosque that is built based on the righteousness from the first day deserves more that you stand in there, as there are men in it who like to be cleansed, and God loves those who purify themselves.
9|109| Is one who based his foundation on being cautious of God and His pleasure better or one who based his foundation on the edge of a cliff that is about to crumble and is falling down into fire of hell with him? God does not guide the wrongdoing people.
9|110| Their foundation that they built is always a source of doubt in their hearts, until their hearts are torn into pieces. God is knowledgeable and wise.
9|111| Indeed God purchased from the believers their lives and their possessions for the garden that is for them. They fight in God's way, and they kill and are killed. This is a true promise upon Him in the Torah and the Gospel and the Quran. And who fulfills his promise better than God? So, be glad with your trade that you bargained with it, that is the great victory.
9|112| (Believers are those) who repent, who serve, who praise (God), who travel (or fast), who bow down, who show humbleness, who instruct to the right (acceptable) and prohibit from the wrong (unacceptable), and who observe the limits set by God, and give good news to the believers.
9|113| It is not for the prophet and those who believed to ask for forgiveness for the polytheists, even if they are their relatives (or close ones), after it is clear to them that they are inhabitants of the hellfire. 
9|114| And Abraham asking forgiveness for his father was only because of a promise that he had promised it to him. But when it was clear to him that he was God's enemy, he stayed away from him. Indeed Abraham was caring and patient.
9|115| And God is not to misguide any group after He guided them, until He clarifies for them what they should be cautious of. God knows everything.
9|116| The rule of the skies and the earth belongs to God, He gives life and causes death, and you have no protector and no helper besides God.
9|117| God certainly turned to (and forgave) the prophet and the migrants and the helpers, those who followed Him in the difficult hours, even after the hearts of some of them almost deviated, then He turned to them (and forgave them). He is gentle and merciful to them.
9|118| And for the three (persons), those who remained behind until the earth with all its vastness became too tight for them and they were fed up with themselves and they thought that there was no refuge from God except to Himself, then He turned to (and forgave) them that they may repent, as indeed God is the acceptor of repentance, the merciful.
9|119| You who believe, be cautious of God and be with the truthful ones.
9|120| It is not (appropriate) for the people of the city (Medina) and those around them among the desert Arabs to stay behind (and refuse to follow) the messenger of God, and prefer their lives to his life. That is because they do not suffer any thirst or difficulty or hunger in God's way, or any step they take to anger the disbelievers or any gain they gain against an enemy unless it is written down for them as good work. God does not waste reward of the good doers.
9|121| And anything small or large that they spent (in God's way), and any valley they crossed is written down for them, so that God rewards them better than what they were doing.
9|122| It is not (appropriate) for the believers to go out all together. Why did not a party from each group go out to thoroughly understand about the religion, and to warn their group when they return to them so that they may be wary?
9|123| You who believe, fight those of the disbelievers who are near you and they should find firmness in you. And know that God is with those who control themselves.
9|124| And whenever a chapter is sent down, then some among them say: this (chapter) increased belief of which one of you? As for those who believed, it increased their belief and they are glad.
9|125| And as for those who have a disease in their hearts, it added filth to their filthiness, and they died while they were disbelievers.
9|126| Or do they not see that they are tested once or twice every year? Yet they do not repent and they do not take notice.
9|127| And whenever a chapter is sent down, they look at each other (saying): does anyone see you? Then they turn away. God turned away their hearts because indeed they are a group who do not understand.
9|128| Certainly a messenger has come to you from among yourselves, what bothers you is difficult for him, (he is) anxious about you and is gentle and merciful to the believers.
9|129| If they turn away, then say: God is enough for me, there is no god except Him, I trust in Him and He is the Master of the great throne.
10|1| A.L.R. (Alif. Lam. Ra.). These are the verses of the wise book.
10|2| Is it a surprise to the people that We revealed to a man among them to warn the people, and to give good news to those who believed that they have a true footing with their Master? The disbelievers said: this is certainly an obvious magician.
10|3| Indeed your Master is God the One who created the skies and the earth in six days (stages), then He settled on the throne directing the affair. There is no mediator except after His permission. That is God your Master, so serve Him. Do you not take notice?
10|4| Return of all of you is to Him. God’s promise is true. He begins the creation then brings it back to justly reward those who believed and did good works, and those who disbelieved have a drink of boiling water and a painful punishment for what they used to disbelieve.
10|5| He is the One who made the sun shine and the moon a (reflection of) light and determined its positions so you know the number of years and the count (of days and time). God rightfully created that. He explains the signs for people who know.
10|6| Indeed in the alternation (and the difference) of the night and the day and what God created in the skies and the earth there are signs for people who control themselves.
10|7| Indeed those who do not expect to meet Us and are happy with this world’s life and are satisfied with it, and those who are negligent of Our signs,
10|8| their housing is the fire, for what they were doing.
10|9| Indeed those who believed and did good works, their Master guides them to gardens of delight which rivers flow through them, because of their belief. 
10|10| Their prayer in it is: God, glory to You. And their greeting in it is: peace (and well-being). And the end of their prayer is that all praise belongs to God, Master of humankind.
10|11| If God rushes to the badness (and punishment) for the people as much as they want to rush to the good, their term would be complete (and they would be punished).  So We leave those who do not expect to meet Us, blindly wandering in their rebellion.
10|12| And when the harm happens to the human being, he calls on Us (lying) on his side or sitting or standing, but when We remove his harm from him, he moves on as if he did not call on Us for harm that happened to him. That is how what they were doing was beautified for the excessive ones.
10|13| And We have certainly destroyed the generations before you when they did wrong, while their messenger brought them the clear proofs and they would not believe. That is how We payback the guilty people.
10|14| Then We made you successors on the earth after them to see how you do.
10|15| When Our clear signs are read to them, those who do not expect to meet Us, say: bring a Quran other than this or change it. Say: it is not for me to change it on my own accord, I only follow what is revealed to me, indeed I am afraid of the punishment of a great day if I disobey my Master. 
10|16| Say: if God wanted, I would not have read it to you, and He would not have made you know it, and I have stayed among you a lifetime before that, do you not understand?
10|17| Who is more wrong than someone who makes up a lie (and attributes it) to God or denies His signs? Indeed the guilty ones do not succeed.
10|18| And they serve, other than God, that which does not harm them and does not benefit them, and they say: these are our mediators before God. Say: do you inform God of something that He does not know in the skies or on the earth? He is flawless and is above what they associate (with Him).
10|19| People were only a single community then they disagreed, and if it was not for a word that previously issued from your Master, it would have been judged between them about what they disagreed about it.
10|20| And they say: why a miracle was not send down to him from his Master? Say: the unseen is only for God (to know), so wait and I am with you among those who wait.
10|21| And when We make people taste a mercy after a harm happened to them, they immediately have a plot against Our signs. Say: God is faster in planning. Indeed Our messengers (angels) write down what you plot.
10|22| He is the One who makes you go in the land and the sea until when you were on board the ships and they sailed with them with a nice wind and they were happy with it, then a strong wind came to it and the waves came to them from every side and they thought they were surrounded by it, they called on God being sincere to Him in the religion (saying): if You save us from this, we shall be of the thankful ones.
10|23| But when He saved them, they immediately wronged on the earth unjustifiably. People, your wrong (actions) for enjoyment of this world's life is only against yourselves, then your return is to Us and We inform you of what you were doing.
10|24| The example of this world's life is indeed like a rain that We sent it down from the sky, then the plants of the earth from which the people and the livestock eat, mixes with it, until when the earth takes its decoration and is beautified, and its inhabitants think that they have power over it, then Our command comes to it by night or day and We make it as a mowed down field as if it did not exist the day before. That is how We explain the signs for people who think.
10|25| And God invites to the house of peace (and well-being) and He guides anyone He wants to a straight path.
10|26| For those who did good, is the good (reward) and more, and neither darkness nor humiliation covers their faces. They are inhabitants of the garden remaining in there forever.
10|27| And those who did the bad, payback of bad is equal to it, and humiliation covers them. They have no defender against God, as if their faces are covered with pieces of the night's darkness. They are inhabitants of the fire remaining in there forever.
10|28| On a day that We gather them all, then We say to those who associated (partners with God): at your place, you and your partners. Then We separate them from one another. And their partners say: it was not us that you were serving,
10|29| and God is enough as witness between us and between you, that we were unaware of your servitude.
10|30| There, every person examines what it did before, and they are returned to God, their rightful protector/master, and what they used to make up abandons them.
10|31| Say: who provides you from the sky and the earth, or who owns the hearing and the eyesight, and who brings out the living from the dead and brings out the dead from the living, and who regulates the affairs? They are going to say: God. Then say: will you not be cautious (of Him)?
10|32| This is God, your true Master. What is there after the truth except the error (and lie)? Then, how are you turned away (from the truth).
10|33| That is how your Master's word proved true against those who disobeyed, for indeed they do not believe.
10|34| Say: does any of your partners (of God) initiate the creation then brings it back? Say: God initiates the creation and then brings it back, so how do you deviate?
10|35| Say: does any of your partners (of God) guides to the truth? Say: God guides to the truth, is one who guides to the truth more deserving to be followed or one who does not guide (or does not find the way) unless he is guided, then what is the matter with you? What is your opinion?
10|36| And most of them only follow guess. Indeed the guess has no use against the truth at all. God knows what they do.
10|37| And this Quran is not made up by anyone other than God, and it is a confirmation of what is before it, and an explanation of the book, no doubt about it (that it is) from the Master of Human kind.
10|38| Or do they say: he (Muhammad) made it up? Say: if you are truthful, then bring a chapter like it, and call on anyone you can (for help) other than God.
10|39| No, but  they denied that which they did not have knowledge of it, and its interpretation (of its events) have not come to them. Those before them also denied like that. So see what the end of the wrongdoers was.
10|40| And some of them believe in it and some of them do not believe in it, and Your Master best knows the corruptors.
10|41| And if they denied you, then say: my work is for me and your work is for you, you are clear of what I do and I am clear of what you do.
10|42| And some of them listen to you. Can you make the deaf listen even though they do not understand?
10|43| And some of them look at you. Can you guide the blind (by showing the way) even though they do not see?
10|44| Indeed God does not wrong the people at all, but people wrong themselves.
10|45| And a day He gathers them, (will be) as if they only stayed for only an hour of the day. They recognize each other. Those who denied meeting of God have lost and they were not guided.
10|46| And whether We show you some of what We promised them or We make you die (before that), their return is to Us, then God is witness over what they do.
10|47| And for every community is a messenger. So when their messenger comes, it would be judged between them with justice, and they will not be wronged.
10|48| And they say:  when is this promise, if you are truthful?
10|49| Say: I have no power of harm or benefit for myself except what God wants. For every community there is a period (to believe), When their time comes, they cannot delay for an hour or put it forward.
10|50| Say: what do you think, if His punishment comes to you by night or day, what part of it do the guilty ones want to be rushed?
10|51| Would you believe in it when it occurs? Why (believe) now, while you wanted it to be rushed.
10|52| Then it is said to those who did wrong: taste the eternal punishment, are you being punished for (anything) other than what you used to do?
10|53| And they want you to tell if it (the punishment) is true. Say: yes, by my Master, it is indeed true and you cannot disable/escape it.
10|54| And if each person that did wrong, had all that is on the earth, he would have ransomed with it, and he would hide the regret when he sees the punishment. And it will be judged between them with justice and they will not be wronged.
10|55| Know that whatever is in the skies and the earth belongs to God. Know that God’s promise is true, but most of them do not know.
10|56| He gives life and causes death, and you are returned to Him.
10|57| People, an advice has come to you from your Master, and a healing for what is in the chests and a guidance and a mercy for the believers.
10|58| Say: they should be happy with God’s grace and His mercy. That is better than what they accumulate.
10|59| Say: what do you think that God sent down some provisions to you, then you made some of it unlawful and some lawful. Say: did God permit you or you made up lies (and attributed them) to God? 
10|60| What do those who make up lies (and attribute them) to God think about the resurrection day? God is indeed gracious to people, but most of them do not thank.
10|61| You are not in any situation/affair, and you do not read any part of Quran, and you do not do any action except We are witness over you when you engage in it. Not even a tiny particle in the earth or in the sky, and not smaller or larger than that, escapes your Master, but it is in a clear book.
10|62| Know that God's friends have no fear and no sadness,
10|63| those who believed and were controlling themselves,
10|64| they have the good news in this world’s life and in the hereafter. There is no change in God's words. That is the great victory.
10|65| And their talk should not make you sad. Indeed all the honor (and power) belongs to God. He hears all and knows all.
10|66| Know that indeed everyone in the skies and on the earth, and whatever partners they follow besides God, belongs to God. They only follow the speculation, and they only guess.
10|67| He is the One who made the night for you to rest in it and the day to see. There are signs in that for people who listen.
10|68| They said: God took a child. He is flawless, He has no need, everything in the skies and on the earth belongs to Him. You have no reason for this. Do you say about God what you do not know?
10|69| Say: those who make up lies (and attribute them) to God do not succeed.
10|70| A little enjoyment in this world, then their return is to Us, then We make them taste the severe punishment for what they used to disbelieve.
10|71| And read them story of Noah, when he said to his people: people, if my position and my reminding you of God's signs is hard on you, I put my trust in God, so you and your partners (of God) get your affair together, so your affair should be clear to you, then carry it out against me and do not wait.
10|72| But if you turn away, (then remember that) I did not ask you for any wage, my wage is upon God, and I have been ordered to be of the submitted.
10|73| They denied him, so We saved him and those with him in the Ark, and We made them successors, and We drowned those who denied Our signs. So see what the end of those who were warned was?
10|74| Then after him We sent messengers to their people, and they brought them the clear proofs, but they were not to believe in what they denied it in the past. That is how We seal the heart of those who exceed the limits.
10|75| Then after them, We sent Moses and Aaron with Our signs to Pharaoh and his assembly, but they acted arrogantly and they were guilty people.
10|76| When the truth came to them from Us, they said: this is an obvious magic.
10|77| Moses said: do you say about the truth that came to you, that is this magic? And the magicians do not succeed.
10|78| They said: did you come to us to turn us away from what we found our fathers upon it, and you two become great in the land? We are not believers in you two.
10|79| And Pharaoh said: bring me every knowledgeable magician.
10|80| And when the magicians came, Moses told them: throw what you want to throw. 
10|81| When they threw, Moses said: what you brought is the magic, indeed God is going to make it useless. Indeed God does not improve the work of the corruptors. 
10|82| God proves the truth with His words, even if the guilty ones dislike it.
10|83| No one believed in Moses except a group of descendants of his people, because of fear of Pharaoh and his assembly that they persecute them. Indeed Pharaoh was powerful on the earth and he was among the excessive ones.
10|84| And Moses said: my people, if you believe in God, then put your trust in Him if you are submitted.
10|85| Then they said: we put our trust in God, our Master, do not make us a test for the wrongdoing people,
10|86| and save us from the disbelieving people by Your mercy.
10|87| And We revealed to Moses and his brother: settle your people in Egypt's houses, and make your houses face each other (or make them places of worship) and perform the mandatory prayer, and give good news to the believers.
10|88| And Moses said: our Master, you gave Pharaoh and his assembly luxury and wealth in this world’s life; our Master, they misguide (people) from your way; our Master, destroy their wealth and harden their hearts for they will not believe until they see the painful punishment.
10|89| He (God) said: prayer of you two has been answered, so stay on course (and persevere) and do not follow the way of those who do not know.
10|90| And We made the children of Israel cross the sea, then Pharaoh and his troops followed them aggressively and with hatred, until when the drowning overtook him, he said: I believe that there is no god except the One that the children of Israel believed in Him, and I am of the submitted.
10|91| (He was told:) now!? while you have disobeyed in the past and you were of the corruptors.
10|92| Today, We save your (dead) body so that you may be a sign for those who succeed you. Indeed a lot of people are negligent of Our signs.
10|93| And We settled down the children of Israel in an excellent settlement, and provided them with the good things, and they only disagreed after the knowledge came to them. Indeed on the resurrection day your Master judges between them regarding what they used to disagree about it. 
10|94| (Muhammad,) if you are in doubt about what We sent down to you, then ask those who read the book (that was sent down) before you. Indeed the truth has come to you from your Master, so do not be of the doubters.
10|95| And do not be among those who denied God's signs, for you would become of the losers.
10|96| Indeed those whom the word of your Master proved against them would not believe,
10|97| even if every sign (miracle) comes to them, until they see the painful punishment.
10|98| Why there was no town that believed and their belief benefited them except the people of Jonah? When they believed, We removed the humiliating punishment in this world’s life from them, and We let them enjoy for a while (in their lifetime).
10|99| And if your Master wanted, everyone on the earth would have believed altogether. Do you then force the people to become believers?
10|100| No one is to believe except with God’s permission (according to His laws), and He puts the filth on those who do not understand.
10|101| Say: look at what is in the skies and the earth. But the signs and the warnings is of no use to people who do not believe. 
10|102| Are they waiting for days like those who passed before them? Say: wait and I am with you among the waiters.
10|103| Then (at the end) We save our messengers and those who believe. It is Our responsibility to save the believers.
10|104| Say: people, if you are in doubt about my way of life (religion), then (know that) I do not serve those you serve other than God, but I serve God, the One who makes you die, and I am ordered to be of the believers,
10|105| and (I am also ordered) that: set your course (and purpose) to the way of life of monotheism and do not be of the polytheists,
10|106| and do not call on other than God, that which does not benefit you or harm you, and if you do, then you are indeed of the wrongdoers,
10|107| and if God afflicts you with harm, no one can remove it except Him, and if He wants good for you, no one can hold back His grace, He allocates it to any of His servants He wants, and He is the forgiving and the merciful.
10|108| Say: people, the truth has come to you from your Master, so anyone who is guided then he is only guided for himself, and whoever lost (the right path) then he has only erred against himself, and I am not your advocate.
10|109| And follow what is revealed to you and persevere (and be patient) until God judges. He is the best of the judges.
11|1| A.L.R. (Alif. Lam. Ra.), a book that its verses are made consistent and then explained by wise and well informed one.
11|2| That you should not serve except God. Indeed I am a warner and a giver of good news for you from Him.
11|3| And that you ask forgiveness of your Master, then turn to Him (in repentance), He makes you enjoy a good enjoyment for a limited period, and He gives His grace to everyone who is gracious. And if you turn away, then indeed I am afraid of the punishment of a great day upon you.
11|4| Your return is to God, and He is capable of everything. 
11|5| Know that they fold up their chests to hide from him (or Him). Know that (even) when they cover themselves with their clothing, He knows what they hide and what they disclose. He knows what is inside the chests (minds).
11|6| There is no creature on the earth except its food (and provision) is God’s responsibility, and He knows its habitation and its depository (where it is buried), all is in a clear book.
11|7| He is the One who created the skies and the earth in six days (stages) and His kingdom is on the water, so that He tests which one of you does better work. And if you say you will be raised after the death, those who disbelieve shall say: this is only a clear magic.
11|8| And if We delay the punishment from them for a limited time, they shall say: what holds it back? Know that on a day that it comes to them, it will not be turned away from them, and what they used to ridicule will surround them.
11|9| If We make the human being taste from Our mercy, then We take it away from him, he is certainly hopeless and ungrateful.
11|10| And if We make him taste favor after hardship touched him, he shall say: the badness went away from me. Indeed he will be happy and proud. 
11|11| Except those who persevered and did good works, they have forgiveness and a great reward.
11|12| So you may leave some of what is revealed to you, and your chest is tightened by it, because they say: why was not a treasure sent down to him or an angel came with him? You are only a warner, and God is in charge of everything. 
11|13| Or they say: he has made it up. Say: then bring ten chapters made up like that, and call on anyone you can other than God if you are truthful.
11|14| If they did not answer to you, then know that it was sent down with God’s knowledge, and that there is no god except Him, so are you submitters?
11|15| Whoever wants this world's life and its luxury, We pay them for their works in it and they will not be short changed in it. 
11|16| They are those who have nothing in the hereafter except the fire, and whatever they made in it (this world) is made useless and whatever they used to do is worthless.
11|17| Is someone who is on a clear proof from his Master and a witness from Him reads it, and book of Moses was a guide/leader and a mercy before it (like someone who wants this world's life)? They believe in it, and whoever disbelieves in it among the factions then the fire is his promised place. So do not be in doubt about it, indeed it is the truth from your Master, but most people do not believe.
11|18| And who is more wrong than someone who makes up a lie (and attributes it) to God? They will be brought before their Master, and the witnesses will say: these are those who lied against their Master. Know that God’s curse is on the wrongdoers.
11|19| Those who obstruct God’s way and they look for its distortion, and they are disbelievers in the hereafter. 
11|20| They did not weaken/escape (God) on the earth, and there is no protector for them besides God. The punishment is doubled for them. They were not able to hear and they did not used to see (the truth).
11|21| They are those who lost themselves, and what they used to fabricate abandoned them.
11|22| Without a doubt, they are the worst losers in the hereafter.
11|23| Indeed those who believed and did good works and humbled themselves before their Master, they are inhabitants of the garden, remaining in there forever.
11|24| Example of the two groups is like the blind and deaf, and the one who sees and hears. Are the two examples equal? Do you not take notice?
11|25| And We have certainly sent Noah to his people (saying): I am a clear warner for you, 
11|26| that you should not serve except God, indeed I am afraid of the punishment of a painful day for you.
11|27| And the leaders of those who disbelieved among his people said: we see you are only a human being like us, and we only see those simple minded low lives among us followed you, and we do not see you have any advantage over us, rather we think of you as liars.
11|28| He said: my people, what do you think, if I am on a clear proof from my Master and He gave me mercy from Himself that is made obscure to you, should we force it on you while you dislike it?
11|29| My people, I do not ask you for any wealth for it, my wage is only God's responsibility, and I do not drive away those who believed. Indeed they meet their Master, but I see you as ignorant people.
11|30| And my people, who helps me against God if I drive them away, do you not take notice?
11|31| I do not say to you that treasures of God are with me, and I do not know the unseen, and I do not say that I am an angel, and I do not say about those who are despicable in your eyes that God never gives them any good, as God knows best what is in their souls, in that case I am indeed of the wrongdoers (if I drive them away).
11|32| They said: Noah, you have argued with us, and argued too much with us, so bring us what you promise us if you are truthful.
11|33| He said: only God brings it to you if He wants and you cannot escape (or stop) it.
11|34| And if I want to advise you, my advice does not benefit you if God wants to mislead you. He is your Master, and you are returned to Him.
11|35| Or do they say he made it up? Say: if I made that up, then my crime is on me, and I am free of your crime.
11|36| And it was revealed to Noah that your people will never believe except anyone who has already believed, so do not be sad by what they were doing.
11|37| And build the Ark under Our eyes and Our revelation, and do not speak to Me about those who did wrong, indeed they will be drowned.
11|38| While he was building the Ark, every time leaders of his people passed by him, they made fun of him. He said: if you make fun of us, then indeed we make fun of you as you make fun (of us).
11|39| And you will know to whom punishment comes, humiliating him and a lasting punishment falls on him.
11|40| Until when Our command came and the oven burst out. We said: carry in there from every pair two (a male and a female), and your family except anyone whom the word previously issued against him, and anyone who believes. And only a few believed with him.
11|41| And he said: board in it, its sailing and its anchoring is in the name of God, indeed my Master is forgiving and merciful.
11|42| And it (the Ark) sailed with them in wave like mountains, and Noah called out his son while he was in seclusion: my son, board with us and do not be with the disbelievers.
11|43| He said: I am going to take shelter in a mountain which guards me from the water. He said: there is no guardian against God’s command today, except anyone whom He has mercy (on him). And the wave came between them and he became of the drowned ones.
11|44| And it was said: earth, swallow your water; and sky, stop (the rain). The water subsided and the matter was over, and it (the Ark) rested on the (mount) Judi. And it was said: away with the wrongdoing people.
11|45| And Noah called out to his Master, and said: my Master, indeed my son is part of my family, and indeed your promise is true, and you are the wisest of judges.
11|46| He (God) said: Noah, he is not of your family, for his action is not good, so do not ask Me what you don't have any knowledge of it, I advise you that do not be of the ignorant ones.
11|47| He said: my Master, I look for Your protection for asking You what I do not have any knowledge of it, and if You don’t forgive me and don’t have mercy on me, I will be of the losers.
11|48| It was said: Noah, come down with peace (and well-being) from Us and blessings on you and on groups that are with you. And there are groups that We are going to make them enjoy (for a while), then a painful punishment from Us happens to them.
11|49| This is from news of the unseen that We reveal to you, neither you nor your people used to know it before this, so be patient as the end is indeed for those who control themselves.
11|50| And to Aad (We sent) their brother Hud, he said: my people, serve God, there is no god for you other than Him, you are only making up (lies).
11|51| My people, I do not ask of you any wage for it, as My wage is only responsibility of the One who created me, do you not understand?
11|52| And my people, ask forgiveness of your Master then turn to Him in repentance, He sends plenty of rain on you from the sky , and He adds power to your power, and do not turn back being guilty ones.
11|53| They said: Hud, you did not bring us any clear proof, and we do not abandon our gods because of your word, and we do not believe you.
11|54| We only say that some of our gods afflicted you with badness. He said: I call God to witness, and to be witness that I have nothing to do with what you associate
11|55| besides Him, so all of you plot against me and do not wait.
11|56| I put my trust in God, my Master and your Master. There is no living creature unless He takes by its forehead (and controls it), indeed my Master is on a straight path. 
11|57| If you turn away, I have indeed preached you what I was sent to you with it, and my Master replaces you with people other than you, and you do not harm Him at all, indeed my Master is guardian of everything.
11|58| And when Our command came, We saved Hud and those who believed with him by a mercy from Us, and We saved them from a severe punishment.
11|59| And this was Aad, they rejected their Master's signs and disobeyed His messenger and followed order of every stubborn tyrant.
11|60| And they were followed by a curse in this world and the resurrection day. Know that indeed Aad disbelieved in their Master. Know that, away with Aad, people of Hud.
11|61| And to Thamud (We sent) their brother Salih. He said: my people, serve God, there is no god for you other than Him, He produced you from the earth and made you develop (and stay) in it, so ask for His forgiveness then turn to Him in repentance, indeed my Master is near and answers (your prayers).
11|62| They said: Salih, indeed we were our hope among us before this, do you forbid us from serving what our fathers serve, and we are certainly in serious doubt about what you invite us to it.
11|63| He said: my people, what do you think, if I am on a clear proof from my Master and He has given me a mercy from Himself, then who helps me against God if I disobey Him? You do not add anything to me except loss.
11|64| And my people, this is God’s female camel as a sign for you, so leave her to eat on God’s earth and do not harm her, otherwise a punishment soon takes you.
11|65| But they killed her. Then he said: enjoy in your houses for three days, this is a promise that is not a lie.
11|66| So when Our command came, We saved Salih and those who believed with him by a mercy from Us and from the humiliation of that day. Indeed your Master is strong and powerful.
11|67| And the awesome roar took those who did wrong, then they became motionless (bodies) in their houses,
11|68| as if they did not flourish in there. Know that indeed Thamud disbelieved in their Master. Know that, away with Thamud.
11|69| And Our messengers have certainly come to Abraham with good news, they said: peace (and well-being). He said: peace (and well-being). It did not take long before he brought a roasted calf.
11|70| But when he saw that their hands do not reach for it, (he realized that) he did not know them, and he felt afraid of them. They said: do not fear, we are sent to Lot's people.
11|71| And his wife was standing and she laughed, then We gave her the good news of Isaac, and after Isaac, of Jacob.
11|72| She said: woe to me, would I give birth while I am an old woman and my husband is an old man, indeed this is a surprising thing. 
11|73| They said: are you surprised about God’s order? God’s mercy and His blessings are on you, the household (of Abraham), He is indeed praiseworthy and glorious.
11|74| So when Abraham’s fear subsided and the good news came to him, he (began to) argue with Us about Lot’s people.
11|75| Indeed Abraham was patient, kind, and returning (in repentance).
11|76| Abraham, stay away from this, indeed your Master's command has come and indeed an unavoidable punishment comes to them.
11|77| And when Our messengers came to Lot, he was anxious about them and felt uneasy about them and he said: this is a terrible day.
11|78| And his people came rushing toward him, and they used to do the bad deeds in the past. He said: my people, these are my daughters, they are purer (and more proper) for you, so be cautious of God and do not humiliate me about my guests, is there not any sensible man among you?
11|79| They said: you have certainly known we have no claim to your daughters, and indeed you know what we want.
11|80| He said: I wish I had power against you, or I had taken shelter in a strong corner.
11|81| They (the messengers) said: Lot, indeed we are messengers of your Master, they will never reach you, so travel with your family during part of the night and none of you should look back except your wife, as she suffers what they suffer, their promised time is the morning, is not the morning near?
11|82| So when Our command came, We made it upside down and We rained upon them layers of stones of hard clay,
11|83| (stones) marked by your Master. And it (the punishment) is not far from the wrongdoers.
11|84| And to Midian (We sent) their brother Shu'aib. He said: my people, serve God, there is no god for you other than Him, and do not reduce the measure and the scale, indeed I see you are well off, and indeed I am afraid of the punishment of a surrounding day for you.
11|85| And my people, give the full measure and weight with justice and do not short change the people their stuff, and do not commit mischief on the earth as corruptors.
11|86| God's remainder (lawful profit) is better for you if you are believers, and I am not your guardian.
11|87| They said: Shu'aib, does your mandatory prayer instructs you that we should give up what our fathers served or (to give up) what we want to do with our wealth, you are indeed patient and sensible.
11|88| He said: my people, what do you think, if I am on a clear proof from my Master and He provided me a good provision from Himself. And I do not want to oppose you in what I prohibit you from it, I do not want anything but reform (and improvement) as much as I can, and my success is only by God, I trust in Him and I turn to Him.
11|89| And my people, do not misbehave (and act unjustly) because of my opposition so that you suffer like what people of Noah or people of Hud or people of Salih suffered, and people of Lot are not far from you.
11|90| And ask forgiveness of your Master, then turn to Him in repentance, my Master is indeed merciful and loving.
11|91| They said: Shu'aib, we do not understand most of what you say and we certainly see that you are weak among us, and if it was not for your family, we would certainly stone you, and you have no power over us.
11|92| He said: my people, is my family more powerful against you than God, yet you throw Him behind your backs (and ignore Him)? Indeed my Master surrounds what you do.
11|93| And my people, do what you are capable of, indeed I do (what I can), you will know on whom a punishment comes humiliating him, and who is a liar, and watch and I am watchful with you.
11|94| And when Our command came, We saved Shu'aib and those who believed with him by a mercy from Us, and the awesome roar took those who did wrong, then they became motionless in their houses,
11|95| as if they did not flourish in there. Know that, away with Midian as was done away with Thamud.
11|96| And We have certainly sent Moses with Our signs (miracles) and clear reason
11|97| to Pharaoh and his assembly. But they followed Pharaoh’s order while Pharaoh's order was not right.
11|98| He goes ahead of his people on the resurrection day, and he leads them into the fire, and it is a bad arrival place.
11|99| And they were followed by a curse in this (life) and on the resurrection day, they are offered a bad offering.
11|100| That is among the news of the towns that we tell you, some of them are standing and some are wiped out.
11|101| And We did not wrong them, but they did wrong to themselves. Their gods that they call on other than God were of no use to them at all when your Master's order came, and they only added destruction to them.
11|102| And such is your Master's taking (for punishment) when He takes the towns while they are wrongdoers. His taking is indeed severely painful. 
11|103| Indeed there is a sign in that for anyone who fears punishment of the hereafter. It is a day that the people are gathered in it and it is a witnessed day (witnessed by everyone). 
11|104| And We only put it off for a limited time.
11|105| A day (when) it comes, no one speaks except with His permission, then some of them are unfortunate and some are fortunate.
11|106| As for those who are unfortunate, then they have moaning and screaming in the fire.
11|107| They remain in it as long as the skies and the earth last, unless what your Master wants (to forgive them). Indeed your Master indeed does what He wants.
11|108| As for those who are fortunate, they will be in the garden, remaining in it as long as the skies and the earth last, unless what your Master wants, a gift that is irreversible.
11|109| So do not be in any doubt as to what these serve. They only serve as their fathers served in the past, and We certainly pay them back their portion without any reduction.
11|110| And We have certainly given Moses the book, then they disagreed about it, and if it was not for a word that previously came from your Master, it would have been judged between them, and they are indeed in serious doubt about it.
11|111| And your Master shall pay them all back for their actions. Indeed He is well informed of what they do.
11|112| So, you and those who repented with you persevere as you are ordered and do not rebel, indeed He sees what you do.
11|113| And do not lean toward those who did wrong, otherwise the fire touches you, and there is no protector for you other than God, then you are not helped.
11|114| And perform the mandatory prayer at the two ends of the day and early part of the night. Indeed the good deeds eliminate the bad deeds. This is a reminder to the mindful.
11|115| And persevere (and be patient), for God does not waste the reward of the good doers.
11|116| Why there were not men of insight among the generations before you to prohibit from the corruption in the earth, except a few of those whom We saved among them? And those who did wrong followed what they took pleasure in it, and they were guilty. 
11|117| And it is not for your Master to destroy any town unjustly while its people are reformers.
11|118| And if your Master wanted, He would have made the people a single community (of faith), but they would not stop to disagree,
11|119| except anyone whom your Master had mercy on, and for that He created them. And word of your Master fulfilled: I shall fill hell with the Jinn and the people altogether.
11|120| And all that we tell you from stories of the messengers is what We strengthen your heart with it, and the truth and an advice and a reminder came to you for the believers in this.
11|121| And say to those who do not believe: do what you are capable of, and indeed we are doers
11|122| and wait, indeed we are also waiting.
11|123| The unseen of the skies and the earth belongs to God, and all the affairs are returned to Him, so serve Him and put your trust in Him. And you Master is not negligent of what you do.
12|1| A.L.R. (Alif. Lam. Ra.) These are verses of the clear (and clarifying) book.
12|2| We sent it down, an Arabic Quran, so that you may understand.
12|3| We tell you the best stories in what We revealed to you in this Quran while you were of the negligent ones before it.
12|4| (Remember) when Joseph said to his father: my father, indeed I saw (in my dream) eleven stars and the sun and the moon, I saw them being humble before me.
12|5| He said: my son, do not tell your dream to your brothers, so they don't plan a plot against you, indeed Satan is human being’s obvious enemy.
12|6| And that is how your Master chooses you and teaches you the interpretation of events (and dreams) and completes His favor on you and the Jacob’s family as He previously completed it on your fathers Abraham and Isaac. Indeed your Master is knowledgeable and wise.
12|7| In (the story of) Joseph and his brothers there are definitely signs for those who ask.
12|8| (Remember) when they said: Joseph and his brother (Benjamin) are more loved by our father than us, although we are a bunch, our father is certainly in an obvious mistake.
12|9| Kill Joseph or throw him out to another land, then your father’s full attention will be yours, and you will be righteous people after that.
12|10| A speaker among them said: do not kill Joseph, but throw him down in the bottom of the well so some caravan picks him up if you are doers.
12|11| They said: our father, why do you not trust us with Joseph while we really wish him well.
12|12| Send him with us tomorrow to enjoy and play and we are certainly his guardians.
12|13| He said: indeed it saddens me if you take him away, and I am afraid that a wolf eats him while you are unaware of him.
12|14| They said: if a wolf eats him while we are a bunch, then indeed we are losers.
12|15| And when they took him away and they all agreed to put him in the bottom of the well, We revealed to him: (some day) you shall inform them of this affair of theirs while they would not realize.
12|16| And they came crying to their father in the evening.
12|17| They said: father, we went racing and we left Joseph with our things then the wolf ate him, and you do not believe us even though we are truthful.
12|18| And they brought his shirt with false blood on it. He said: no, but you let yourselves be seduced by a matter, so a nice patience (is necessary for me), and God is Whom to call for help about what you claim.
12|19| And a caravan came, then they sent their water carrier, and he let down his bucket (into the well). He said: good news, this is a boy. And they hid him as merchandise while God knew what they do.
12|20| And they sold him for a low price, a few coins, and they were indifferent about him.
12|21| And the one from Egypt who bought him told his wife: dignify his place of stay, perhaps he benefits us or we adopt him as a son. And that is how We established Joseph in the land and to teach him the interpretation of events (and dreams). God dominates over His affair, but most people do not know.
12|22| And when he reached his maturity, We gave him wisdom and knowledge, and that is how We reward the good doers.
12|23| And she, in whose house he was, wanted to seduce him  (to lie with him), and she locked the doors and said: come here. He said: may God protect me, indeed He is my Master and He made my place good, indeed the wrongdoers do not succeed.
12|24| And she has certainly desired him, and he would have desired her if he had not seen his Master's proof. That is how We turn the badness and the indecency away from him. He was indeed one of Our devoted servants.
12|25| And they both raced to the door, and she tore his shirt from behind, and they found her husband at the door. She said: what is the punishment of anyone who wanted to abuse your wife except that he is imprisoned or a painful punishment?
12|26| He said: she wanted to seduce me (to lie with her). And a witness from her family testified: if his shirt is torn from the front, then she is telling the truth and he is a liar,
12|27| and if his shirt is torn from behind, then she is lying and he is truthful.
12|28| So when he saw that his shirt is torn from behind, he said (to her): indeed that is from your plot, indeed your plot is great.
12|29| Joseph, stay away from this. And you (my wife) ask forgiveness for your sin, for indeed you are of the sinners.
12|30| And women in the city said: wife of Aziz (the powerful one) wants to seduce her young slave, love has affected her, and indeed we see her in an obvious mistake.
12|31| So when she heard of their ploy, she sent for them and prepared a banquet for them, and gave everyone of them a knife and she said (to Joseph): come out before them. So when they saw him, they admired him and cut their hands (in amazement), and they said: God forbid, this is not a human being, this is not but a noble angel.
12|32| She said: this is the one whom you blamed me about him, and I certainly wanted to seduce him but he resisted, and if he does not do what I order him, he shall be imprisoned and he certainly becomes of the belittled ones.
12|33| He said: my Master, prison is more likeable to me than what they invite me to it, and if you do not turn their plot away from me, I may lean toward them and I would be one of the ignorant ones.
12|34| So his Master answered him and turned their plot away from him. He hears all and knows all.
12|35| So it seemed proper to them that they should imprison him for a while even after they saw the signs (of his innocence).
12|36| And two young men entered the prison with him. One of them said: I see myself pressing wine (in my dreams). The other one said: I see myself carrying bread over my head and the birds eating from it. Tell us its interpretation as we see you are of the good doers.
12|37| He said: food that you are provided with it does not come to you, unless I tell you of its interpretation before it comes to you. This is some of what my Master taught me. I left faith of people who do not believe in God and they disbelieve in the hereafter.
12|38| And I followed faith of my fathers, Abraham and Isaac and Jacob, it is not for us to associate anything (as partner) with God. This is from God’s grace to us and to the people, but most of the people do not thank.
12|39| My two prison mates, are several different masters better or the one dominant God?
12|40| Other than Him, you only serve names which you and your fathers named (and made up) which God did not send down any reason for it. The rule only belongs to God. He ordered that you do not serve except Him. This is the lasting religion, but most of the people do not know.
12|41| My two prison mates, one of you will give wine to his master to drink, and the other will be crucified and the birds will eat from his head. The matter about which you both asked is decided.
12|42| And he said to the one that he thought will be saved from the two of them: mention me to your master. But Satan made him forget mentioning to his master, so he (Joseph) remained in prison for several years.
12|43| And the king said: I see (in my dreams) seven fat cows that seven skinny ones eat them, and seven green clusters (of grain) and (seven) others dry; counselors, explain to me about my dream if you interpret dreams.
12|44| They said: confused dreams and we do not know the interpretation of the (confused) dreams.
12|45| And the one who was saved, remembered (Joseph) after a while and said: I tell you its interpretation, so send me (to Joseph).
12|46| Joseph, the honest one, explain to us about seven fat cows that seven skinny ones eat them, and seven green clusters and (seven) others dry, so that I may return to the people so that they may know (its interpretation).
12|47| He said: you will cultivate seven years as usual, and whatever you harvest you leave it in its clusters (to be stored), except a little that you eat.
12|48| Then after that, seven hard years come, which you consume what you previously stored up for them, except a little that you save.
12|49| Then after that, a year comes in which the people will be showered (with plenty of rain) and in which they press (juices of grapes and others).
12|50| And the king said: bring him to me. Then when the messenger came to him, he said: return to your master and ask him what the case of the women who cut their hands is? Indeed my Master knows their plot.
12|51| He said (to the women): what was your business when you wanted to seduce Joseph? They said: God forbid, we do not know anything bad about him. The wife of the powerful one said: now the truth is cleared, I wanted to seduce him, and he is certainly truthful.
12|52| (And Joseph said:) this was for him to know that I did not betray him in his absence, and indeed God does not guide the plot of the betrayers,
12|53| And I do not acquit myself, indeed the soul orders to the badness except if my Master has mercy, indeed my Master is forgiving and merciful.
12|54| And the king said: bring him to me, I select him (to work) only for myself. So when he spoke to him, he said: as of today, you are respected and trustworthy with us.
12|55| He said: put me in charge of treasures of the land, I am a knowledgeable guardian.
12|56| And that is how We established Joseph in the land, to settle anywhere he wants in it. We give Our mercy to anyone We want, and We do not waste the reward of the good doers.
12|57| And the reward of the hereafter is certainly better for those who believed and used to control themselves.
12|58| And brothers of Joseph came and entered upon him (in the time of famine). So he recognized them while they did not recognize him.
12|59| And when he provided them with their provision, he said: bring me a brother you have from your father (your stepbrother), do you not see that I give full measure and I am the best host?
12|60| But if you do not bring him to me, then there is no measure (of grain) for you from me, and do not come near me.
12|61| They said: we are going to try to get him from his father, and we are certainly doers.
12|62| And he said to his servants: put their merchandise (and fund) in their saddlebags, so that they may recognize it when they go back to their family, so that they may return.
12|63| So when they returned to their father, they said: our father, the measure was forbidden to us, so send our brother with us that we get measure, and we are certainly his guardians.
12|64| He (Jacob) said: should I trust you with him as I trusted you with his brother (Joseph) in the past while God is the best guardian and He is the most merciful of the merciful ones?
12|65| And when they opened their goods, they found that their merchandise (and fund) was returned to them. They said: our father, what else we wish for, this is our merchandise that was returned to us, and we get supplies for our family, and we take care of our brother, and we get an additional measure of a camel’s load, this is a small (and easy) measure.
12|66| He (Jacob) said: I will never send him with you until you give me a commitment by God that you shall bring him (back) to me unless it is completely out of your control. So when they gave him their commitment, he said: God is trustee over what we say.
12|67| And he said: my sons, do not enter from one gate, but enter from different gates, I cannot be of any use to you at all against God, as the rule only belongs to God, I put my trust in Him, and those who trust should put their trust in Him.
12|68| And when they entered from where their father instructed them, it was of no use to them at all against God, but it was a requirement of Jacob himself which was carried out. And indeed he had knowledge because of what We taught him, but most people do not know.
12|69| And when they entered upon Joseph, he placed his brother next to himself and said: I am indeed your brother, so do not be sad by what they were doing.
12|70| And when he supplied them with their supplies, he placed the drinking cup in his brother's saddlebag, then a caller announced: you in the caravan, you are thieves.
12|71| They said while turning around to them: what do you miss?
12|72| They said: we miss king’s cup, and for anyone who brings it is a camel load (of supplies), and I am its guarantor.
12|73| They said: by God, you have certainly known that we did not come to commit corruption in the land, and we are not thieves.
12|74| They said: then what is its punishment, if you are liars?
12|75| They said: its punishment, for whomever that it is found in his saddlebag, is himself (becoming a slave) as punishment, that is how we punish the wrongdoers.
12|76| So he began with their sacks before his brother’s sack, then he brought it out of his brother’s sack. That is how We plotted for Joseph. He was not to take his brother according to the king’s law unless God wants. We raise ranks of anyone We want. And above all having knowledge is a (more) knowledgeable one.
12|77| They said: if he steals, a brother of his has also stolen in the past. But Joseph kept it in himself and did not disclose it to them. He said: you are in a bad position, and God knows better what you claim.
12|78| They said: the powerful one, indeed he has a very old father, so take one of us in his place, as indeed we see you are of the good doers.
12|79| He said: may God protect me that we take anyone except whom we found our property with him, for then we are indeed of the wrongdoers.
12|80| So when they lost hope of him, they had a private conversation. The oldest of them said: did you not know that your father has taken a commitment from you by God, and you failed about Joseph in the past? So I would never leave this land until my father permits me or God rules for me, and He is the best of the rulers (and judges).
12|81| Return to your father and say: our father, indeed your son stole, and we only testified to what we knew, and we could not guard against the unseen.
12|82| And ask (the people of) the town that we were in it, and the caravan that we returned in it, and we are certainly truthful.
12|83| He (Jacob) said: no, but you let yourselves be seduced by a matter, so a nice patience (is necessary for me), perhaps God brings them all to me, indeed He is the knowledgeable and the wise.
12|84| And he turned away from them and said: I am sorry about Joseph. And his eyes turned white (and blinded) from the sorrow, and he is a suppressor (of his sorrow and anger).
12|85| They said: by God, you will not stop remembering Joseph until you become sick or you are dead.
12|86| He said: I only complain to God about my pain and sorrow, and I know from God what you do not know.
12|87| My sons, go and look for Joseph and his brother, and do not lose hope of God’s kindness, indeed only the disbelieving people lose hope of God's kindness.
12|88| So when they entered upon him (Joseph), they said: powerful one, hard times happened to us and our family, and we brought little merchandise, but give us the full measure and be charitable to us, as God indeed rewards the charitable ones.
12|89| He said: do you know what you did with Joseph and his brother when you were ignorant?
12|90| They said: are you indeed Joseph? He said: I am Joseph and this is my brother, God has been gracious to us, indeed anyone who controls himself and perseveres then God does not waste reward of the good doers.
12|91| They said: by God, certainly God has preferred you over us and we were sinners.
12|92| He said: (there is) no blame on you today, God forgives you, and He is most merciful of the merciful ones.
12|93| Go with this shirt of mine, and throw it over my father’s face, he regains sight, and bring me all your family.
12|94| And when the caravan left, their father said: I certainly find smell of Joseph, if you don't think that I am senile.
12|95| They said: by God, indeed you are in your old mistake.
12|96| So when the giver of good news came, he threw it over his face and his sight returned. He said: did I not say to you indeed I know from God what you do not know?
12|97| They said: our father, ask forgiveness for us for our sins, as we were indeed sinners.
12|98| He said: I will ask forgiveness for you from my Master, He is indeed the forgiving, the merciful.
12|99| When they entered upon Joseph, he placed his parents next to him and said: God willing, enter Egypt safely.
12|100| And he raised his parent to the throne and they fell down before him humbly, and he said: my father, this is the interpretation of my dream in the past, my Master has made it true, and He has been good to me when He took me out of the prison and brought you from the desert after Satan set off enmity between me and my brothers, my Master is indeed nice to what He wants, indeed He is the knowledgeable and the wise.
12|101| My Master, you have given me some of the rule and taught me some of the interpretation of events (dreams). Creator of the skies and the earth, You are my protector in this life and the hereafter, make me die as a submitter and join me with the righteous.
12|102| This is from the stories of the unseen that We reveal to you, and you were not with them when they all agreed on their issue while they plot.
12|103| And most people do not believe, even though you are eager.
12|104| And you do not ask them for any wage for it. It (Quran) is only a reminder for humankind.
12|105| And how many a sign in the skies and the earth they pass by it and they turn away from it?
12|106| And most of them do not believe in God except while they are still associating (partners with Him).
12|107| Do they feel safe about an overwhelming God’s punishment coming to them, or the hour comes to them suddenly while they do not realize?
12|108| Say: this is my way, I and anyone who follows me invite (people) to God with insight, and glory to God (He is flawless), and I am not of the polytheists.
12|109| And We did not send (messengers) before you, except men from among the people of the towns whom We revealed to them. Did they not travel throughout the earth to see what the end of those before them was? And the home of the hereafter is certainly better for those who control themselves, do you not understand?
12|110| Until when the messengers lost hope and thought that they have been lied to, Our help came to them and anyone We want was saved. And Our punishment is not held back from the guilty people. 
12|111| Certainly, there is a lesson in their stories for the people of understanding (reasonable people). It is not a saying that is made up, but a confirmation of that which is before it (in the Torah and the Gospel), and an explanation of everything (concerning religion) and a guide and a mercy for people who believe.
13|1| A.L.M.R. (Alif. Lam. Mim. Ra.) These are verses of the book. And that which was sent down to you from your Master is the truth, but most people do not believe.
13|2| God is the One who raised the skies without any pillars that you see it, then He settled on the throne, and He controlled the sun and the moon, each running (its course) in a finite period. He directs the affairs, He explains the verses (signs) so that you may be certain of meeting your Master.
13|3| And He is the One who stretched the earth and put mountains and rivers in it, and He made all kind of fruit in pairs of two (male and female) in it, He covers the night over the day. Indeed there are signs in that for people who think.
13|4| And in the earth there are adjacent pieces and gardens of grapes and plantation and date palms from same root and not from the same root watered with same water, and We make some of them preferable to eat than the others. Indeed there are signs in that for people who understand.
13|5| And if you are surprised, then their saying is astonishing: will we be created again when we turn to dust? They are those who disbelieved in their Master, and they have shackles around their necks, and they are inhabitants of the fire, they remain in it forever.
13|6| They ask you to rush with the bad before the good while similar examples (of punishment) have passed before them. And your Master certainly has forgiveness for the people about their wrongdoing. And indeed your Master is severe in punishment.
13|7| And those who disbelieved say: why a miracle (sign) was not sent down to him from his Master. You are only a warner. And for every group there is a guide.
13|8| God knows what every female carries (during pregnancy), and how much the wombs fall short or exceed (in length or in number), and everything with Him is in proper measures.
13|9| Knower of the unseen and the visible, the greatest and the highest.
13|10| It is the same whether any of you hides the word or anyone says it loud, or whether anyone hides in the night or goes about in the day.
13|11| For each (person) there are followers in front of him and behind him which guard him by God’s command. Indeed God does not change condition of any group until they change what is in themselves. And when God wants something bad for a group, there is no turning it away and they have no protector besides Him.
13|12| He is the One who shows you the lightning, a fear and a hope, and He produces the heavy clouds.
13|13| And the thunder glorifies Him with His praise, and so do angels from His fear. And He sends the lightning, and He strikes anyone He wants with it, and yet they argue about God, and He is severe in punishment.
13|14| The true calling belongs to Him, and those whom they call on other than Him do not answer them at all, except like someone who stretches his hands toward the water to reach his mouth, but it does not reach it. And the call of the disbelievers is only in error (and it is useless).
13|15| Everyone in the skies and in the earth, willingly or unwillingly, shows humbleness to God, and so do their shadows in the mornings and the afternoons.
13|16| Say: who is the Master of the skies and the earth? Say: God. Say: did you take protectors other than God who have no power to benefit or to harm themselves? Say: are the blind and the one who can see equal, or are the darkness and the light equal? Or did they make partners for God that created as He created, and it seemed like the creation to them? Say: God is creator of everything, and He is the One, the supreme (and dominant).
13|17| He sent down rain from the sky and it flowed in the valleys according to their measure, then the current carried the foam that built up (on its surface). And similar foam (builds up) from what they melt in the fire to make ornaments or utensils. That is how God gives example of the truth and the falsehood. As for the foam, it goes away uselessly, but that which benefits the people stays on the earth. This is how God gives the examples.
13|18| For those who answered their Master is the good (reward), while those who did not answer Him, if they had all that is in the earth and the like of it with that, they would have offered it as compensation. They have the bad account, and their housing is hell, and it is a bad resting place.
13|19| Is someone who knows, that what was sent down to you from your Master is the truth, same as one who is blind? Only the people of understanding (reasonable people) take notice.
13|20| Those who fulfill God’s promise and do not break the commitment,
13|21| and those who join what God ordered it to be joined, and they fear their Master, and they are afraid of the bad account, 
13|22| and those who persevered looking for their Master’s attention (and His pleasure) and performed the mandatory prayer and they spent from what We provided them secretly and openly and they drive back the badness with the goodness, for them is the final home.
13|23| Eternal gardens, which they enter it and anyone who was righteous among their fathers and their spouses and their descendants. And the angels enter upon them from every gate (saying)
13|24| peace (and well-being) upon you for your perseverance. And how excellent is the final home!
13|25| And those who break God’s promise after committing to it and cut what God ordered it to be joined and commit corruption on the earth, they have the curse upon them and the bad home is for them.
13|26| God increases and decreases the provision for anyone He wants. And they were happy with this world's life, while this world’s life is only a brief joy compared to the hereafter.
13|27| Those who disbelieved say: why a miracle was not sent down to him from his Master? Say: God misguides anyone He wants and guides to Himself anyone who turns to Him.
13|28| Those who believed and their hearts are reassured by remembering God, know that the hearts are reassured by remembering God.
13|29| Those who believed and did good works, happiness and a good place of return is for them.
13|30| As such We sent you to a group that other groups have passed away before them, so that you read to them that which We revealed to you while they disbelieve in the beneficent. Say: He is my Master, there is no god except Him, I put my trust in Him, and my return is to Him.
13|31| If it was a Quran that the mountains was moved by it or the earth was torn into pieces by it or the dead were made to speak by it (they would still not believe in it). No, but all the affairs belong to God. Did not those who believed give up hope (and realized) that if God wants He would guide all the people? And those who disbelieved, catastrophe does not stop to happen to them or to fall near their homes because of what they did, until God’s promise comes. Indeed God does not break His promise.
13|32| And messengers before you were certainly ridiculed, but I gave those who disbelieved some time and then took them (in punishment). How was My punishment?
13|33| Does anyone (other than God) watch over what everyone does? And yet they made partners for God. Say: name them, or do you inform Him about something that He does not know on the earth, or is it (just) superficial word? No, but for those who disbelieved their plot is beautified and they are kept back from the (right) way. And there is no guide for anyone who God misguides.
13|34| They have punishment in this world’s life, and the punishment in the hereafter is certainly harder, and there is no protector for them against God.
13|35| Example of the garden which is promised to those who control themselves is rivers flowing through it, and its food and shade are forever. This is the end of those who control themselves, and the end of the disbelievers is the fire.
13|36| Those We gave them the book are happy because of what was sent down to you, and some among the parties disbelieve in part of it. Say: I am only ordered to serve God and do not associate (any partner) with Him, I invite to Him and the return is to Him.
13|37| That is how We sent it (Quran) down, a ruling (and a law) in Arabic. And if you follow their desires after what came to you from the knowledge, then there is no supporter and no protector for you against God.
13|38| We have certainly sent messengers before you and appointed wives and children for them. And it was not (possible) for a messenger to bring a sign (or a miracle) except with God’s permission. For every period there is a mandate (or a record).
13|39| God erases and registers what He wants, and the main book is with Him.
13|40| And whether We show you some of that (punishment) which We promise them or We make you die (before that), your only responsibility is the preaching, and the accounting is Our responsibility.
13|41| Did they not see that We come to the land and We reduce it from its sides? And God orders and no one revises/delays His order, and He is quick in accounting.
13|42| And those before them have certainly plotted, but all the plots belong to God. He knows what everyone does. And the disbelievers are going to know who gets the final home (in the hereafter).
13|43| And those who disbelieved say: you are not a messenger. Say: God and anyone who has knowledge of the book are enough as witness between me and you.
14|1| A.L.R. (Alif. Lam. Ra.) A book that We sent it down to you, so that you bring the people out of the darkness and into the light with their Master’s permission, the path of the powerful, the praiseworthy.
14|2| God is the One who whatever is in the skies and on the earth belongs to Him. And woe to the disbelievers from a severe punishment. 
14|3| Those who like this world's life over the hereafter and obstruct God's way and look for its distortion, they are lost far (from the right path).
14|4| We did not sent any messenger except in the language of his people, in order to clarify (the message) for them. God misguides anyone He wants, and guides anyone He wants, and He is the powerful, the wise.
14|5| And We have certainly sent Moses with Our signs (saying): bring your people out of the darkness and into the light and remind them of the days of God. Indeed there are signs in that for every patient and thankful (person).
14|6| And (remember) when Moses said to his people: remember God’s favors upon you when He saved you from Pharaoh’s people who subjected you to the harsh punishment while killing your sons and letting your women live. There was a great trial in that from your Master.
14|7| And when your Master announced: if you are thankful, I shall increase you (and your reward), and if you are ungrateful then indeed My punishment is certainly severe.
14|8| And Moses said: if you and everyone on the earth disbelieve together, God is rich (and has no need) and is praiseworthy. 
14|9| Did not the story of those before you come to you, people of Noah and Aad and Thamud and those after them? No one knows them except God. Their messengers brought them the clear proofs, but they returned their hands to their mouth and said: indeed we disbelieve in what you are sent with it, and we are certainly in serious doubt about what you invite us to it.
14|10| Their messengers said: is there any doubt about God, creator of the skies and the earth?  He invites you to forgive you of your sins and postpone you (your death and punishment) until a limited period. They said: you are only a human being like us, you want to turn us away from what our fathers used to serve, so bring us a clear reason.
14|11| Their messengers told them: we are only human beings like you, but God favors upon any one of His servants that He wants, and it is not for us to bring you a reason except with God’s permission, and believers should put their trust in God.
14|12| And why should we not put our trust in God, while He has guided us in our ways? And we shall persevere over what you harass us. And those who trust should put their trust in God.
14|13| And those who disbelieved said to their messengers: we shall drive you out of our land or you shall return to our faith. Then their Master revealed to them: We shall destroy the wrongdoers.
14|14| And We shall make you inhabit the land after them. That is for those who fear My position and fear My threat (of punishment).
14|15| And they asked for victory, and every stubborn tyrant was disappointed.
14|16| Hell is ahead of him, and he is made to drink from rotten water.
14|17| He sips it and does not swallow it easily, and death comes to him from everywhere but he does not die, and beyond it is a severe punishment.
14|18| The works of those who disbelieved in their Master is like ashes that a strong wind blows on it on a stormy day. They are not able to gain anything from what they did. That is being lost far away (from the right path).
14|19| Did you not see that God created the skies and the earth in truth? If He wants, He eliminates you and brings a new creation. 
14|20| And that is not difficult for God.
14|21| And all (people) appear before God, then the weak ones say to those who were arrogant: we were your followers, so can you be of any use to us against God’s punishment at all? They say: if God had guided us, we would have certainly guided you, it is the same for us whether we are anxious or we are patient, for there is no way of escape for us.
14|22| And when the matter was decided, Satan said: indeed God promised you a true promise, and I promised you and I failed to keep my promise, I had no authority over you except that I invited you and you accepted my invitation, so do not blame me but blame yourselves, I am not your rescuer and you are not my rescuer, I disbelieve in you associating me (as partner) with God in the past. The wrongdoers have a painful punishment.
14|23| Those who believed and did good works are admitted to gardens which rivers flow through them, remaining in there forever with their Master's permission. Their greeting in it is: peace (and well-being).
14|24| Did you not see how God gives an example? Good word is like a good tree, its root is firm and its branches are in the sky.
14|25| It gives its fruit all the time with its Master’s permission. And God gives the examples for the people, so that they may take notice.
14|26| Example of a bad word is like a bad tree which is uprooted from the surface of the earth and is has no stability.
14|27| God reaffirms those who believed in this world's life and in the hereafter with firm words. And He misguides the wrongdoers. And God does what He wants.
14|28| Did you not see those who exchanged God’s favor with disbelief, and they brought about their people to the house of doom.
14|29| Hell, they enter (and burn in) it, and it is bad place to stay.
14|30| And they made equals to God in order to misguide (people) from His way. Say: enjoy, for your final return is to the fire.
14|31| Say to My servants, those who believed, to perform the mandatory prayer and to spend secretly and openly from what We provided them, before a day comes that there is no trading and no friendship in it. 
14|32| God is the One who created the skies and the earth and sent down rain from the sky, then He brought out the produce as your provision with it, and He brought the ship under your control (and at your service) so that you sail in the sea by His command, and He brought rivers under your control.
14|33| And He brought the sun and the moon, which continuously hold their courses (orbits), under your control (to be of service o you), And He brought the night and the day under your control.
14|34| And He gave you from all that you asked Him. And if you count God’s favor, you cannot count it. The human being is certainly wrongdoer and ungrateful.
14|35| And remember when Abraham said: my Master, make this territory safe, and keep me and my children away from serving idols.
14|36| My Master, indeed they misguided a lot of people, so whoever follows me then he is of me, and whoever disobeys me, indeed You are forgiving and merciful.
14|37| Our Master, indeed I made some of my descendants live in a barren valley by Your sacred house, so that they may perform the mandatory prayer our Master, so make hearts of the people fond of them, and provide them with the produce so they may be thankful.
14|38| Our Master, you know what we hide and what we disclose, and nothing in the skies and in the earth hides from God.
14|39| All praise belongs to God, the One who gave me Ishmael and Isaac in spite of the old age. Indeed my Master is the listener of the prayer.
14|40| My Master, make me and my descendants performers of the mandatory prayer, and accept my prayer our Master.
14|41| Our Master, forgive me and my parents and the believers on a day that the accounting is established.
14|42| And do not think that God is unaware of what the wrongdoers do. God only postpones them (their punishment) to a day that the eyes stare (in horror) in it.
14|43| Rushing forward with their heads raised up, their eyes do not blink, and their hearts are empty.
14|44| And warn the people of a day that the punishment comes to them, then those who did wrong say: our Master, postpone (the punishment) for us for a short period, so that we accept Your call and follow the messengers. (God says): did you not swear in the past that you have no ending?
14|45| And you resided in houses of those who did wrong to themselves, and what We did to them was made clear to you, and We gave you the examples.
14|46| And they have plotted their plot, and their plot is with God (God is aware of their plot) even if their plot was to wipe out the mountains by it.
14|47| Do not think that God breaks His promise to His messengers. Indeed God is powerful, revengeful.
14|48| On a day that the earth is changed to a different earth and so is the skies, and they (the people) appear before God, the One and the supreme (and the dominant).
14|49| And on that day, you see the guilty ones are tied together in chains.
14|50| Their clothes are from tar and the fire covers their faces.
14|51| So that God repays everyone according to what it did. God is quick in the accounting. 
14|52| This (Quran) is a notification for the people, so that they are warned with it, and to know that only He is the One god, and for the people of understanding (reasonable people) to take notice.
15|1| A.L.R. (Alif, Lam, Ra). These are verses of the book and a clear (and clarifying) Quran.
15|2| Oftentimes those who disbelieved wish that they were submitted (to God).
15|3| Leave them eat and enjoy, and their (false) hope amuse them. They will know.
15|4| We did not destroy any town unless there was a known writing/verdict for it.
15|5| No group advances or delays its appointed time.
15|6| And they said: you, the one that the reminder (Quran) is sent to him, you are certainly mad.
15|7| Why do you not bring us the angels if you are truthful?
15|8| We do not send down the angels unless with the truth and then they are not given any delay.
15|9| Indeed We sent down the reminder (Quran), and We are certainly its guardian.
15|10| And We have certainly sent (messengers) before you to the previous groups.
15|11| And no messenger came to them except they were ridiculing him.
15|12| That is how We put it into the hearts of the guilty ones.
15|13| They do not believe in it, way of the earlier ones who passed away. 
15|14| And if We had opened a gate in the sky for them, and they would have continuously climbed in it,
15|15| they would certainly say: indeed our eyes are intoxicated (and we are dazzled), rather we are bewitched people.
15|16| We have certainly placed constellations in the sky, and beautified it for the observers.
15|17| And We guarded it from every cast out devil.
15|18| Except anyone who eavesdrops, then he is pursued by a visible shooting flame. 
15|19| And We stretched the earth, and We placed firm mountains in it, and We grew everything in there in good proportions.
15|20| And We made means of living in it for you and for those that you are not responsible to provide for them.
15|21| We have unlimited supply of everything, and We only send it down in a known amount.
15|22| And We sent the wind impregnating (the clouds with rain), then We sent down rain from the sky for you to drink it. And you are not its treasurer.
15|23| And indeed We give life and cause death, and We are the inheritors (of everything).
15|24| And We have certainly known those who came before you, and We certainly know those who come after you.
15|25| And indeed it is your Master who gathers them. He is wise and knowledgeable.
15|26| And We have certainly created the human being from dried clay of stinky black mud. 
15|27| And the Jinn, We created it from the scorching (and smokeless) fire earlier.
15|28| And when your Master said to the angels: indeed I am creator of a human being from dried clay of stinky black mud, 
15|29| so when I shape him, and blow My breath/spirit into him, then fall down humbly before him.
15|30| Then the angels altogether showed humbleness,
15|31| Except Iblis (Satan) which refused to be with the humble ones.
15|32| He (God) said: Iblis, what is it with you that you are not with the humble ones?
15|33| He said: I would not be humble before a human being that You created him from dried clay of stinky black mud. 
15|34| He (God) said: then get out of it, for indeed you are expelled,
15|35| and the curse is on you until the judgment day.
15|36| He said: so give me time until the day that they are raised.
15|37| He (God) said: indeed you are of those given a delay,
15|38| until day of the known time.
15|39| He said: Master, because you misled me, I shall beautify (the bad deeds) for them on the earth and I shall mislead them all,
15|40| except your devoted servants among them.
15|41| He (God) said: this is a straight path to Me,
15|42| indeed you have no authority over My servants, except anyone of the misled ones who follows you,
15|43| and hell is the promised place for all of them.
15|44| It has seven gates, and each gate is for an assigned portion of them.
15|45| Indeed those who control themselves will be in gardens and springs.
15|46| (They will be told:) enter it in peace (and well-being) and safety.
15|47| And We remove any resentment from their minds, brothers (sitting) on sofas facing each other.
15|48| No suffering touches them in there, and they will not be driven out of it.
15|49| Tell My servants that I Myself am the forgiving, the merciful.
15|50| And indeed My punishment is the painful punishment.
15|51| And tell them about Abraham’s guests.
15|52| When they entered upon him, they said: peace (and well-being). He said: indeed we are afraid of you.
15|53| They said: do not be afraid, we give you good news of a knowledgeable boy.
15|54| He said: do you give me good news (of a son) although I am old, so what good news are you giving?
15|55| They said: we give you good news in truth, so do not be hopeless.
15|56| He said: and who loses hope of his Master’s mercy except the lost ones? 
15|57| He said: so what is your business messengers?
15|58| They said: indeed we are sent to the guilty people,
15|59| except Lot’s family, indeed we will save them all
15|60| except his wife, which we determined that indeed she is of those staying behind.
15|61| So when the messengers came to Lot’s family,
15|62| He (Lot) said: indeed you are a group of strangers.
15|63| They said: no, but we brought you what they used to doubt about it.
15|64| And we brought you the truth, and indeed we are truthful.
15|65| So travel with your family during part of the night, with you following in their rear, and no one of you should look back, and go where you are ordered.
15|66| And We announced to him this matter that the root of these will be cut off by the morning (and they will be wiped out).
15|67| And people of the city came joyfully.
15|68| He said: indeed these are my guests, so do not disgrace me,
15|69| and be cautious of God and do not humiliate me.
15|70| They said: did we not ban you from humankind (to have them as guests).
15|71| He said: these are my daughters, if you are doers.
15|72| By your life, they were blindly wandering in their intoxication.
15|73| So the awesome roar took them at sunrise.
15|74| And We turned (the cities) upside down, and We rained stones of hard clay on them.
15|75| Indeed there are signs in that for the clever ones.
15|76| And indeed it (the cities' ruin) remains on a road.
15|77| Indeed there is a sign in that for the believers.
15|78| And inhabitants of the woods (people of Midian) were indeed wrongdoers.
15|79| And We took revenge from them, and they are both on a visible road.
15|80| And inhabitants of the rock (people of Thamud) have certainly denied the messengers.
15|81| And We gave them Our signs, but they were turning away from it.
15|82| And they carved houses in the mountain being safe.
15|83| But the awesome roar took them in the morning.
15|84| Then what they were doing was of no use to them.
15|85| And We did not create the skies and the earth and what is between them except with the truth, and certainly the hour is coming, so pardon them, a beautiful pardon. 
15|86| Indeed your Master, He is the knowledgeable creator.
15|87| We have given you seven of the repeated ones and the great Quran.
15|88| Do not stretch out your eyes to (and be dazzled by) what We made some of them enjoy it, and do not be sad about them, and spread your wing for the believers.
15|89| And say: Indeed I am the clear warner.
15|90| (Warning about) such (punishment) as We sent down on the dividers,
15|91| those who made Quran into parts (and believed only in parts of it).
15|92| So, by your Master, We shall question them all,
15|93| about what they were doing.
15|94| So explain publicly what you are ordered, and stay away from the polytheists.
15|95| Indeed We are sufficient for you against those who ridicule,
15|96| those who set up another god with God. They will know.
15|97| We have certainly known that your chest tightens (and you get upset) because of what they say.
15|98| So glorify Your Master with praise, and be of those who show humbleness,
15|99| and serve your Master until the certainty/death comes to you.
16|1| God’s command came, so do not ask to rush it. He is flawless and is above what you associate (with Him).
16|2| He sends down the angels with the revelation spirit by His command upon anyone of His servants whom He wants (saying): warn that there is no god except Me, so be cautious of Me.
16|3| He created the skies and the earth with the truth. He is above what you associate (with Him).
16|4| God created the human being from fertilized egg (zygote), then he is an overt challenger now!
16|5| And He created the livestock for you, in them there is warmth (from their skin) and other benefits in them, and you eat from them.
16|6| And there is beauty (and joy) for you in them when you return them (from pasture) and when you drive them out (to pasture).
16|7| And they carry your heavy loads to a land that you were not able to reach it except with (great) difficulty to yourselves. Indeed your God is gentle and kind.
16|8| And the horses and the mules and the donkeys for you to ride them and as a frill. And He creates what you do not know. 
16|9| And (showing) the right way is God’s responsibility, while (other ways away) from it are wrong. If He wanted, He would have guided all of you.
16|10| He is the One who sent down rain from the sky for you to drink from it, and (to grow) vegetation from it that you graze (your livestock) in it.
16|11| He grows crops and olives and dates and grapes and all kind of produce with it for you. Indeed there is a sign in that for people who think.
16|12| And He brought the night and the day and the sun and the moon under your control (and at your service), and also stars are under control by His command. Indeed there are signs in that for people who understand.
16|13| And whatever He created for you in various colors on the earth. There is a sign in that for those who notice.
16|14| He is the One who brought the sea under control, so that you eat fresh meat from it, and you bring out jewelry from it that you wear it. And you see the ships plowing through it so that you look for His bounty, and you may be thankful.
16|15| And He placed firm mountains in the earth, that it does not shake you (as much), and rivers and roads so that you may find your way,
16|16| and landmarks; and with the stars they find their way.
16|17| Is one who creates like one who does not create? Do you not take notice?
16|18| And if you count God’s favor, you cannot count them. Indeed God is forgiving and merciful.
16|19| And God knows what you hide and what you disclose.
16|20| And those whom they call on other than God do not create anything, and they are created.
16|21| (They are) dead, not alive, and they do not realize when they will be raised.
16|22| Your god is the One god. So those who do not believe in the hereafter, their hearts are deniers, and they are arrogant.
16|23| Undoubtedly God knows what they hide and what they disclose, indeed He does not like the arrogant.
16|24| And when they are told: what did your Master send down? They say: stories of the earlier ones.
16|25| So that they carry their full burdens on the resurrection day, as well as some burdens of those whom they misguide without knowledge. Know that what they carry is bad.
16|26| Those before them has plotted, then God struck their building from the foundations, and then the roof fell down on them from above them, and the punishment came to them from somewhere they did not realize.
16|27| Then He humiliates them on the resurrection day and says: where are My (so called) partners that you used to oppose about them? Those who were given the knowledge say: indeed today the humiliation and the misery are upon the disbelievers.
16|28| Those whom the angels take their lives while wronging themselves, then they offer the submission (and say): we were not doing any bad (deed). Yes, indeed God knows well what you were doing.
16|29| So enter gates of hell, remaining in there forever. Place of the arrogant ones is certainly bad.
16|30| And those who controlled themselves are told: what did your Master send down? They say: good. For those who did good in this world there is a good (reward), and the home of the hereafter is certainly better. And the home of those who control themselves is certainly excellent.
16|31| They enter in eternal gardens which rivers flow through them. They have whatever they want in it. That is how God rewards those who control themselves.
16|32| They (the angels) say to those whom the angels take their lives while being good: peace (and well-being) upon you, enter the garden for what you were doing.
16|33| Do they (the disbelievers) wait for anything except that the angels come to them or your Master’s command comes (for their punishment)? That is how those before them acted. God did not wrong them, but they used to wrong themselves.
16|34| So the bad result of what they did happened to them, and they were surrounded by what they used to ridicule.
16|35| And those who associated (partners with God) said: if God wanted, we and our fathers would not have served anything other than Him, and we would not have forbidden anything other than His (prohibitions). That is how those before them acted. Are the messengers responsible for anything other than the clear preaching?
16|36| We have certainly raised a messenger among every group of people (saying): serve God and avoid the rebellious. God guided some among them, and some of them deserved the misguidance. So travel throughout the earth and see what the end of those who denied was.
16|37| Although you are eager for their guidance, indeed God does not guide those whom He misguides, and there is no helper for them.
16|38| They solemnly swear by God that God does not raise anyone who dies. Yes, it is a true promise (binding) on Him, but most people do not know.
16|39| So that He clarifies for them what they disagree about it, and so that those who disbelieved know that indeed they were liars.
16|40| Indeed Our word for anything when We want it, is that We say for it: be, and it will be.
16|41| And those who migrated for God after they were wronged, We shall provide them well in this world, and reward of the hereafter is certainly greater, if they knew,
16|42| those who persevered and they put their trust in their Master.
16|43| And We did not send (messengers) before you except men whom We revealed to them. So ask people of the reminder (people of the book) if you do not know.
16|44| (We sent them) with the clear proofs and the scriptures. And We sent down the reminder (Quran) to you so that you clarify for the people what was sent down to them, and that they may think.
16|45| Do those who plot bad (plots) feel safe from God making the earth swallow them, or the punishment coming to them from somewhere they do not realize?
16|46| Or He takes them when they are going back and forth, then they cannot disable/escape it?
16|47| Or He takes them in state of fear (or by wasting them away)? Indeed your Master is gentle and merciful.
16|48| Or did they not look at everything that God created which they incline their shadows to the right and to the left, showing humbleness for God, while they are submissive (and inferior)?
16|49| And every creature in the skies and on the earth and the angels show humbleness for God, and they are not arrogant.
16|50| They are afraid of their Master that is above them (and superior to them), and they (the angels) do what they are ordered.
16|51| And God said: do not take two gods, indeed He is One god, and fear only Me.
16|52| And everything in the skies and on the earth belongs to Him, and the way of life is permanently His. Are you cautious of other than God?
16|53| And whatever favor you have is from God, then when harm touches you, you cry out to Him.
16|54| Then when He removes the harm from you, immediately some of you associate (partners) with your Master,
16|55| to be ungrateful about what We gave them. So enjoy, then will know.
16|56| And they set aside a portion of what We provided them for that which they do not know. By God, you shall be questioned about what you used to make up.
16|57| And they assign daughters to God, He is flawless, and (they assign) for themselves what they desire.
16|58| And when the news of (birth of) a female is given to one of them, his face turns dark and he holds back his anger.
16|59| He hides from the people because of bad news he was given. Should he keep her with disgrace, or bury her in the ground? Know that what they judge is bad.
16|60| For those who do not believe in the hereafter is the bad example (and attribute), and for God is the highest example (and attribute). He is the powerful and the wise.
16|61| And if God takes the people (into punishment) for their wrongdoings, He would not leave any creature on it, but He postpones them for a limited period. And when their appointed time comes, they cannot put it back for an hour or put it forward.
16|62| And they assign to God what they dislike, and their tongue describes the lie that the good things are for them. No doubt that the fire is for them, and they are rushed (to it).
16|63| By God, We have certainly sent (messengers) to groups of people before you, but Satan beautified their actions for them, so today he is their supporter and there is a painful punishment for them.
16|64| And We only sent down the book (Quran) to you, so that you clarify for them that which they disagree about it, and as a guide and a mercy for people who believe.
16|65| And God sent down rain from the sky then He brought back the land to life with that after its death. Indeed there is a sign in that for people who listen.
16|66| And indeed there is a lesson for you in the livestock. We make you drink from what is inside their bellies, from between feces and blood, pure delicious milk for those who drink.
16|67| And from the fruits of date palms and the grapes you extract intoxicating drinks as well as good food. Indeed there is a sign in that for people who understand.
16|68| And your Master revealed to the honeybee to make homes from the mountains and from the trees and from what they construct.
16|69| Then eat from all the fruits and obediently follow your Master’s ways. A liquid of different colors (honey), in which there is healing for the people, comes out from its inside. Indeed there is a sign in that for people who think.
16|70| And God created you and then makes you die. And some of you are returned to the meanest part of the life, so that they do not know anything after knowing. Indeed God is knowledgeable and capable.
16|71| God preferred some over the others in regards to the provision. But those who were preferred would not give away (part) of their provision to whom their right hands own so that they become equal in it. Do they reject God’s favor?
16|72| And God made spouses for you from yourselves, and made children and grandchildren for you from your spouses, and provided you with good things. Do they believe in falsehood and disbelieve in God’s favor?
16|73| And they serve other than God that which does not own any provision for them from the skies or the earth, and they are not able.
16|74| So do not set the equivalents for God. Indeed God knows and you do not know.
16|75| God gave an example of an owned servant who has no power over anything, and someone whom We provided him with good provision from Us and he spends from it secretly and openly, are they equal? All praise belongs to God, but most of them do not know.
16|76| And God gave an example of two men, one of them is dumb and has no power over anything and he is a burden to his guardian/master and he does not bring any good wherever he directs him, is he equal to one who orders to justice and is on a straight path?
16|77| And the unseen of the skies and the earth belongs to God. And matter of the hour (of resurrection) is only like a blink of the eye or even shorter. Indeed God is capable of everything.
16|78| And God brought you out of your mothers’ wombs, not knowing anything, and He made the hearing and the sights and the hearts for you, so you may be thankful.
16|79| Did they not see the birds (flying) under control in the middle of the sky? Nothing keeps them except God. Indeed there are signs in that for people who believe.
16|80| And God made your houses a place of rest for you, and made homes (tents) for you from the skins of the livestock which you find them light on your travel day and  on your settling day (when you camp), and from their wools and furs and hairs household goods and  enjoyment for a while.
16|81| And God made shade for you from what He created and He made shelters for you in the mountains and made coats for you protecting you from the heat and coats protecting you in your battles. That is how He completes his favor upon you, so you may submit (to Him).
16|82| But if they turn away, then your responsibility is only the clear preaching.
16|83| They recognize God’s favor then they deny it, and most of them are ungrateful.
16|84| On a day that We raise a witness from every group, then those who disbelieved are not given permission, and they are not allowed to plea. 
16|85| And when those who did wrong see the punishment, then it is reduced for them, and they are not given any delay. 
16|86| And when those who associated see their partners (that they associated with God), they say: our Mater, these are our partners (of God), those whom we were calling on besides You. But they would throw the word back at them (saying): you are certainly liars.
16|87| On that day, they yield the submission to God, and what they used to make up abandons them.
16|88| We add punishment to the punishment of those who disbelieved and obstructed God's way, because they were committing corruption,
16|89| on a day that We raise from every group a witness against them from themselves, and We bring you as a witness against these. And We sent down the book to you explaining everything, and a guide and a mercy and good news for those who submit.
16|90| Indeed God orders to the justice and doing good and giving to the relatives (and close ones), and prohibits from the indecency and the wrong (and unacceptable) and the injustice. He advises you so you may take notice.
16|91| And fulfill your promise to God when you made a promise, and do not break your oaths after confirming it while you have made God as a guarantor. Indeed God knows what you do.
16|92| And do not be like her who unraveled her yarn, breaking it, after making it strong (by spinning it), by taking your oaths as a means of deception among you so that one group be more numerous (and powerful) than another group. Indeed God tests you by it, and on the resurrection day He shall clarify for you what you were disagreeing about it.
16|93| And if God wanted, He would have made you a single community (of faith), but He misguides anyone He wants, and He guides anyone He wants, and you shall be questioned about what you were doing.
16|94| And do not take your oaths as a means of deception among you, so a foot slips after its steadiness and you taste the suffering because you obstructed God’s way, and you have a great punishment. 
16|95| And do not sell your promise to God for a small price. Indeed what is with God is better for you, if you were to know.
16|96| What is with you perishes, and what is with God lasts. And We shall reward those who persevered, their wage better than what they used to do.
16|97| Anyone who does good work, be it a man or a woman, and is a believer, We shall give him life, a good life, and We shall reward them their wage better than what they used to do.
16|98| When you read the Quran, look for God’s protection from the cast out Satan.
16|99| Indeed he has no authority (or power) over those who believed and put their trust in their Master.
16|100| His power is only over those who take him as a friend, and those who associate (partners) with Him.
16|101| And when We substitute a sign in place of another sign, and God knows better what He sends down, they say: you are only a fabricator (and a liar). No, but most of them do not know.
16|102| Say: the Holy Spirit (Gabriel) brought it down from your Master with truth, to strengthen those who believed, and as a guide and a good news for those who submit.
16|103| And We certainly know that they say: it is only a human being who teaches him. The language of the person they refer to him is foreign, while this (Quran) is clear Arabic language.
16|104| Indeed God does not guide those who do not believe in God’s signs, and they have a painful punishment.
16|105| Those who make up the lie (and attribute it to God) are only those who do not believe in God’s signs, and they are the liars.
16|106| Whoever disbelieves in God after his belief, except anyone who does so unwillingly but his heart is at ease with the belief, but whoever opens his chest to the disbelief, God’s anger is on them, and they have a great punishment.
16|107| That is because they preferred this world's life over the hereafter, and that God does not guide the disbelieving people.
16|108| They are those whom God set a seal on their hearts and their ears and their eyes, and they are the negligent ones.
16|109| Without a doubt, indeed they are losers in the hereafter.
16|110| So indeed your Master (is forgiving) to those who migrated and tried hard and persevered after they were persecuted, indeed your Master is forgiving and merciful after that,
16|111| on a day that every person comes arguing for itself and each person is paid for what it did and they are wronged.
16|112| And God gave an example: a town that was safe and peaceful, its provision coming to it abundantly from every place, then it disbelieved in God’s favors, so God made them taste cover of the hunger and the fear because of what they were doing.
16|113| And certainly a messenger from among them has come to them, but they denied him, so the punishment took them while they were wrongdoers.
16|114| So eat from lawful good things that God provided for you, and be grateful for God’s favor if you serve Him.
16|115| He only forbade you the dead and the blood and the pork and what is offered up for other than God. But if anyone is forced without being desirous and not exceeding, then God is forgiving and merciful.
16|116| And do not say the lie that your tongue describes, that this is lawful and this is unlawful, to make up the lie (and attribute it) to God. Those who make up the lie (and attribute it) to God do not succeed,
16|117| a little enjoyment (in this life) and they have a painful punishment.
16|118| And to those who are Jewish, We prohibited what We told you in the past. And We did not wrong them, but they used to wrong to themselves.
16|119| So indeed your Master (is forgiving) to those who did wrong out of ignorance and then repented and straightened out after that, indeed your Master is forgiving and merciful after that.
16|120| Indeed Abraham was a leader, obedient to God, a monotheist and he was not of the polytheists.
16|121| Thankful for His favors, He chose him and guided him to a straight path.
16|122| And We gave him a good (life) in this world, and indeed he is among the righteous in the hereafter.
16|123| Then We revealed to you (Muhammad) to follow Abraham's faith, a monotheist, and he was not one of the polytheists.
16|124| The Sabbath was only made (a mandate) for those who disagreed about it, and on the resurrection day your Master certainly judges between them in what they were disagreeing about it.
16|125| Invite (people) to your Master’s way with the wisdom and the good advice, and debate with them in the best manner. Your Master knows best those who lost his way, and He knows best who the guided ones are.
16|126| And if you (want to) punish, then punish same as you were made to suffer it (and not more), and if you are patient, it is certainly better for the patient ones.
16|127| And be patient (and persevere), as your patience (and perseverance) is only from God. And do not be sad for them, and do not be upset over what they plot.
16|128| Indeed God is with those who control themselves and those who are good doers.
17|1| Glory to Him who took His servant by night from the Sacred Mosque to the Al-Aqsa Mosque which We blessed its surrounding, so that We show him some of Our signs. Indeed He hears all, sees all. 
17|2| And We gave Moses the book, and made it a guide for children of Israel (saying): do not take any advocate other than Me.
17|3| Descendants of those whom We carried with Noah (in the Ark), indeed he was a grateful servant.
17|4| And in the book We declared to children of Israel: you shall commit corruption in the land twice, you shall rise to a great superiority (and arrogance),
17|5| then when first promise of two comes, We would raise servants of Ours against you with awesome powers, then they enter your houses. This is a promise that was done.
17|6| Then We give you back the turnaround over them, and We help you with wealth and children, and We make you numerous persons.
17|7| If you do good, you do good for yourselves, and if you do bad, then it is for yourself. So, when the last promise comes, (We send your enemies) to sadden your faces and to enter the temple as they entered it the first time, and to destroy whatever they overcome with utmost destruction.
17|8| Perhaps your Master will have mercy on you. And if you return (to sin) We return (to punishment). And We made hell a prison for the disbelievers.
17|9| Indeed this Quran guides to that (way of life) which is most proper, and gives good news to the believers, those who do good works, that they have a great reward.
17|10| And for those who do not believe in the hereafter, We prepared a painful punishment for them.
17|11| The human being prays for the bad as he prays for the good, for the human being is very hasty (and impulsive and rash).
17|12| And We made the night and the day two signs, then We darkened the sign of the night, and made sign of the day visible so that you look for a bounty from your Master and that you know the number of years and the count (of other things). And We explained everything in full detail.
17|13| And We tied deeds of every human being around his neck, and on the resurrection day We bring it out for him, as a book which he sees it open.
17|14| (He will be told) read your book, today yourself is sufficient for accounting against you.
17|15| Anyone who is guided then he is only guided for his himself, and anyone who lost (the right path) then he only errs against himself. And no bearer bears the burden of another. And We are not punishers until We send a messenger.
17|16| And when We want to destroy any town, We instruct its rich ones (to obedience), then they disobey in it, then the word is justified against it, then We destroy it with utmost destruction.
17|17| And We destroyed many generations after Noah, and it is enough that your Master is well informed and watchful of His servants’ sins.
17|18| Anyone who desires the transient (this world’s life), We rush to him what We want for whom We want in it, then We put hell for him to enter it (and burn), condemned and banished.
17|19| And anyone who wants the hereafter and tries for it, as should be tried for it, and is a believer, then their efforts is appreciated (and rewarded).
17|20| We help them all, these and those, from your Master’s gift, and your Master’s gift is not held back (from anyone).
17|21| See how we preferred some over the others, and certainly the hereafter has greater levels and greater preference.
17|22| Do not set up other god with God, so you sit condemned and abandoned.
17|23| And your Master ordered that do not serve except Him, and be good to your parents. If one of them or both of them reaches old age with you, do not say ugh (or yuck) to them and do not snap at them (or drive them away), and talk to them honorably (and kindly).
17|24| And spread the wing of humility (and respect) for them out of kindness, and say: my Master, have mercy on them as they nurtured me from childhood.
17|25| Your Master knows best what is in your minds. If you are righteous, then indeed He is forgiving for all who are repentant (and turn to Him).
17|26| And give the relative (and close one) his due, as well as the needy and the traveler (in need), and do not spend wastefully (and excessively).
17|27| Indeed those who spend wastefully (and excessively) are brothers of the devils, and the devil is ungrateful to his Master.
17|28| And if you turn away from them looking for a mercy from your Master that you hope for it, then speak to them in soft (and courteous) words.
17|29| And do not make your hand chained to your neck (being tightfisted) and do not stretch it out to its utmost extent (being excessive) so you sit down blameworthy and regretful.
17|30| Indeed your Master increases the provision for anyone He wants and decreases it (for whom He wants). Indeed He is well informed and watchful of his servants.
17|31| And do not kill your children for fear of poverty, as We provide for them and for you. Killing them is indeed a great sin.
17|32| And do not go near adultery (and fornication), indeed it is indecent and a bad way.
17|33| And do not kill anyone as God made it sacred (or forbidden), except in just cause. And anyone who is killed wrongfully, then We have given his heir authority (to forgive or take ransom or retaliate). So do not be excessive in the killing, indeed he is helped.
17|34| And do not go near orphan’s property until he reaches maturity except in the best way. And fulfill the promise, as the promise is a responsibility (and will be questioned about).
17|35| And give full measure when you measure, and weigh with accurate scale. That is good and better in the end.
17|36| And do not follow what you don’t have knowledge of it. Indeed the ear and the eye and the heart, each of them is responsible for that.
17|37| And do not walk on the earth overjoyed (and selfishly), as you will never crack the earth and you will never reach the mountains in height.
17|38| Badness of all that is disliked by your Master.
17|39| That is from what your Master revealed to you of the wisdom. And do not set up another god with God, otherwise you will be thrown into hell blameworthy and banished. 
17|40| Did your Master choose sons for you, and He took daughters from the angels? Indeed you say an outrageous word.
17|41| And We have certainly explained (the truth) in various ways in this Quran so that they take notice, but it only increases their disgust (and hatred).
17|42| Say: if as they say there were gods with Him, then they would have certainly looked for a way toward the owner of the throne. 
17|43| Glory to Him (He is flawless) and He is greatly superior and above what they say.
17|44| The seven skies and the earth and everyone in them glorify Him. And there is nothing that does not glorify Him with His praise, but you do not understand their glorifying. Indeed He is patient and forgiving.
17|45| And when you read the Quran, We place an invisible barrier between you and those who do not believe in the hereafter.
17|46| And We put coverings on their hearts and a deafness in their ears that they do not understand it (the Quran),. And when you mention your Master’s oneness in the Quran, they turn their backs in disgust (and hatred).
17|47| We know better what they listen to it when they listen to you and when they talk secretly (and privately), when the wrongdoers say: you only follow a bewitched man.
17|48| See how they give examples of you, therefore they lost (the right path) and they cannot find a way.
17|49| And they said: are we raised in a new creation when we are bones and decomposed fragments?
17|50| Say: if you become stone or iron
17|51| or a creation which is great in your mind (you still will be resurrected). Then they are going to say: who returns us (to life)? Say: He who created you the first time.  Then they are going to shake their heads at you and say: when is that? Say: perhaps it is close,
17|52| a day that He calls you, and you answer with His praise, and you think that you only stayed (dead) for a little while.
17|53| And tell My servants to say that which is the best (and in the best manner). Indeed Satan brings about animosity between them. Indeed Satan is an obvious enemy for the human being.
17|54| Your Master knows you better. If He wants He has mercy on you or if He wants He punishes you. We did not send you as their advocate.
17|55| And your Master knows better everyone in the skies and on the earth. And We have certainly preferred some prophets over the others, and We gave David the Psalms (Zabur).
17|56| Say: call on those whom you claimed other than Him, they do not have any power to get rid of the trouble from you or change it.
17|57| Those whom they call on, they look for the mean to their Master, anyone of them who are closer (to God) and they hope for His mercy and they fear His punishment. Indeed your Master's punishment is to be avoided.
17|58| There is not any town that We do not destroy it or punish it with a severe punishment before the resurrection day. That is written down in the book.
17|59| And nothing prevented Us from sending the miracles except that the earlier ones denied it. And We gave Thamud the female camel, a visible (sign), then they did wrong to her. And We do not send the miracles except as a scare.
17|60| And (remember) when We said to you: indeed your Master surrounds (and dominates) the people. And We only made the dream that We showed you and the cursed tree in the Quran as a test for the people. And We scare them (by warning them), but it only increases their great rebellion.  
17|61| And (remember) when We said to the angels: be humble to Adam. They all showed humbleness except Iblis (Satan), he said: should I be humble to one You created from clay?
17|62| He (Satan) said: what is Your idea, this one that You honored above me, if you give me time until the resurrection day, I shall gain mastery over his descendants except a few (of them). 
17|63| He (God) said: go, and anyone of them who follows you, then indeed hell is your reward, a complete (and full) reward. 
17|64| And incite anyone of them you can with your voice and summon your cavalry and your men against them, and be their partner in their wealth and their children and promise them (all you want). Satan does not promise them anything except a delusion.
17|65| Indeed you have no authority (and power) over My servants, and your Master is sufficient as an advocate.
17|66| Your Master is the One who sails the ship through the sea for you so that you look for His bounty. Your Master is indeed merciful to you.
17|67| When the harm happens to you in the sea, whomever you call on abandons except Him. But when He saves you (and bring you back) to the land, you stay away (from Him). The human being is very ungrateful.
17|68| Do you feel safe that He does not makes you sink in a part of the land or He does not send you a sandstorm then you will not find any advocate for yourselves?
17|69| Or do you feel safe that He does not bring you back into it (the sea) another time and He sends you a hurricane of wind and drowns you because you disbelieved then you will not find a prosecutor (or anyone to sue) against Us for it.
17|70| And We have certainly honored the children of Adam and We carried them in the land and the sea, and We provided them with good things and We preferred them over most of what We created.
17|71| On a day that We call all people with their book of records (or their scripture or their leader), then whoever is given his book in his right hand are those who read their book (with pleasure) and they will not be wronged a bit.
17|72| And anyone who is blind in this (world), then he is blind in the hereafter, and far lost from a (right) way.
17|73| And they were about to tempt you away from what We revealed to you, so that you make up something different than that about Us (and attribute it to Us), and then they would have taken you as a friend.
17|74| And if We had not strengthened you, you would have almost leaned toward them a little bit.
17|75| Then We would certainly make you taste double/multiple (punishment) in the life and double/multiple in the death, and you would not have found any helper against Us.
17|76| They almost enticed/scared you off the land to drive you out of it, and then they would have only stayed for a short while after you. 
17|77| (This was Our) way with messengers that We have sent before you, and you do not find any change in Our way.
17|78| Perform the mandatory prayer from setting of the sun until darkness of the night and the dawn’s recital, and the dawn’s recital is witnessed. 
17|79| And stay awake part of the night with it, as an additional prayer for you, perhaps your Master raises you to a worthy position.
17|80| And say: my Master, make me enter a true entrance and make me exit a true exit (in whatever I do) and give me a helping power from You. 
17|81| And say: the truth came and falsehood died out. Falsehood is indeed perishable.
17|82| And We send down from the Quran that which is a cure and a mercy for the believers, and it only adds to the loss of the wrongdoers.
17|83| And when We do favor to the human being, he stays away and goes on his side (and withdraws), and when the badness touches him, he becomes hopeless. 
17|84| Say: everyone acts according to his character (and his development), and your Master knows better who is better guided to a (right) way.
17|85| And they ask you about the spirit (of the revelation). Say: the spirit (of the revelation) is my Master’s affair, and you are only given a little knowledge.
17|86| If We want, We shall take away what We revealed to you, then you do not find any advocate about it for yourself against Us,
17|87| except a mercy from your Master. Indeed His grace upon you is great.
17|88| Say: if humans and Jinn join together to bring like this Quran, they cannot bring like it, even if they support each other.
17|89| We have certainly explained all kind of examples for the people in this Quran, but most of the people refuse (to accept) except disbelief. 
17|90| And they said: we will never believe in you until you make a spring flows out of the earth for us,
17|91| or you have a garden of date palms and grapes and you make rivers flow through it abundantly,
17|92| or you make the sky fall on us in pieces as you claimed, or bring God and angels face to face (with us),
17|93| or you have a house from gold or you go up into the sky, and we will never believe in your going up until you bring down a book for us that we read it. Say: glory to my Master (He is flawless), am I not but a human being that is (sent as) a messenger?
17|94| And nothing prevented the people to believe when the guidance came to them except that they said: did God send a human being as a messenger?
17|95| Say: if there were angels walking comfortably on the earth, We would have certainly sent down to them an angel from the sky as a messenger.
17|96| Say: God is enough as witness between me and you, indeed He is informed and watchful of His servants.
17|97| And whomever God guides then he is guided, and whomever He misguides you will never find any guardian (or protector) for them other than Him. On the resurrection day, We gather them on their faces (facing downward) blind and dumb and deaf. Their housing is hell, and whenever it subsides, We increase the burning fire for them.
17|98| That is their payback because they disbelieved in Our signs and said: are we raised in a new creation when we are bones and decomposed fragments?
17|99| Or did they not see that God the One who created the skies and the earth is able to create like them (again)? And He made an appointed time for them that there is no doubt about it. The wrongdoers refuse (anything) but disbelief.
17|100| Say: if you owned the treasures of my Master’s mercy, then you would have held them for fear of spending (and finishing them). The human being is tightfisted.
17|101| And We have certainly given Moses nine clear miracles. Ask children of Israel when he (Moses) came to them, and Pharaoh told him: Moses, I think you are bewitched.
17|102| He (Moses) said: you have certainly known that none has sent down these (miracles) except the Master of the skies and the earth as enlightenment, and I think that you will be destroyed Pharaoh.
17|103| Then he wanted to scare them off from the land, but We drowned him and those who were with him altogether.
17|104| And We said to the children of Israel after him: inhabit the land, and when the promise of the hereafter comes, We bring you as a mixed crowd.
17|105| And We truly sent it (Quran) down, and it came down with the truth, and We only sent you as a giver of good news and a warner.
17|106| And (it is) a Quran which We divided it (and sent it part by part), so you read it to the people at intervals (and gradually), and We sent it down gradually.
17|107| Say: whether you believe in it or you do not believe, indeed when it is read to those who were given the knowledge before it, they fall down on their chins (faces) being humble.
17|108| And they say: glory to our Master (He is flawless), indeed the promise of our Master is fulfilled.
17|109| And they fall down on their chins (faces) crying, and it (Quran) adds to their humility.
17|110| Say: call on God or call on the beneficent, whichever one you call on (it makes no difference), the good names (and attributes) are for Him. And do not be loud in your mandatory prayer and do not be quiet with it, and look for a way between that.
17|111| And say: all praise belongs to God, the One who did not take a child, and there is no partner for Him in the rule, and there is no supporter (or helper) for Him out of the weakness, and magnify Him greatly.
18|1| All praise belongs to God, the One who sent down the book to His servant, and did not place any distortion in it.
18|2| Straight (and without any distortion) to warn of a severe punishment from Him and to give good news to the believers who do good works that there is a good reward for them,
18|3| staying in it forever.
18|4| And warns those who say: God took a child.
18|5| They have no knowledge of it, and neither did their fathers. Word coming out of their mouths is serious. They only say a lie.
18|6| So you may kill yourself from sorrow over their actions if they do not believe in this saying.
18|7| And We made all that is on the earth as decoration for it, so that We test them as to which one of them does better work.
18|8| And indeed We make whatever is on it, a barren wasteland.
18|9| Did you think that inhabitants of the cave and the inscription were among Our amazing signs?
18|10| When the youths took shelter in the cave then they said: our Master, give us mercy form You and arrange a sensible conduct for us in our affairs.
18|11| And We sealed their ears (and made them sleep) in the cave for a number of years. 
18|12| Then We woke them up, so that We know which of the two groups was better at counting the time they stayed (asleep).
18|13| We tell you their story in truth. Indeed they were youths who believed in their Master and We increased their guidance.
18|14| And We strengthened their hearts with patience when they stood up, and they said: our Master is Master of the skies and the earth, we never call on any god other than Him, (for if we did) then we have certainly said an outrageous (word).
18|15| These are our people who took god other than Him, why do they not bring a clear reason for them? Who is more wrong than someone who makes up a lie and attributes it to God?
18|16| And (they told each other:) when you stay away from them and what they serve other than God, then take shelter in the cave, so your Master opens up His mercy on you and set up ease for you in your affairs.
18|17| And you see the sun when it rises, it turns toward the right side of their cave, and when it sets, it passes them from the left, while they are in the spacious part of it (in the middle of the cave). That is among God’s signs. Whomever God guides then he is guided, and whomever He misguides then you will never find any guardian for him guiding to the right way.
18|18| And you think of them as awake while they are sleep, and We turn them to the right and to the left, and their dog stretches out its forelegs toward the entrance. If you find out about them you would turn away from them running away and you would be filled with fear of them. 
18|19| And that is how We woke them up, so that they may ask each other (how long they stayed sleep). A spokesperson among them said: how long did you stay? They said: we stayed a day or part of a day. They said: your Master knows better how long you stayed. So send one of you with this money of yours to the city, then he should see which of them has the cleanest food, then he should bring you a supply of it, and he should be careful and let no one find out about you.
18|20| Indeed if they learn about you, they stone you or make you return to their faith and you will never ever prosper.
18|21| And that is how We made (others) acquainted with them, so that they know that God’s promise is true and that there is no doubt about the hour. When they disputed about their affair among themselves, they said: build a structure over them, their Master knows better about them. Those who won about their affair said: we shall build a temple over them.
18|22| (Some) are going to say: three, their fourth being their dog. While (others) say: five, their sixth being their dog. Throwing stone in the dark, and (others) say: seven, their eight being their dog. Say: my Master knows their number better as only a few know them (their number), so do not argue about them except in a superficial argument, and do not ask opinion of any of them about them.
18|23| And do not say about anything: I will do that tomorrow.
18|24| Unless (you say) if God wants. And remember your Master when you forget and say: perhaps my Master guides me to a closer to right way than this. 
18|25| And they stayed in their cave three hundred years, and added nine (if counting in lunar years).
18|26| Say: God knows better how long they stayed, the unseen of the skies and the earth belongs to Him, and how well He sees and He hears! They do not have any protector other than Him, and He does not make anyone partner in His command (and statute).
18|27| And read what was revealed to you from your Master’s book. No one can change His words, and you never find any refuge other than Him.
18|28| And be patient with those who call on their Master in the morning and the evening, looking for His attention, and do not overlook them wanting luxury of this world’s life, and do not obey anyone whom We made his heart pay no attention to remembering Us and followed his desires and he is excessive in his affairs.
18|29| And say: the truth is from your Master, so anyone who wants then let him believe and anyone who wants then let him disbelieve. Indeed We prepared a fire for the wrongdoers that its canopy surrounds them. And if they ask for help, they will be helped with water like melted metal (or burning oil) that burns the faces. What a bad drink and a bad resting place.
18|30| Indeed those who believed and did good works, (know that) We would not waste the reward of anyone who does good work.
18|31| Eternal gardens are for them, which rivers flow through them, they are adorned with bracelets of gold in it and they wear clothes of green fine silk and heavy silk (brocade), leaning on sofas in it. What a good reward and a good resting place.
18|32| And give them an example of two men. We gave two gardens of grapes to one of them and We enclosed them with date palms and We placed a plantation between them.
18|33| Both gardens yielded their produce, and did not fail in that at all, and We made a river flow through them.
18|34| And (their) produce was for him. Then he said to his friend while talking to him: I am more wealthy than you and I am more powerful in (number of) men.
18|35| Ad he entered his garden while he was wrong to himself, he said: I do not think that this (garden) will ever ruin,
18|36| and I do not think the hour establishes, and even if I am returned to my Master, I shall certainly find better than this in return.
18|37| His friend said to him while talking to him: do you disbelieve in the One who created you from dust, then from fertilized egg (zygote), then He shaped you as a man?
18|38| But as for me, (I say:) God is my Master and I do not associate anyone (as partner) with my Master,
18|39| and when you entered your garden, why did you not say that whatever God wants, there is no power except by God? If you see me (as having) less than you in wealth and children,
18|40| then perhaps my Master gives me better than your garden and sends a thunderbolt from the sky on it, so it becomes a slippery wasteland,
18|41| or its water dries up, and you can never reclaim it.
18|42| And his produce was surrounded (by destruction), then he began to twirl his hands (in regret) over what he had spent in it, and now it was fallen down on its trellises, and he said: I wish I did not associate anyone (as partner) with my Master.
18|43| And there was not any group to help him other than God, and he could not help himself.
18|44| There (he realized that) the protection belongs to the true God, He is best in reward and best in outcome.
18|45| And give them example of this world’s life: it is like rain that We sent down from the sky, then the plants of the earth mixed with it (and grew), then it became dried straw that the winds scatter it. And God is able to do everything.
18|46| Wealth and children are decoration (and luxuries) of this world’s life while the lasting good works are better for a reward with your Master and better to hope for.
18|47| And on a day that We set the mountains in motion and you see the earth appears as a flatland, and We gather them, and We do not leave any one of them out.
18|48| And they are presented to your Master in rows (and they will be told): you have certainly come to Us as We created you the first time, but you claimed that We never made an appointment time for you.
18|49| And the book (of records) is placed, then you see the guilty ones afraid of what is in it, and they say: woe to us, what is with this book that does not leave out any small or any large (deed) without taking it into account. And they find whatever they did present (in the book), and your Master does not wrong anyone.
18|50| And (remember) when We said to the angels to be humble to Adam, then they humbled except Iblis (Satan) who was of the Jinn, so He disobeyed his Master’s order. Do you take him and his descendants as your supporters instead of Me while they are your enemies. What a bad exchange for the wrongdoers
18|51| I did not make them witness creation of the skies and the earth or creation of themselves, and I did not take those who misguide as an assistant.
18|52| And on a day when He says call out those whom you claimed to be My partners, then they call on them, but they would not answer them, and We put a steep cliff (and a place of destruction) between them.
18|53| And the guilty ones see the fire and they think that they are to fall into it, and they do not find any escape from it.
18|54| And We have certainly explained every kind of example for people in this Quran. And the human being, more than anything, is argumentative.
18|55| And nothing prevented the people to believe and ask forgiveness from their Master when the guidance came to them except that (they would expect) the ways of the earlier ones come to them or the punishment comes to them face to face.
18|56| We did not send the messengers except as givers of good news and warners. And those who disbelieved argue with falsehood to disprove the truth with it, and they took My signs and what they were warned as a joke.
18|57| And who is more wrong than someone who is reminded of his Master's signs then he stays away from them and forgets what his hands sent ahead (what he did). Indeed We placed a cover on their hearts that they do not understand it (Quran) and a deafness in their ears (so they don't hear it), and if you call them to the guidance they will never ever be guided.
18|58| And your Master is the forgiving, having mercy. If He was to take them to account for what they did, He would have certainly rushed the punishment for them, but there is an appointed time for them, from which they never find a refuge.
18|59| And We destroyed those towns when they did wrong, and We set an appointed time for their destruction.
18|60| And (remember) when Moses said to his young companion: I continue on until I reach the junction of the two seas or I go on for a long time.
18|61| So when they reached the junction of the two (seas), they forgot their fish and it took its way drifting into the sea.
18|62| So when they went beyond (the junction), he said to his young companion: bring us our meal, we have certainly got tired in this trip of ours.
18|63| He said: did you notice that when we stayed on the rock and I forgot the fish, only Satan made me forget to mention it, and it amazingly took its way into the sea.
18|64| He (Moses) said: that is where we were looking for. So they returned backtracking on their footsteps.
18|65| Then they found a servant from Our servants whom We gave him kindness from Us and taught him (some) knowledge from Us.
18|66| Moses said to him: may I follow you that you teach me from what you were taught of  good sense (and knowledge)?
18|67| He said: you can never be patient with me,
18|68| how can you be patient about what you are not familiar with any knowledge of it?
18|69| He (Moses) said: God willing, you are going to find me patient and I will not disobey you in any matter.
18|70| He said: so if you follow me, then do not ask me about anything until I bring about mentioning of it for you. 
18|71| So they went on until when they got on the boat, and he made a hole in it. He (Moses) said: did you make a hole in it to drown its passengers? You have certainly committed a terrible thing.
18|72| He said: did I not say to you that you can never be patient with me?
18|73| He (Moses) said: forgive me for what I forgot, and do not make me suffer difficulty (and don't be hard on me) in my affair.
18|74| So they went on until when they met a young man, then he killed him. He (Moses) said: did you kill an innocent person without (him killing) a person? You have certainly committed an awful thing.
18|75| He said: did I not say to you that you can never be patient with me?
18|76| He (Moses) said: if I ask you about anything after that, then do not keep me in your company, for you have got an excuse from me.
18|77| So they went on until when they came to inhabitants of a town, they asked its inhabitants for food, but they refused to entertain them. Then they found a wall in it that was about to fall down, so he set it up straight. He (Moses) said: if you wanted, you could have taken a wage for it.
18|78| He said: this is separation between me and you. I am going to tell you the interpretation of what you could not be patient about it.
18|79| As for the boat, it belonged to some needy people working in the sea, then I decided to damage it because a king was after them who would take every boat by force.
18|80| As for the young man, his parents were believers, and we feared that he would press them to rebellious and disbelief.
18|81| So we wanted that their Master substitute for them a better (son) than him in integrity and closer to kindness.
18|82| And as for the wall, it belonged to two young orphan boys in the city, and under it there was a treasure for them, and their father was righteous, so your Master decided that they should reach their maturity to take out their treasure as a kindness from your Master. And I did not do it on my own accord. This is interpretation of what you could not be patient about it.
18|83| And they ask you about Zul-Qarnain. Say: I am going to recite to you a mention of him.
18|84| Indeed We established him on the earth, and we gave him means of everything.
18|85| Then he followed a way,
18|86| until when he reached where the sun sets, he found (perceived) it setting into a dark murky spring, and found a group of people by it. We said: Zul-Qarnain, would you punish them or would you treat them with goodness?
18|87| He said: as for anyone who does wrong then I will punish him, then he is returned to his Master and He punishes him with an awful punishment,
18|88| and as for anyone who believes and does good work, then there is the good reward for him, and we are going to issue easy order for him.
18|89| Then he followed (another) way,
18|90| until when he reached where the sun rises, he found it rising on a group that We did not make any cover for them other than it (the sun).
18|91| That is how it was, and We have thoroughly known about what knowledge he had with him of .
18|92| Then he followed (another) way,
18|93| until when he reached between the two obstacles (mountains), beside them he found a group who could hardly understand a word.
18|94| They said: Zul-Qarnain, indeed Ya’juj (Gog) and Ma’juj (Magog) commit corruption on the land, so may we give you a payment, that you make an obstacle between us and them?
18|95| He said: what my Master established me in it is better, so help me with manpower, I make a barricade between you and them.
18|96| Bring me chunks of the iron. Until when he leveled between the two mountains. He said: blow. Until when he made it (look) as a fire. He said: bring me melted copper to pour over it.
18|97| So they (Ya’juj and Ma’juj) could not climb it and they could not dig through it.
18|98| He said: this is a mercy from my Master, so when the promise of my Master comes, He levels it to the ground, and my Master’s promise is true.
18|99| And on that day, We leave some of them roll among others, and the trumpet is blown, then We gather them altogether.
18|100| And on that day, We present hell to the disbelievers, in plain view,
18|101| those whose eyes were in a cover from My remembrance, and they could not hear (the truth).
18|102| Did those who disbelieved think that they take My servants as their protectors instead of Me? Indeed We prepared hell for the disbelievers as an entertainment.
18|103| Say: should We inform you about the worst losers' actions?
18|104| (Works of) those whose effort is lost in this world’s life and they think indeed they do good work.
18|105| They are those who disbelieved in their Master's signs and in meeting Him (in the hereafter), so their works became useless, and We do not assign any weight to them on the resurrection day.
18|106| That is their payback, hell, because they disbelieved and took My signs and My messengers as a joke.
18|107| Indeed those who believed and did good works, they have gardens of the paradise as an entertainment,
18|108| remaining in there forever, and they will not look for moving from it.
18|109| Say: if the sea becomes ink for (writing) the words of my Master, the sea certainly run out before the words of my Master run out, even if we bring another (sea) like it as help
18|110| Say: I am only a human being like you, it is revealed to me that your god is the One god, so whoever is hoping to meet his Master, then he should do good work and he should not make any partner in serving his Master.
19|1| K.H.Y.A.S. (Kaf. Ha. Ya. Ain. Sud.)
19|2| (This is) a reminder of your Master’s mercy to His servant Zachariah.
19|3| When he called his Master, a private calling.
19|4| He said: my Master, indeed my bones have weakened and my head has turned white (from old age), and I have not been unhappy about praying to you, my Master. 
19|5| And indeed I am afraid of my relatives after me (when I am dead), and my wife is infertile, so give me an heir from Yourself,
19|6| to inherit from me and inherit from Jacob’s family. And my Master, make him pleasing.
19|7| (He was told): Zachariah, indeed We give you good news of a boy, his name is Yahya (John the Baptist), We did not give anyone his name (or attribute) in the past.
19|8| He said: my Master, how can there be a son for me while my wife is infertile and I have reached the very old age.
19|9| He (the angel) said: it is so, your Master says: it is easy for Me, and I have created you in the past while you were nothing.
19|10| He said: my Master, give me a sign. He said: your sign is that you will not speak to the people for three nights (being) sound (and healthy).
19|11| So he went out of the chamber (place of prayer) to his people, and revealed to them (by sign language) to glorify (God) morning and evening.
19|12| Yahya, take the book firmly. And We gave him the wisdom from childhood,
19|13| and sympathy and purity (and integrity) from Us, and he was in control of himself,
19|14| and good (and kind) to his parent, and he was not a disobeying bully.
19|15| And peace (and well-being) upon him the day he was born and the day he dies and the day he is raised to life. 
19|16| And mention Mary in the book, when she withdrew from her family to an eastern place.
19|17| She took a partition (to separate herself) from them, then We sent Our spirit (Gabriel) to her, and he looked like a perfect human being to her.
19|18| She said: I look for protection of the beneficent from you, if you control yourself (then get away from me).
19|19| He said: I am only a messenger of your Master to present you a pure (and righteous) boy.
19|20| She said: how can I have a son while no man has ever touched me, and I was not unchaste.
19|21| He said: so it is, your Master says: it is easy for Me, and We make him a sign for the people and a mercy from Us, and it is a matter already decided.
19|22| So she conceived him, and withdrew to a remote place with him.
19|23| The pain of childbirth drove her to trunk of the palm tree. She said: I wish I was dead before this and I was completely forgotten.
19|24| Then (a voice) called her from under her that do not be sad, your Master has placed a stream under you.
19|25| And shake trunk of the palm tree towards you and it drops fresh ripe dates on you.
19|26| So eat and drink and be cheerful. If you see any human being, then say: indeed I pledged a fast for the beneficent, so I never talk to any human being today.
19|27| Then she brought him to her people, carrying him. They said: Mary, you have committed an unprecedented thing.
19|28| Sister of Aaron, your father was not a bad man and your mother was not unchaste. 
19|29| Then she pointed to him. They said: how can we talk to any child who is the cradle?
19|30| He said: indeed I am God’s servant, He gave me the book and made me a prophet,
19|31| and He made me blessed wherever I am, and He instructed me to the mandatory prayer and the mandatory charity as long as I live,
19|32| and good (and kind) to my mother, and He did not make me a miserable bully.
19|33| And peace (and well-being) upon me on a day I was born, and a day that I die, and a day I am raised to life. 
19|34| That is (the story of) Jesus, son of Mary, a true word that they doubt about it.
19|35| It is not for God to take a child, He is flawless. When He decides on an issue, then He just says for it: be, and it will be.
19|36| And (Jesus said): indeed God is my Master and your Master, so serve Him, this is  straight path.
19|37| Then the groups disagreed among themselves, so woe to those who disbelieved in seeing the great day (the resurrection day).
19|38| How well they hear and see on a day they come to Us! But today the wrongdoers are in obvious error.
19|39| And warn them of day of the regret, when the issue is decided while they are in negligence and they do not believe.
19|40| Indeed We inherit the earth and whoever is on it and they are returned to Us.
19|41| And mention Abraham in the book, he was a truthful prophet.
19|42| When he said to his father: my father, why do you serve that which does not hear and does not see and is of no use to you at all?
19|43| My father, indeed some of the knowledge has come to me that did not come to you, so follow me, I guide you to a proper path.
19|44| My father, do not serve Satan, indeed Satan is rebellious against the beneficent.
19|45| My father, I am afraid that a punishment from the beneficent touches you, so you will be a friend of Satan.
19|46| He said: Abraham, do you hate my gods? If you do not stop, I shall stone you, and get away from me for a long while. 
19|47| He said: peace (and well-being) upon you, I am going to ask forgiveness for you from my Master, indeed he is kind to me.
19|48| I stay away from you and what you call on other than God, and I call on my Master, perhaps I will not be unhappy with prayer to my Master.
19|49| So when he stayed away from them and what they served other than God, We gave him Isaac and Jacob, and We made each of them a prophet.
19|50| And We gave them from Our mercy, and We gave them a true and high fame.
19|51| And mention Moses in the book. Indeed he was devoted, and he was a messenger and a prophet.
19|52| And We called him from the right side of the mountain (Mount Sinai), and made him close for a private talk.
19|53| And We gave him from Our mercy his brother Aaron, a prophet.
19|54| And mention Ishmael in the book. Indeed he was true to the promise and he was a messenger and a prophet.
19|55| And he used to order his family to the mandatory prayer and the mandatory charity, and he was pleasing in his Master's view..
19|56| And mention Idris (Enoch) in the book. Indeed he was a truthful prophet.
19|57| And We raised him to an elevated position.
19|58| They are those whom God favored upon them among the prophets from descendant of Adam and from those whom We carried with Noah (in the Ark) and from descendant of Abraham and Israel (Jacob), and from those whom We guided and We chose. When signs of  the beneficent were read to them, they fell down prostrating (being humble) and crying.
19|59| Then successors succeeded after them who eliminated (and neglected) the mandatory prayer and followed their desires, so they will face (the result) of (being) wrong.
19|60| Except anyone who repented, and believed and did good work, then they enter the garden and will not be wronged a bit. 
19|61| Eternal gardens which the beneficent promised His servants as the unseen. Indeed His promise is coming.
19|62| They do not hear any useless (talk) in there, but only peace (and well-being), and they have their provision (and food) in it, morning and evening (and all through the day).
19|63| This is the garden that We leave to Our servants who control themselves.
19|64| And we (angels) do not come down except by your Master's command, whatever in front of us and whatever behind us and whatever between that belongs to Him. And your Master is not forgetful.
19|65| (He is) Master of the skies and the earth and whatever between them, so serve Him and be persistent in His servitude. Do you know anyone with the same name (or attributes) as Him?
19|66| And the human being says: will I be brought back to life after I am dead?
19|67| Or does the human being not remember that We created him in the past while he was nothing?
19|68| And by your Master, We shall gather them and the devils then We shall bring them in attendance around hell on their knees.
19|69| Then We shall pick out from every group those of them who were more unruly against the beneficent.
19|70| And We certainly know better those who deserve it, entering (and burning).
19|71| And there is not any of you that will not arrive at it. This is an unavoidable decision of your Master.
19|72| Then We save those who controlled themselves, and We leave the wrongdoers in it on their knees.
19|73| And when Our clear signs are read to them, those who disbelieved say to those who believed: which one of the two groups is in better position and in better company? 
19|74| And We destroyed many generations before them who were better in assets and in appearance.
19|75| Say: anyone who is in error, then the beneficent extends an extension to him, until when they see what they are promised, either the punishment or the hour (of resurrection), then they are going to know who is in a worse position and weaker in forces.
19|76| And God increases guidance of those who are guided. And the lasting good works has a better reward with your Master and has a better return.
19|77| Did you see the one who disbelieved in Our signs and said: I will certainly be given wealth and children.
19|78| Did he know the unseen or did he take a promise from the beneficent?
19|79| Not at all, We are going to write what he says, and We extend an extension for him from the punishment.
19|80| And We inherit from him whatever he says and he comes to Us individually.
19|81| And they took gods other than God to be (source of) power (and honor) for them.
19|82| Not at all, they are going to deny their servitude, and will be an adversary against them.
19|83| Did you not see that We sent the devils to the disbelievers to encourage them with encouragement?
19|84| So do not be in a hurry against them, We only count a number for them.
19|85| A day that We gather those who controlled themselves as a delegation to the beneficent,
19|86| and We are going to drive the guilty ones to hell in thirst.
19|87| They do not have power of the mediation except anyone who took a promise from the beneficent.
19|88| And they said: the beneficent took a child.
19|89| You have certainly committed a horrible thing.
19|90| And the skies are about to tear from it and the earth is about to split wide open and the mountains are about to fall down collapsing,
19|91| that they designate a child to the beneficent.
19|92| It is not becoming for the beneficent to take a child.
19|93| Everyone in the skies and the earth only come to the beneficent as servant.
19|94| He has certainly taken them into account and has counted their number. 
19|95| And each of them comes to the resurrection day individually.
19|96| Indeed the beneficent is going to put love (and friendship) for those who believed and did good works.
19|97| So We only made it (Quran) easy in your language, for you to give good news to those who control themselves with it, and to warn contentious (and hostile) people with it.
19|98| And We destroyed many generations before them. Do you feel any one of them or hear any sound from them? 
20|1| T. H. (Ta. Ha.) 
20|2| We did not send down the Quran to you to make you unhappy.
20|3| But as a reminder for anyone who fears (God).
20|4| A sending down from Him who created the earth and the high skies,
20|5| the beneficent, settled on the throne.
20|6| Everything in the skies and on the earth and whatever between them and whatever under the ground belongs to Him.
20|7| And whether you speak loudly (or not), He knows the secret and more hidden.
20|8| God, there is no god except Him. The good names (and attributes) are for Him.
20|9| And did the story of Moses come to you?
20|10| When he saw a fire, then he said to his family: wait, indeed I saw a fire, maybe I bring you a burning stick from it or find guidance at the fire.
20|11| So when he came to it, he was called: Moses,
20|12| Indeed I am your Master, so take off your shoes, you are in the sacred valley of Tuwa. 
20|13| and I chose you, so listen to what is revealed (to you):
20|14| Indeed I am God, there is no god except Me, so serve Me and perform the mandatory prayer to remember Me.
20|15| Indeed the hour is coming. I want to keep it hidden, so that every person is rewarded by what he tries.
20|16| So do not let those who do not believe in it and follow their desires, turn you away from it, otherwise you perish.
20|17| Moses, what is that in your right hand?
20|18| He said: it is my cane, I lean on it and I chop off the leaves for my sheep with it, and I have other uses for it.
20|19| He (God) said: Moses, throw it (down). 
20|20| So he threw it, and suddenly it turned into a fast moving serpent.
20|21| He (God) said: take it and do not fear, We are going to return it to its original shape.
20|22| And put your hand under your arm, it comes out white without any disease, as another miracle.
20|23| So that We show you some of Our greater miracles.
20|24| Go to Pharaoh, indeed he rebelled.
20|25| He said: my Master, expand my chest (and give me patience),
20|26| and make my task easy for me,
20|27| and open the knot from my tongue (and allow me to speak clearly),
20|28| so they understand my word,
20|29| and assign me an assistant from my family,
20|30| my brother Aaron,
20|31| to back me up with him,
20|32| and make him partner in my task,
20|33| so that we glorify You much,
20|34| and we remember You much,
20|35| Indeed You are observant of us.
20|36| He (God) said: Moses, your request is granted,
20|37| And We have certainly favored upon you another time
20|38| when We revealed to your mother what was revealed,
20|39| that throw him in the box, then throw it in the sea/river, then the sea/river should throw it on the shore, and an enemy of Me and an enemy of him takes him. And I threw My affection on you so that you are brought up under My eye (and My observation).
20|40| (Remember) when your sister walked (to them) and said: should I show you someone to take care of him? So We returned you to your mother so that her eyes are cooled (and she is cheered up) and she would not be sad. And you killed a person, then We saved you from the sadness and We tested you with tests. Then you stayed with people of Midian (people of Shu'aib) for years, then you came as destined, Moses.
20|41| And I made you (and chose you) for Myself (to communicate My message to children of Israel and Pharaoh).
20|42| You and your brother go with My miracles and do not slack off in remembering Me.
20|43| Both of you go to Pharaoh, indeed he rebelled.
20|44| Then say to him in gentle words, so that he may take notice or fear.
20|45| They said: our Master, we fear that he goes too far against us (and he rushes to punish us) or that he rebels.
20|46| He (God) said: do not fear, indeed I am with you, I hear and I see.
20|47| So you two go to him and say: we are messengers of your Master, so send the children of Israel with us and do not punish them, we have brought you a miracle from your Master, and peace (and well-being) on anyone who follows the guidance.
20|48| Indeed it has been revealed to us that the punishment is on anyone who denies and turns away.
20|49| He said: Moses, who is your Master?
20|50| He (Moses) said: our Master is the One who gave everything its creation, then guided (it).
20|51| He said: so, what about the previous generations?
20|52| He (Moses) said: its knowledge is with my Master in a book, my Master does not make mistake and does not forget.
20|53| The One who made the earth a bed for you (to rest on), and inserted roadways in it for you, and sent down rain from the sky, then We brought out various types of plants with it.
20|54| Eat (from them) and pasture your livestock. Indeed there are signs in that for people of the intellect.
20|55| We created you from it (the earth) and We return you into it and We bring you out of it another time.
20|56| And We have certainly shown him (Pharaoh) Our miracles, each of them, but he denied and refused.
20|57| He said: Moses, did you come to us to drive us out of our land with your magic?
20|58| We shall bring you a magic like it, so make an appointment between us, which neither we nor you break it, in a level (and impartial) place.
20|59| He said: your appointment is day of the festival and if the people gather before noon.
20|60| So Pharaoh went away and put his plan together, then he came (back).
20|61| Moses said to them: woe to you, do not make up a lie (and attribute it) to God, otherwise He destroys you with a punishment, and anyone who made up (lies) has failed.
20|62| So they argued about their affair among themselves, and they kept their private conversation secret.
20|63| They said: these are two magicians who want to drive you out of your land with their magic, and do away with your outstanding (religious) way.
20|64| So get your plan together, then come as a unit, and whoever overcomes today has succeeded.
20|65| They said: Moses, do you throw or are we to throw first?
20|66| He said: no, you throw (first). So suddenly their ropes and their canes appeared to him as if they were moving fast because of their magic,
20|67| Then Moses had a sensation of fear in himself.
20|68| We said: do not fear, indeed you are superior,
20|69| and throw down what is in your right hand (your cane), it swallows what they produced. Indeed what they produced is only a magician’s trick, and the magician does not succeed wherever he goes.
20|70| So the magicians fell prostrating (showing humbleness), and they said: we believed in the Master of Aaron and Moses.
20|71| He (Pharaoh) said: did you believe in Him/him before I give you permission? Indeed he is your senior, the one who taught you the magic, I shall cut off your hands and your feet on opposite sides, and I shall crucify you on the trunks of the palm tree, and you shall know punishment of which one of us is more severe and more lasting.
20|72| They (the magicians) said: we never prefer you to what came to us from the clear proofs (evidences) and to the One who created us, so decide what you want to decide, for you only decide in this world’s life.
20|73| Indeed we believed in our Master so that He may forgive us our faults and the magic that you forced us to it, and God is better and more lasting.
20|74| Indeed anyone who comes to his Master guilty, then indeed hell is for him, and he does not die in it and he does not live.
20|75| And anyone who comes to Him as a believer who has done good works then they have high rank (and status).
20|76| Eternal gardens which rivers flow through them, remaining in there forever, and that is reward of anyone who purifies (and absolves).
20|77| And We have certainly revealed to Moses that travel by night with My servants, and make a dry path for them in the sea, and do not be afraid of being overtaken (by Pharaoh) and do not fear (from drowning in the sea).
20|78| So Pharaoh followed them with his troops, then the sea covered them with what covered them (and they drowned).
20|79| And Pharaoh misguided his people and he did not guide.
20|80| Children of Israel, We have saved you from your enemy, and We made an appointment with you on the right side of the mountain (Mount Sinai), and We sent down Manna and Salwa (two kind of edible foods) to you.
20|81| Eat from good things that We provided you and do not rebel in it, otherwise My anger comes downs upon you, and anyone whom My anger comes down upon him, then he has fallen down.
20|82| And indeed I am very forgiving to anyone who repents and believes and does good works, and then stays rightly guided,
20|83| and Moses, what made you rush ahead of your people?
20|84| He said: they are close on my tracks, and I rushed to You to please You my Master .
20|85| He (God) said: indeed We have tested your people after you, and the Sumeri misguided them.
20|86| So Moses returned to his people, angry and sorrowful. He said: my people, did not your Master promise you a good promise, was the promise too long for you or did you want the anger of your Master to come down upon you that you broke (your) promise to me?
20|87| They said: we did not break (our) promise to you on purpose, but we were made to carry a load of ornament from (Pharaoh’s) people, so we threw it (into fire) same as the Sumeri threw.
20|88| Then he brought out (of the fire) a body of a calf for them which had a sound, so they said: this is your god and god of Moses, but he (Moses) forgot.
20|89| Do they not see that it does not respond to them a word, and it does not have power of any harm or any benefit for them?
20|90| And Aaron has certainly said to them previously: my people, you were only being tested with it, and indeed your Master is the beneficent, so follow me and obey my order.
20|91| They said: we never stop being devoted to it until Moses returns to us.
20|92| He (Moses) said: Aaron, what kept you back when you saw them losing the (right) path,
20|93| that you do not to follow me, did you disobey my order?
20|94| He (Aaron) said: son of my mother, do not grab me by my beard or my head, I was afraid that you say: you made division between children of Israel and you disregarded my word.
20|95| He (Moses) said: Sumeri, what is the matter with you?
20|96| He (Sumeri) said: I saw something that they did not see it, so I grabbed a handful from the messenger's trace and threw it, and that is how my soul seduced me.
20|97| He (Moses) said: so go away, and (punishment) for you in this life is to say do not touch me (to whoever that come close to you), and indeed it is a promise for you that will never be broken, and look at your god, the one that you remained devoted to it, as we shall burn it then we shall totally spread it out into the sea.
20|98| Your god is only God, the One that there is no god except Him. His knowledge includes everything.
20|99| That is how We tell you of news of what has passed. And We have given you a reminder (Quran) from Us.
20|100| Whoever stays away from it, then indeed he carries a burden on the resurrection day.
20|101| They remain in that (state) forever, and it is a bad load for them on the resurrection day.
20|102| A day that the trumpet is blown, on that day We gather the guilty ones, having cyanosis (or lead color eyes).
20|103| They whisper among themselves: you only stayed (dead) ten days.
20|104| We know better what they say when the most perceptive among them says: you only stayed (dead) one day.
20|105| And they ask you about the mountains, say: my Master completely pulverizes them,
20|106| then He leaves them as a flat plain,
20|107| you would not see any curve or bumps in it. 
20|108| On that day, they follow the caller without deviating from him, and the voices lowered for the beneficent and you only hear but a murmur.
20|109| On that day the mediation does not benefit, except from someone whom the beneficent permitted him and He approves of his saying.
20|110| He knows what is in front of them and what is behind them , and they do not comprehend His knowledge.
20|111| And the faces humbled (and lowered) before the eternal living (God), and anyone who carries wrongdoing has failed.
20|112| And whoever does good works and he is a believer has no fear of injustice or holding back (his reward).
20|113| And that is how We sent down an Arabic Quran and We explained about the threats (of punishment) in it, so that they may be cautious, or brings about a reminder for them (and they take notice).
20|114| So God, the true king is highest (and above all). And do not rush to read the Quran before its revelation to you is completed, and say: my Master, increase my knowledge.
20|115| We have certainly instructed Adam in the past, but he forgot, and We did not find any determination in him. 
20|116| And (remember) when We said to the angels: be humble to Adam. Then they humbled except Iblis (Satan) who refused.
20|117| Then We said: Adam, indeed this is an enemy for you and for your wife, so do not let him drive both of you out of the garden, so that you become unhappy.
20|118| Indeed You do not get hungry or naked in there.
20|119| And indeed you do not get thirsty or suffer from sun’s heat (or sunburn) in there.
20|120| But Satan seduced him, he said: Adam, should I lead you to the tree of eternity (and immortality) and to a kingdom that does not deteriorate?
20|121| So they both ate from it, then their shame (their private part) appeared to them, and they began to patch over themselves with leaves of the garden. Adam disobeyed his Master, so he went wrong.
20|122| Then his Master chose him, and He turned to him (in mercy) and guided him.
20|123| He said: go down from it altogether, some of you will be enemies of the others, then if guidance from Me comes to you, then anyone who follows My guidance will not lose (the right path) and he will not be unhappy.
20|124| And whoever stays away from My reminder then indeed he will have a hard life and We gather him as a blind on the resurrection day.
20|125| He says: my Master, why did you gather me as a blind, while I could see (before)?
20|126| He (God) says: same way as My signs came to you and you forgot them, and like that I forget you today.
20|127| And that is how We payback anyone who is excessive and did not believe in his Master’s signs, and certainly the punishment of the hereafter is more severe and more lasting.
20|128| Was it not a guide for them that how many generations before them We destroyed, which they are walking in their habitat? Indeed there are signs in that for people of the intellect.
20|129| And if it was not for a word that previously issued from your Master and for a finite time, it ( the punishment) would have been necessary.
20|130| So be patient about what they say, and glorify your Master with His praise before rising of the sun and before its setting and glorify Him during hours of the night and on both sides of the day, that you may be content (and pleased).
20|131| Do not stretch out your eyes to (and be dazzled by) what We made some group among them enjoy, (it is) beauty of this world’s life so that We test them with it, while the provision of your Master is better and more lasting. 
20|132| And instruct your family to the mandatory prayer and persist on it. We do not ask you for provision, We provide for you, and the (good) ending is for those who control themselves.
20|133| And they say: why does he not bring us a sign from his Master? Did not clear proof come to them in what is in the previous scriptures?
20|134| And if We had destroyed them by punishment before it (sending the prophet), they would have certainly said: our Master, why did you not send us a messenger, so we follow Your signs before we are humiliated and disgraced?
20|135| Say: everyone is waiting, so you wait (too), and you are going to know who are followers of the even (and the right) path and who are guided.
21|1| Accounting for the people got close, and they turn away in negligence.
21|2| No new reminder comes to them from their Master, unless they listen to it while they play (and joke around).
21|3| Their hearts are preoccupied, and those who did wrong hide the whisper (saying): is this but a human being like you, do you give in to the magic while you see (and realize)?
21|4| He (the prophet) said: my Master knows the words in the skies and the earth, and He hears all and knows all.
21|5| But they said: confused dreams, or he made it up, or he is a poet, so he should bring us a miracle like it was sent to the earlier (prophets).
21|6| We destroyed towns that did not believe before them, so do they believe?
21|7| And We did not send (any messenger/prophet) before you except men whom We revealed to them, so ask people of the reminder (people of the book) if you do not know.
21|8| And We did not make them bodies that do not eat the food, and they were they not immortals.
21|9| Then We fulfilled the promise (We made) to them and saved them and anyone We wanted, and We destroyed the excessive ones.
21|10| We have certainly sent down a book to you in which there is your mention/reminder, do you not understand?
21|11| And We crushed many towns that were wrongdoers and We gave rise to other people after them.
21|12| And when they felt Our punishment, they immediately run away from it.
21|13| Do not run away, and return to what you were delighted in it and to your homes, so that you may be questioned.
21|14| They said: woe to us, we were wrongdoers.
21|15| And that call of them did not stop until We made them extinct as a mowed down field.
21|16| And We did not create the skies and the earth and what is between them playing around.
21|17| If We wanted to take a hobby, We would have taken it from what is with Us, if We were doers.
21|18| No, but We throw the truth over the falsehood and it destroys it, and then it dies out. And woe to you for what you describe.
21|19| And everyone in the skies and the earth belongs to Him, and those with Him are not arrogant about serving Him, and they do not get tired.
21|20| They glorify (Him) night and day, and they do not slack off.
21|21| Or did they take gods from the earth that they raise (the dead)?
21|22| If there were gods in them (the skies and the earth) other than God, they would certainly corrupt them both. Glory to God, Master of the throne, (He is flawless) of what they describe.
21|23| He is not questioned about what He does, while they are questioned.
21|24| Or did they take gods other than Him? Say: bring your proof, this is the message of those with me and the message of those before me. But most of them do not know the truth and they turn away.
21|25| We did not send any messenger before you unless We revealed to him that there is no god except Me, so serve Me.
21|26| And they said: the beneficent took a child. He is flawless, rather they (the angels) are His honored servants.
21|27| They do not get ahead of Him in the speech, and they do according to His commands.
21|28| He knows what is in front of them and what is behind them, and they do not mediate except for someone He approves, and they are afraid of His awe.
21|29| And if anyone of them say I am god besides Him, then We would punish him with hell, that is how We punish the wrongdoers.
21|30| Or did those who disbelieved not see that the skies and the earth were joined together (as a single entity), then We separated them, and We made every living thing from the water. Do they not believe?
21|31| And We placed firm mountains in the earth, that it does not shake them (as much), and We placed wide roadways in it so that they may be guided (and find their way).
21|32| And We made the skies a protecting roof, and yet they turn away from its signs.
21|33| And He is the One who created the night and the day, and the sun and the moon each one floating (and moving) in an orbit. 
21|34| And We did not make any human being immortal before you, so if you die then would they be the immortals?
21|35| Every person tastes the death, and We test you with the bad and the good as a trial, and you are returned to Us.
21|36| And when those who disbelieved see you, they only take you as a joke (saying): is this the one who mentions your gods (and rejects them)? While they are disbelievers in the mention of the beneficent.
21|37| The human being is created from rush (and is in a hurry by nature). I am going to show you My signs, so do not ask Me to rush.
21|38| And they say: when is this promise, if you are truthful?
21|39| If those who disbelieved knew of the time that they will not be able to keep the fire away from their faces and from their backs and they will not be helped (then they would not say such things).
21|40| No, but it (punishment) comes to them suddenly and stuns them and they cannot repel it and they are not given any delay.
21|41| And messengers before you were certainly ridiculed, then those who laughed at them were surrounded by what they were ridiculing it (the punishment).
21|42| Say: who protects you in the night and the day from the beneficent? Yet they turn away from remembering their Master.
21|43| Or do they have gods that guard/defend them against Us? They cannot help themselves and they are not accompanied (and helped) by Us. 
21|44| No, but We gave these and their fathers enjoyment until the life lengthened for them (and they had a long life). Do they not see that We come to the earth and reduce it from its sides? So are they the winners?
21|45| Say: I only warn you with the revelation. And the deaf do not hear the call when they are warned.
21|46| And if a single blow of your Master’s punishment touches them, they shall say: woe to us, indeed we were wrongdoers.
21|47| And We set up the scales of justice on the resurrection day, then no person is wronged a bit, and even if it is weights of a mustard seed We bring it (into account), and We are sufficient for accounting.
21|48| And We have certainly given Moses and Aaron the criterion (of good and bad) and a light and a reminder for those who control themselves,
21|49| those who fear their Master in secret, and they are in awe of the hour (of resurrection).
21|50| And this (Quran) is a blessed reminder that We sent it down. So do you deny it?
21|51| And We have certainly given Abraham his good sense in the past, and We knew him well.
21|52| When he said to his father and his people: what are these statues that you are devoted to them?
21|53| They said: we found our fathers serving them.
21|54| He said: you and your fathers were certainly in obvious error.
21|55| They said: did you bring us the truth or are you playing around?
21|56| He said: no, but your Master is the Master of the skies and the earth, the One who created them, and I am of those who testify to that.
21|57| And by God, I shall plan for your statues after you go away turning back.
21|58| So he made them into small pieces except the biggest one of them, so that they may return to him.
21|59| They said: who did this to our gods? Indeed he is of the wrongdoers.
21|60| They said: we heard a young man mentioning them, he is called Abraham.
21|61| They said: then bring him before the people’s eyes, so that they may testify.
21|62| They said: Abraham, did you do this to our gods?
21|63| He said: no, but this biggest of them did this, so ask them if they are speaking.
21|64| So they turned to themselves and said: indeed you yourselves are the wrongdoers.
21|65| Then they were turned over their heads (in shame or in defiance saying): you have certainly known that these do not speak.
21|66| He said: do you serve other than God that which does not benefit you at all and it does not harm you?
21|67| Ugh (yuck) to you and to what you serve other than God. Do you not understand? 
21|68| They said: burn him and help your gods if you are doers.
21|69| We said: fire, be cool and safe for Abraham.
21|70| And they intended a plot against him, so We made them the worst losers.
21|71| And We saved him and Lot (and took them) to the land that We blessed it for humankind.
21|72| And We gave him Isaac, and in addition Jacob, and We made all of them righteous.
21|73| And We made them leaders who guide by Our command, and We revealed to them to do good and to perform the mandatory prayers and to give to the mandatory charity, and they were Our servants.
21|74| And Lot, We gave him wisdom and knowledge and We saved him from the town that did the awful (things). Indeed they were bad people and disobedient.
21|75| And We admitted him into Our mercy, indeed he was of the righteous.
21|76| And (remember) Noah when he called out in the past, so We answered him and We saved him and his family from the great disaster.
21|77| And We helped him against the people who denied Our signs. Indeed they were indeed bad people, so We drowned them all.
21|78| And (remember) David and Solomon when they judged about the field that people’s sheep grazed in it during the night, and We were witnesses to their judgment.
21|79| We made Solomon understand it (how to judge/rule). And We gave each one wisdom and knowledge. And We brought the mountains and the birds under David’s control, glorifying (Us). And We are doers (of it).
21|80| And We taught him making of armored coats for you in order to protect you from each others' violence (in your wars), so will you be thankful?
21|81| And for Solomon (We brought under his control), the gusting wind which by his command blows to the land which We blessed it. And We are knowledgeable of everything.
21|82| And some of the devils dive for him and do work beside that and We were their guardians. 
21|83| And Job, when he called out to his Master: indeed harm has touched me (and I am sick), and you are the most merciful of merciful ones.
21|84| So We answered him, and We removed what was harming him, and We gave him his family, and like them with them (We doubled the size of his family), as a mercy from Us and a reminder to Our servants.
21|85| And Ishmael and Idris (Enoch) and Zul-kifl (man of the responsibility), they were all persevering (and patient).
21|86| And We admitted them into Our mercy, indeed they were of the righteous.
21|87| And (remember) Zun-nun (man of the fish/Jonah), when he left in anger, and he assumed that We will never be hard on him. Then he cried out from the darkness that there is no god except You, You are flawless, indeed I was of the wrongdoers.
21|88| So We answered him and We saved him from the sadness (and misery), and that is how We save the believers.
21|89| And (remember) Zachariah, when called out to his Master: my Master, do not leave me alone (without child), and you are the best of the inheritors.
21|90| So We answered him, and We gave him Yahya (John the Baptist) and We set his wife right for him (so she can bear a child). Indeed they were quick in doing good, and they would call on Us with hope and in awe, and they were humble before Us.
21|91| And she, who guarded her private part, then We blew from Our breath/spirit into her, and We made her and her son a sign for humankind.
21|92| Indeed this is your community (of faith), a single community and I am your Master so serve Me.
21|93| And they cut up their affair (in religion) between them, they all return to Us.
21|94| So anyone who does from the good works and is a believer, then there is no rejection for his efforts and We are writers for him.
21|95| And it is forbidden for (people of) a town that We destroyed it (to return), indeed they do not return,
21|96| until when (the barrier of) Ya’juj and Ma’juj (Gog and Magog) is opened, and they rush out from every hill.
21|97| And the true promise got close, then when the eyes of those who disbelieved gaze (they say): woe to us, we were definitely ignorant of this, rather we were wrongdoers.
21|98| (They will be told): indeed you and what you serve other than God are fuel for hell, and you will arrive (in it).
21|99| If these were (true) gods, they would not have arrived in it, and all of you remain in it forever.
21|100| They have moaning (and groaning) in it and they do not hear (anything) in it.
21|101| Indeed those whom the good (reward) came from Us for them previously (due to their belief and good deeds), they are removed far from it.
21|102| They do not hear its faint sound, and they remain in whatever their soul desire forever.
21|103| The great terror (of hell) does not make them sad, and the angels meet them (saying): this is your day which you were promised.
21|104| On a day that We roll up the sky like rolling the scroll for writing, as We began the first creation We will repeat it. A promise that is Our responsibility. Indeed We are doers (of this).
21|105| And We have certainly written in the Psalms after the reminder (Torah) that: My righteous servants will inherit the earth.
21|106| Indeed there is a notification in this for people who are servants (of God).
21|107| And We only sent you as a mercy for humankind.
21|108| Say: indeed it is revealed to me that your god is the One god, so are you submitters (to Him)?
21|109| So if they turn away, then say: I notified you equally, and I do not know whether what you are promised is near or far.
21|110| Indeed He knows the openly (and public) words and He knows what you hide.
21|111| And I do not know, it may be a test for you and an enjoyment for a while.
21|112| He (Muhammad) said: my Master, judge with the truth, and Our Master is the beneficent whose help is asked for about what you describe.
22|1| People, be cautious of your Master. Indeed earthquake of the hour is an awesome thing.
22|2| On a day that you see it, every nursing mother forgets about what she nurses, and every pregnant female drops her load (and miscarries), and you see the people intoxicated while they are not intoxicated, but God’s punishment is severe.
22|3| And some of the people argue about God without any knowledge and follow every rebellious devil.
22|4| It is prescribed against him (Satan) that anyone who takes him as a friend, then he misguides him and guides him to punishment of the burning fire.
22|5| People, if you are in doubt about the resurrection, then (consider that) indeed We created you from dust, then from fertilized egg (Zygote), then from a (dangling, clinging, and leach like) blood clot, then from a piece of chewed flesh (embryo) formed and unformed in order to clarify for you (that We are capable of everything). And We settle what We want in the wombs for a limited period, then We bring you out as a baby, then you reach your full maturity (and strength), and some of you die and some of you are returned to the lowest part of life, so that they do not know anything after knowing (and they forget everything). And you see the earth barren (and lifeless), then when We send down the rain on it, it revives and grows and produces all types of beautiful (plants).
22|6| That is because God is the truth, and He gives life to the dead, and He is capable of everything.
22|7| And the hour (of resurrection) is coming, there is no doubt about it, and God raises those in the graves.
22|8| And some people argue about God without any knowledge or any guidance or any enlightening book. 
22|9| Twisting his side (being arrogant) to misguide (people) away from God’s way. There is humiliation for him in this world, and We make him taste punishment of the burning on the resurrection day.
22|10| (He will be told): that is for what your hands sent ahead, and God is not unjust to His servants.
22|11| And some people serve God on edge (doubtfully), so if any good happens to him, he is content with it, and if a suffering happens to him, he turns on his face losing the world and the hereafter. That is the clear loss.
22|12| He calls on other than God, that which does not harm him and does not benefit him. That is the major error.
22|13| He calls on someone whose harm is closer than his benefit, certainly a bad supporter (and friend) and certainly a bad companion.
22|14| Indeed God admits those who believed and did good works to gardens which rivers flows through them. Indeed God does what He wants.
22|15| If anyone thinks that God never helps him (Muhammad) in this world and the hereafter, then let him stretch a rope to the ceiling (and hang himself with it), then let him cut it off and see whether his plan gets rid of whatever angers him.
22|16| And that is how We sent it down as clear signs, and that God guides anyone He wants.
22|17| Indeed God judges between those who believed, and those who are Jewish and the Sabians and the Christians and the Zoroastrian, and those who associated (partners with God) on the resurrection day. Indeed God is witness over everything.
22|18| Did you not see that it is God that everyone in the skies and everyone on the earth and the sun and the moon and the stars and the mountains and the trees and the animals and most of the people humble themselves before Him? And many deserve the punishment, and whoever God humiliates then there is no one to honor him. Indeed God does what He wants.
22|19| These are two (groups of) adversaries who dispute about their Master. So clothes of fire are cut for those who disbelieved, and boiling water is poured from over their head.
22|20| What is in their stomachs and their skins are melted with it,
22|21| and clubs of iron are for them.
22|22| Whenever they want to get out of it because of misery, they are returned into it, and (are told) taste the burning punishment.
22|23| Indeed God admits those who believed and did good works into gardens that rivers flow through them, and they are adorned with bracelets of gold and pearls in it, and their clothes is of silk in there.
22|24| And they are guided to the good word, and they are guided to path of the praiseworthy.
22|25| Indeed those who disbelieved and obstruct God's way and the Sacred Mosque, which We made it equal for the people whether the resident in there or the visitors, and anyone who wants the deviation (from the truth) in there by wrongdoing, We make him taste from a painful punishment.
22|26| And (remember) when We put up Abraham at the site of the house (saying): do not associate anything (as partner) with Me, and cleanse My house for those who go around (it) and those who stand (in prayer) and those who bow down humbly.
22|27| And announce the Pilgrimage (Hajj) to the people, they come to you on foot and on every lean camel (or any other ride), coming from every distant area.
22|28| In order that they witness the benefits (provided) for them, and to mention God’s name on specified days over what He provided for them from the livestock animals, so eat from it and feed the suffering poor.
22|29| Then they should do away with their body's filth and fulfill their pledges and go around the ancient house (Ka’aba).
22|30| That is (the Pilgrimage), and whoever honors God’s requirements (and restrictions), then it is better for him in his Master's view. And the livestock are made lawful for you except what is read to you. So avoid the filth of the idols, and avoid the false word (and lie).
22|31| Be monotheist for God, not associating (any partner) with Him. And whoever associates (any partner) with God, then it is as if he falls from the sky and the birds snatch him, or the wind blows him to a remote place.
22|32| That is how it is, and whoever honors God’s rituals then indeed it is from self control of the hearts.
22|33| There are benefits in that (the livestock) for you for a limited period then their lawful place (of sacrifice) is at the ancient house (Ka’aba).
22|34| And for every community (of faith) We made a ritual (of sacrifice) so that they mention God’s name over what He provided them from the livestock animals. Your god is the One god, so submit to Him and give good news to those who humble themselves,
22|35| those whose hearts are scared when God is mentioned, and they are patient about what happens to them, and they perform the mandatory prayer, and they spend (in God's way) from what We provided them.
22|36| And We made the fat camel/cow as part of God's rituals (of pilgrimage) for you. There is goodness for you in them, so mention God’s name on them as they are lined up, then when they fall (on the ground) on their sides, eat from them and feed the poor and the beggar. That is how We put them under your control (and at you service), so you may be thankful.
22|37| Their meat and their blood would never reach God, but your self control reaches Him. That is how He put them under your control (and at your service) so that you magnify God for He guided you, and give good news to the good doers.
22|38| Indeed God defends those who believed, indeed God does not like any ungrateful traitor.
22|39| (Fighting) is permitted for those who are attacked (and war is waged against them), because they are wronged, and God is certainly able to help them (to victory),
22|40| those who were driven out of their home unjustly, only because they said: our Master is God. If God had not repelled some people by others, then monasteries and churches and synagogues and mosques in which God’s name is mentioned often, would have been demolished. And God shall help anyone who helps Him. Indeed God is strong and powerful.
22|41| (They are) those who perform the mandatory prayer and give to the mandatory charity and instruct to the right (acceptable) and prohibit from the wrong (unacceptable) if We make them powerful on the earth. And the end of all affairs belongs to God.
22|42| And if they deny you, people of Noah and Aad and Thamud also denied (their prophets) before them,
22|43| and (so did) people of Abraham and people of Lot,
22|44| and inhabitant of Midian (people of Shu'aib), and Moses was also denied, so I gave the disbelievers a break then I took them, so how was My rejection (and punishment)?
22|45| And how many a town did We destroy while it was (filled with) wrongdoer, then it (was ruined and) fell on its roofs and abandoned wells and towering castles.
22|46| Did they not travel in the land, so that they have hearts to understand with it or ears to hear with it? Indeed the eyes are not blind, but the hearts which are in the chests are blind.
22|47| They ask you to hurry up with the punishment, while God never breaks His promise. And indeed a day with your Master is like a thousand years of what you count.
22|48| And how many a town did I give break to it while it was (filled with) wrongdoer? Then I took it (into punishment), and the final return is to Me.
22|49| Say: people, I am only a clear warner for you.
22|50| So those who believed and did good works, they have forgiveness and an honorable provision.
22|51| And those who try to disable (and to discredit) Our signs, they are inhabitants of the hellfire.
22|52| And We did not send any messenger or prophet before you, unless when he wished (something) Satan threw (temptation) in his wish, but God eliminates anything that Satan throws, then God reaffirms His signs. God is knowledgeable and wise.
22|53| So that He makes whatever Satan throws a test for those who have a disease in their hearts and their hearts are hardened, and indeed the wrongdoers are in extreme opposition (to the truth). 
22|54| And so that those who were given the knowledge know that it (Quran) is the truth from your Master, so they believe in it and their hearts are humbled (and compliant) for it. And God certainly guides those who believed to a straight path.
22|55| Those who disbelieved do not stop to be in doubt about it until the hour suddenly comes to them or the punishment of a barren (and hopeless) day comes to them.
22|56| The rule belongs to God on that day, He judges between them, then those who believed and did good works will be in gardens of delight.
22|57| And those who disbelieved and denied Our signs, then they would have a humiliating punishment.
22|58| And those who migrated in God's way, then they were killed or died, God shall provide them with a good provision, and indeed God is best of the providers.
22|59| He shall admit them to a place that they would be pleased with it. Indeed God is knowledgeable and patient. 
22|60| That is how it is. And whoever retaliates (it should be) the same as what he was made to suffer, then if he is wronged (again), God shall help him. Indeed God is pardoning and forgiving.
22|61| That is because God makes the night pass through the day and makes the day pass through the night, and that God hears and sees all.
22|62| That is because God is the truth and whatever they call on besides Him, it is the falsehood, and God is the superior, the great.
22|63| Did you not see that God sent down rain from the sky then the earth becomes green? God is nice and well informed.
22|64| Everything in the skies and on the earth belongs to Him, and indeed God is the rich (without needs) and the praiseworthy.
22|65| Did you not see that God brought what is on the earth under your control (and at your service), and the ships sail through the sea by His command? And He keeps the sky from falling on the earth except by His permission. God is certainly gentle and merciful to the people.
22|66| And He is the One who makes you live then makes you die then brings you (back) to life. Indeed the human being is ungrateful.
22|67| For every community (of faith) We made ritual to perform it, so they should not dispute with you about the matter (of rituals). And invite (people) to your Master, indeed you are on a right guidance.
22|68| And if they argue with you, then say: God knows best what you do.
22|69| On the resurrection day God judges between you in what you used to disagree about it.
22|70| Did you not know that God knows whatever is in the skies and the earth? Indeed that is (recorded) in a book, indeed that is easy for God.
22|71| And they serve other than God that which He did not send down a reason for it and they do not have any knowledge of it. There is no helper for the wrongdoers.
22|72| And when Our clear signs are read to them, you notice the denial on the faces of those who disbelieved, they are about to assault those who read them Our signs. Say: should I tell you about worse than this? The fire that God promised it to those who disbelieved, and it is a bad destination.
22|73| People, an example was given, so listen to it: indeed those you call on other than God never create a fly even if they get together for it, and if the fly snatches anything away from them, they cannot get it back from it. The seeker and the sought are weak.
22|74| They did not value God, His true worth. Indeed God is strong and powerful.
22|75| God chooses messengers from the angels and from the people. Indeed God hears all and sees all.
22|76| He knows what is in front of them and what is behind them, and the affairs are returned to God.
22|77| You who believe, bow down and be humble (and prostrate) and serve your Master and do good, so that you may succeed.
22|78| And try hard in God's way, a trying that He deserves. He chose you, and He did not impose any difficulty on you in the way of life (religion). This is faith of your father Abraham. He named you the Muslims (the submitted ones) in the past and in this, so that the messenger be a witness over you, and you be witnesses over the people, so perform the mandatory prayer and give to the mandatory charity and hold on to God, He is your protector, what an excellent protector and excellent helper.
23|1| The believers have succeeded,
23|2| those who are humble in their prayers,
23|3| and those who stay away from the useless (acts and talks),
23|4| and those who do their mandatory charity,
23|5| and those who guard their private parts,
23|6| except with their spouses or what they own, then indeed they are blameless,
23|7| and anyone who look for beyond this, then they are those who exceed the limits,
23|8| and those who observe their trusts and their promise,
23|9| and those who guard their mandatory prayer,
23|10| they are the inheritors,
23|11| those who inherit the paradise, remaining in there forever.
23|12| And We have certainly created the human being from clay’s extract.
23|13| Then We placed him as a fertilized egg in a safe quarter (the womb).
23|14| Then We made the fertilized egg into a (dangling, clinging, and leach like) blood clot, then We made the clot into a (piece of) chewed flesh, then We made the chewed flesh into bones, then We covered the bones with flesh, then We turned it into another creation. So blessed is God, best of the creators.
23|15| Then you certainly die after that.
23|16| Then indeed you are raised on the resurrection day.
23|17| And We have certainly created seven paths/layers (of skies) above you, and We are not neglectful of the creation.
23|18| And We sent down rain from the sky in proper amount, then We made it settle in the earth, and indeed We are able to take it away.
23|19| And We produced gardens of date palms and grapes for you with it, and there are plenty of fruits in them that you eat from it.
23|20| And a tree (of olive) that comes out of Mount Sinai producing oil and sauce/dip for those who eat.
23|21| And there is a lesson for you in the livestock, We give you drink from what is in their bellies, and there are many other benefits for you in them, and you also eat from them.
23|22| And you are carried on them and on the ships.
23|23| And We have certainly sent Noah to his people, and he said: my people, serve God, you have no god other than Him, would you not be cautious?
23|24| The leaders of those who disbelieved among his people said: he is only a human being like you who wants to be superior over you, and if God wanted He would have sent down angels, we did not hear of this among our forefathers.
23|25| He is only a man that there is madness in him, so put up with him for a while.
23|26| He said: my Master, help me because they denied me.
23|27| So We revealed to him that build the Ark under Our eyes and Our revelation, and when Our command comes and the oven bursts out (with water), then put two of every kind (a male and a female) and your family in it except anyone among them whom the word is already issued against him, and do not talk to me about those who did wrong for they will be drowned.
23|28| And when you and those with you settle on the Ark, then say: all praise belongs to God, the One who saved us from the wrongdoing people.
23|29| And say: my Master, make me land in a blessed landing place, you are the best of those who make (people) land.
23|30| Indeed there are signs in that, and indeed We put (people) to test.
23|31| Then We gave rise to another generation after them.
23|32| And We sent them a messenger from among themselves (saying): serve God, you have no god other than Him, would you not be cautious?
23|33| And the leaders of his people, those who disbelieved and denied the meeting of the hereafter and We made them comfortable in this world’s life said: this is only a human being like you, he eats from what you eat from it and he drinks from what you drink,
23|34| and if you obey a human being like yourselves, then you are certainly losers.
23|35| Does he promise you that when you die and you become dust and bones, that you are brought out (and resurrected)?
23|36| What you are promised is far, far (from the truth). 
23|37| There is nothing except our life of this world, we die and we live (and world goes on), and we will not be raised.
23|38| He is only a man that makes up a lie (and attributes it) to God, and we do not believe him.
23|39| He said: my Master, help me because they denied me.
23|40| He (God) said: they shall become sorry in a short while.
23|41| Then the awesome roar rightfully took them, and We made them into debris. So away with the wrongdoing people. 
23|42| Then We gave rise to other generations after them.
23|43| No community (of faith) gets ahead of its appointed time and they would not delay.
23|44| Then We sent Our messengers one after the other, every time a messenger came to a community, they denied him. So We made them follow each other (to destruction), and We made them stories (for the others). So away with people who do not believe. 
23|45| Then We sent Moses and his brother Aaron with Our signs and a clear reason
23|46| to Pharaoh and his assembly, but they acted arrogantly and they were bossy people.
23|47| They said: should we believe in two human beings like us while their people are our servants?
23|48| So they denied them both then they became among the destroyed ones.
23|49| And We have certainly given Moses the book, so that they may be guided.
23|50| And We made son of Mary and his mother a sign, and we sheltered them both on a hilltop having an accommodation and a spring (of running water).
23|51| Messengers, eat from the good things and do good work, indeed I know well what you do.
23|52| And indeed this is your community, a single community, and I am your Master so be cautious of Me. 
23|53| But they cut up their affair (in the religion) into pieces among them, each party happy with what they had.
23|54| So leave them in their ignorance for a while.
23|55| Do they think that what We supplied them with it from wealth and children,
23|56| We are rushing the goodness for them? No, they do not realize.
23|57| Indeed those who are fearful of the awe of their Master
23|58| and those who believe in their Master’s signs
23|59| and those who do not associate (partners) with their Master
23|60| and those who give from what they are given, and their hearts trembles that they return to their Master,
23|61| they rush in (doing) the good and they are pioneers for it.
23|62| We do not task any person beyond its capability, and there is a book with Us that speaks the truth, and they will not be wronged.
23|63| No, but their hearts are in ignorance regarding this (truth), and they have works other than that, which they are doers of them.
23|64| Until when We take their rich ones with the punishment, then they cry out for help.
23|65| Do not cry out for help today, indeed you will not be helped by Us.
23|66| My signs had been read to you, but you used to turn back on your heels.
23|67| Being arrogant about them, talking nonsense (about My signs) in nightly conversation.
23|68| Did they not think about the word (of Quran), or did something come to them that did not come to their forefathers?
23|69| Or did they not recognize their messenger, so they rejected him?
23|70| Or do they say there is madness in him? No, but he brought them the truth, and most of them dislike the truth.
23|71| And if the truth had followed their desires, then the skies and the earth and everyone in them would have certainly corrupted/perished. No, but We brought them their mention/reminder, but they turn away from their mention/reminder.
23|72| Or do you ask them for any payment? Payment from your Master is better, and He is best of the providers.
23|73| And you certainly invite them to a straight path.
23|74| And indeed those who do not believe in the hereafter are deviators from the (right) path.
23|75| And if We have mercy on them and remove what is with them from harm, they would persist in their rebellion, blindly wandering.
23|76| And We have certainly taken them to the punishment, but they did not comply with their Master and they do not humbly plead.
23|77| Until when We opened a door having a severe punishment for them, then they became hopeless in it.
23|78| And He is the One who made the ear and the eyes and the hearts for you. You give little thanks.
23|79| And He is the One who multiplied (and spread) you on the earth, and you will be gathered to Him.
23|80| And He is the One who gives life and causes death, and the alternation of the night and the day belongs to Him. Do you not understand?
23|81| No, but they say same as what the earlier ones said.
23|82| They said: would we be raised when we die and become dust and bones?
23|83| We and our fathers have certainly been promised this in the past. This is only stories of the earlier ones.
23|84| Say: to whom belongs the earth and everyone in it, if you knew?
23|85| They are going to say: God. Say: do you not take notice?
23|86| Say: who is the Master of the seven skies and the Master of the great throne?
23|87| They are going to say: God. Say: would you not be cautious?
23|88| Say: in whose hand is the rule of everything and he shelters and no one is sheltered against him, if you knew?
23|89| They are going to say: God. Say: so, how are you bewitched? 
23|90| No, but We brought them the truth, and they are certainly liars.
23|91| God did not take a child and there is no god with Him, in that case every god would take away what it created, and some of them would be superior to others. God is flawless about what they describe.
23|92| Knower of the unseen and the visible, and He is above what they associate (with Him).
23|93| Say: my Master, I wish You would show me what they are promised.
23|94| My Master, do not make me of the wrongdoing people.
23|95| And We are certainly able to show you what We promised them.
23|96| Repel (and respond to) the badness with that which is better. We know better about what they describe. 
23|97| And say: my Master, I look for Your protection from seductions of the devils,
23|98| and my Master, I look for your protection from their presence.
23|99| Until when the death comes to one of them, then he says: my Master, send me back
23|100| so that I do good work in what I left behind (and neglected). No way, indeed it is only a word that he says it. And there is a barrier behind them until a day they are raised.
23|101| So when the trumpet is blown, then there is no relationship between them on that day, and they do not ask each other.
23|102| So those who scales are heavy, then they are the successful ones.
23|103| And those whose scales are light, then they are those who lost their souls, remaining in hell forever.
23|104| The fire burns their faces, and they frown in it.
23|105| Were not My signs being read to you, and you were denying it?
23|106| They say: our Master, our misery overcame us and we were misguided people.
23|107| Our Master, bring us out of it, and if we return (to disbelief) then indeed we are wrongdoers.
23|108| He (God) says: go away, into it and do not talk to Me.
23|109| Indeed there was a group of My servants saying: our Master, we believed, so forgive us and have mercy on us, and You are the best of the merciful ones.
23|110| But you took them as a joke (and ridiculed them) and you were laughing at them until they made you forget remembering Me 
23|111| Indeed I reward them today because of their perseverance (and patience), indeed they are the victors. 
23|112| He (God) says: how many years did you stay in the earth (in the grave)?
23|113| They say: we stayed for a day or part of a day, so ask those who count.
23|114| He says: you only stayed a little while, if only you knew.
23|115| Did you think that We created you uselessly (without a purpose), and you are not returned to Us?
23|116| God is highest (and above all), the true king, there is no God except Him, the Master of the honorable throne.
23|117| And whoever calls on another god with God without having any proof for that, then indeed his accounting is with his Master. Indeed the disbelievers do not succeed.
23|118| And say: my Master, forgive and have mercy, and you are the best of the merciful ones.
24|1| (This is) a chapter which We sent it down and We made it mandatory and We sent down clear verses in it, so that you may take notice.
24|2| Flog each one of the adulterer/fornicator man and the adulterer/fornicator woman one hundred lashes, and do not let pity for them takes you away from God’s law if you believe in God and the last day, and a group of the believers should witness their punishment.
24|3| The adulterer/fornicator man should only marry an adulterer/fornicator or a polytheist woman, and the adulterer/fornicator woman should only get married to an adulterer/fornicator or a polytheist man, and that is forbidden to the believers.
24|4| And those who accuse chaste women, then do not bring four witnesses, then flog them eighty lashes and do not ever accept their testimony, and they are the disobedient ones.
24|5| Except those who repent and straighten out after that, then indeed God is forgiving and merciful.
24|6| And those who accuse their spouses, and there is no witnesses for them except themselves, then their individual testimony (is acceptable) if they testify four times (swearing) by God that he is certainly of the truthful ones.
24|7| And the fifth (oath) that God’s curse be on him if he is of the liars.
24|8| And it prevents the punishment from her if she testifies four times (swearing) by God that indeed he is of the liars.
24|9| And the fifth (oath) that God’s anger be on her if he is of the truthful ones.
24|10| And if it was not for God’s grace and mercy on you (you would be in trouble). God is acceptor of repentance and wise.
24|11| Those who brought the lie (and accusation) were a bunch of you. Do not think that it is bad for you, but it is good for you. For every one of them earned a share of the sin, and the one among them who had greatest (share) of it, has a great punishment.
24|12| Why when you heard it, the believing men and the believing women did not think well of themselves and they did not say: this is an obvious lie.
24|13| Why did they not bring four witnesses for it? So when they did not bring the witnesses, then they are the liars in God’s view.
24|14| And if it was not for God’s grace and mercy on you in this world and in the hereafter, a great punishment would have touched you because of what you engaged in it.
24|15| When you receive it through each other’s tongues and you say with your mouths what you have no knowledge of it, and you think it is insignificant, while it is significant in God's view.
24|16| And whey when you heard it, you did not say: it is not for us to speak of this, You are flawless, this is a great slander.
24|17| God advises you that do not ever repeat anything like it if you are believers.
24|18| And God clarifies the signs for you, and God is knowledgeable and wise.
24|19| Indeed those who like to spread the indecency among those who believed have a painful punishment in this world and the hereafter, and God knows and you do not know.
24|20| And if it was not for God’s grace and mercy on you, (you would be in trouble) and indeed God is gentle and merciful 
24|21| You who believe, do not follow Satan's footsteps, and whoever follows Satan's footsteps (should know that), indeed he instructs to the indecency and to the wrong (unacceptable). And if it was not for God’s grace and mercy on you, none of you would ever be purified (absolved), but God purifies anyone He wants. God hears all and knows all. 
24|22| And those who have grace and plenty (of wealth) should not swear that they would not give to the relatives (and close ones), and the needy, and the migrants in God’s way, and they should excuse and overlook. Do you not like God to forgive you? God is forgiving and merciful. 
24|23| Those who accuse the unaware chaste believing women are cursed in this world and the hereafter and they have a great punishment,
24|24| on a day that their tongues and their hands and their feet testify against them for what they used to do,
24|25| on that day God pays them back in full their rightful dues, and they know that God is the obvious truth. 
24|26| The bad women are for the bad men, and the bad men are for the bad women, and the good women are for good men, and the good men are for good women. They are clear of what they say (about them), forgiveness and honorable provision is for them.
24|27| You who believe, do not enter any houses except your houses until you ask for familiarity (and permission) and greet its resident. That is better for you, so that you may take notice.
24|28| And if you do not find anyone in it, then do not enter it until permission is given to you, and if you are told to go back, then (do not enter and) go back, as that is purer (and better) for you. And God knows well what you do.
24|29| There is no blame on you if you enter vacant houses in which you have goods. God knows what you disclose and what you hide.
24|30| Tell the believing men to lower their looks (and do not look lustfully) and guard their private parts. That is purer (and better) for them. God is well aware of what they do.
24|31| And tell the believing women to lower their looks (and do not look lustfully) and guard their private parts, and they should not show their beauty except what is apparent of it, and they should put their scarves over their breasts, and they should not show their beauty except to their husbands or their fathers or their father in law or their sons or their husbands' sons or their brothers or their brothers' sons or their sisters' sons or their women (companions) or those whom their right hands own or the male dependents with no desire (of women) or children who do not know about the private parts of women, and they should not stomp their feet to expose what they hide from their beauty. And all you believers repent to God, so that you may be successful.
24|32| And marry off the singles among you and the righteous among your male and female servants. If they are poor, God enriches them from His grace, and God is bountiful and knowledgeable.
24|33| And those who do not find (any way) to marry, should abstain (from sex) until God enriches them from His bounty. And those among what your right hands own who ask for the certificate (of freedom), then write it for them if you know any good in them, and give them some of God’s possession that He gave you. And do not force your maids into prostitution looking for gain of this world’s life, if they want to be chaste. And if anyone forces them, then after their compulsion God is forgiving and merciful (to them).
24|34| And We have certainly sent down to you clear (and clarifying) signs, and example of those who passed away before you, and an advice for those who control themselves.
24|35| God is light of the skies and the earth. Example of His light is like a lamp holder with a lamp in it, and the lamp is in a glass, the glass is as if it is a brilliant star lit by (the oil of) a blessed olive tree, that is not facing east or west, and its oil almost glows (by itself) even though fire did not touch it. Light upon light, God guides whom He wants to His light. And God gives the examples for the people, and God knows everything. 
24|36| (This light is) in houses that God permitted His name to be raised and to be mentioned in it, and He is glorified in it in the mornings and the afternoons.
24|37| Men who are not distracted by business and sale (and buy) from remembering God and performing mandatory prayer and giving to mandatory charity, and they are afraid of a day that the hearts and the eyes turn around in it,
24|38| so that God rewards them better than what they did, and increase them (their reward) from His grace. And God provides for anyone He wants without any limit.
24|39| Those who disbelieved, their works are like a mirage in a desert that a thirsty person imagines it as water until when he gets to it and finds it to be nothing, and he finds God with him, and He pays his account back in full, and God is quick in accounting.
24|40| Or like darkness in a deep sea that a wave, over it a wave which above it is clouds, covers it. Darkness, one on top of the other (such that) when he brings out his hand, he almost does not see it, and anyone who God did not put a light for him, then there is no light for him.
24|41| Did you not see that everyone in the skies and the earth and the birds with their wings outspread glorify God, each one does know its prayer and its glorification. God knows well what they do.
24|42| And rule of the skies and the earth belongs to God, and the final return is to God.
24|43| Did you not see that God drives the clouds gently, then joins them together then makes it dense, then you see the raindrops comes out from within it, and He sends down hail from the sky from the mountains (of clouds) that are in it, then He strikes anyone He wants with it,  and turns it away from anyone He wants, and the flash of its lightning almost takes away the sights (and blinds people)?
24|44| God alternates the night and the day. Indeed there is a lesson in that for those who have insight.
24|45| And God created all creatures from water, and some of them walk on their bellies and some of them walk on two legs and some of them walk on four. God creates what He wants. Indeed God is capable of everything.
24|46| We have certainly sent down clarifying verses, and God guides anyone He wants to a straight path.
24|47| And they say: we believed in God and the messenger and we obeyed. Then some of them turn away after that, and they are not the believers.
24|48| And when they are invited to God and His messenger to judge between them, suddenly some of them turn away.
24|49| And if the truth is for them (and they are right), they come to him obediently.
24|50| Is there a disease in their hearts, or do they doubt, or are they afraid that God and His messenger deal unfairly against them? No, but they are the wrongdoers.
24|51| Indeed word of the believers, when they are invited to God and His messenger to judge between them, is to say: we heard and we obeyed. And they are the successful ones.
24|52| And whoever obeys God and His messenger and fears God and is cautious of Him, then they are the victors.
24|53| They solemnly swear by God that if you order them they shall go out (to fight), say: do not swear, reasonable obedience (is enough), indeed God is well aware of what you do.
24|54| Say: obey God and obey the messenger, but if you turn away, he is only responsible for what he is charged with and you are responsible for what you are charged with, and if you obey him you are guided. And the messenger's responsibility is only the clear preaching.
24|55| God promised those who believed among you and did good works, that He shall make them successors (of power) on the earth as He made those before them successors, and He shall strengthen their religion (and way of life) for them, the one that He approved for them, and afterward He shall replace their fear with security to serve Me and not associate anything with Me, and whoever disbelieves after that, then they are the disobedient ones.
24|56| And perform the mandatory prayer and give to the mandatory charity and obey the messenger so that you may receive mercy.
24|57| Do not think that those who disbelieved weaken/escape (God) on the earth. Their housing is the fire and it is certainly a bad destination.
24|58| You who believe, those whom your right hands own and those (children) among you who have not reached puberty should ask your permission at three times (before coming to your room). Before morning mandatory prayer, and when you put off your clothes during noon time, and after evening mandatory prayer. (These are) three times of privacy for you. There is no blame on you or on them to circulate around you and each other at other times. That is how God clarifies the signs for you, and God is knowledgeable and wise.
24|59| And when the children among you reach the puberty, then they should ask permission (at all times) as those before them asked for permission. That is how God clarifies His signs for you, and God is knowledgeable and wise.
24|60| And the women past menopause who do not expect a marriage, then there is no blame on them if they put off their clothes without displaying their beauty. And if they avoid that, it is better for them. God hears all and knows all.
24|61| There is no blame on the blind and no blame on the lame (crippled) and no blame on the sick and not on yourselves if you eat in your houses or your fathers’ houses or your mothers’ houses or your brothers’ houses or your sisters’ houses or your fathers’ brothers’ houses or your fathers’ sisters’ houses or your mothers’ brothers’ houses or your mother's sisters’ houses or the houses that you have their keys or your friend’s houses. There is no blame on you if you eat together or separately. So when you enter any houses then greet each other, a blessed and pure greeting from God. That is how God clarifies the signs for you that you may understand.
24|62| The believers are only those who believed in God and His messenger, and when they are with him on a public matter, they do not go away until they ask his permission. Indeed those who ask your permission are those who believe in God and His messenger. So when they ask your permission for (taking care of) some of their affairs, then give permission to anyone you want among them and ask God for their forgiveness. Indeed God is forgiving and merciful
24|63| Do not make the messenger’s call between you the same as a call from each other. God does know those among you who slip away hiding away (behind others). So those who oppose His/his order should beware of a disaster happening to them or a painful punishment happening to them.
24|64| Know that indeed everything in the skies and the earth belongs to God, He does know what you are up to it (and your intentions), and He tells them of what they did on a day that they are returned to Him. And God knows everything.
25|1| Blessed is the One who sent down the criterion to His servant, to be a warning for humankind,
25|2| the One that rule of the skies and the earth belongs to Him and He did not take a child and there is no partner for Him in the rule and He created everything and determined it proportionately.
25|3| And they took gods other than Him that do not create anything and they are created, and they have no power to harm or benefit themselves, and they have no power over death and life and resurrection.
25|4| And those who disbelieved said: this (Quran) is only a lie that he made up and other people have helped him with it. So they have certainly committed wrongdoing and lie.
25|5| And they said: (these are) stories of the earlier ones that he copied it and it is dictated to him morning and afternoon.
25|6| Say: the One who knows the secret of the skies and the earth sent it down. Indeed He is forgiving and merciful.
25|7| And they said: what is with this messenger that he eats the food and he walks in the markets (and streets), why was not an angel sent down to him to be a warner with him?
25|8| Or a treasure is not given to him, or there is no garden for him to eat from it? And the wrongdoers said: you are only following a bewitched man.
25|9| See how they gave examples about you, they are lost and they cannot find a way.
25|10| Blessed is the One who gives you better than that if He wants, gardens which rivers flow through them and He gives you palaces.
25|11| No, but they denied the hour and We prepared a burning fire for anyone who denies the hour.
25|12| When it sees them from a far place, they hear it raging and roaring.
25|13| And when they are thrown into a tight place of it, chained together, there they call for death.
25|14| Today do not call for death once, but call for death many times.
25|15| Say: is this better or the eternal garden that was promised to those who control themselves? It (garden) is a reward and a destination for them.
25|16| They have whatever they want in there, remaining forever. This is a promise that is your Master’s responsibility.
25|17| And a day He gathers them and whatever they served other than God, then He says: did you misguide these My servants or did they lose the way?
25|18| They say: You are flawless, it is not appropriate for us to take any protector other than You, but You gave them and their fathers joy (and comfort) until they forgot the reminder and they became doomed people.
25|19| So they have denied you in what you say, therefore you cannot turn away (the punishment) or get any help (yourselves). And whoever does wrong among you, We make him taste a great punishment.
25|20| And We did not send any of the messengers before you unless they ate food and walked in the market, and We made some of you a test for the others, would you persevere? And your Master sees all.
25|21| And those who do not expect to meet Us said: why was not the angels sent down to us, or why do we not see our Master? They have certainly been arrogant about themselves, and they rebelled, a great rebellion.
25|22| A day that they see the angels, there is no good news for the guilty ones on that day, and they (the angles) say: a forbidden ban (that you receive God's mercy).
25|23| And We turn to the work they did and We make it scattered dust.
25|24| On that day, inhabitants of the garden have a good living place and better relaxing place.
25|25| A day that the sky with the clouds splits apart and the angels are sent down in a great descent,
25|26| on that day the true rule belongs to the beneficent, and it is a difficult day for the disbelievers.
25|27| And a day that the wrongdoer bites his hands, saying: I wish I had taken the way along with the messenger.
25|28| Woe to me, I wish I had not taken so and so as a friend.
25|29| He has certainly led me away from the reminder after it came to me, and Satan is a deserter of the human being (as he declares himself clear of the human being).
25|30| And the messenger says: my Master, indeed my people made this Quran abandoned.
25|31| And that is how We made an enemy from the guilty ones for every messenger . And your Master is enough as a guide and a helper.
25|32| And those who disbelieved said: why was not the Quran sent down to him all at once? It is like that, so that We strengthen your heart with it, and We recited it to you distinctly (and slowly).
25|33| And they do not give you an example (or question) unless We bring you the truth and the best explanation (of it).
25|34| Those who are gathered (lying down) on their faces into hell, they are in worst position and are far (lost) from the way.
25|35| And We have certainly given Moses the book and appointed his brother Aaron with him as his minister.
25|36| Then We said: you both go to the people who denied Our signs. Then We destroyed them, a total destruction.
25|37| And We drowned people of Noah when they denied the messengers and We made them a sign for the people, and We prepared a painful punishment for the wrongdoers.
25|38| And (We also destroyed) Aad and Thamud and the inhabitants of the Rass (the well) and many generations between them.
25|39| And to each one We gave examples, and We destroyed them all, a total destruction.
25|40| And they have certainly come upon the town that was rained on, the bad rain. Did they not used to see it? No, but they do not expect resurrection. 
25|41| And when they see you, they only take you as a joke (saying): is this the one whom God sent as a messenger?
25|42| He almost led us away from our gods, if we had not persevered on them. They will know who is more off the (right) way when they see the punishment
25|43| Did you see he who took his desire as his god? Are you his advocate?
25|44| Or do you think that most of them listen or understand? They are like animals. No, but they are more lost from a (right) way.
25|45| Did you not see how you Master makes the shadow longer, and if He wanted He would have made it stand still, and We made the sun its guide.
25|46| Then We pull it toward Ourselves, an easy pull.
25|47| And He is the One who made the night as a cover for you, and the sleep as a rest, and He made the day to rise up (and work).
25|48| And He is the One who sent the winds as good news before His mercy, and We sent down pure water from the sky. 
25|49| In order to bring the dead land back to life with it, and make Our numerous creation of livestock and human beings drink it.
25|50| And We have certainly explained it to them (in various ways) so that they may take notice, but most people refuse to be anything except ungrateful (and disbeliever).
25|51| And if We wanted, We would have raised a warner in every town.
25|52| So do not obey the disbelievers, and try hard against them with it (Quran), a great try.
25|53| And He is the One who merged the two seas, this one sweet and drinkable and that one salty and bitter, and He placed a barrier and a forbidden ban between them.
25|54| And He is the One who created a human being from the water, then He made him blood relative and marriage relative. Your Master is capable.
25|55| And they serve other than God that which does not benefit them and does not harm them, and the disbeliever is a supporter (of others) against his Master.
25|56| We only sent you as a giver of good news and a warner.
25|57| Say: I do not ask you for any wage for it, except that someone wants to take a path to his Master.
25|58| And put your trust in the One who lives and does not die, and glorify Him with His praise, and He is enough to be well informed about His servants' sins.
25|59| The One who created the skies and the earth and whatever between them in six stages, then He settled on the throne, the beneficent. So ask about Him from a well informed one.
25|60| And when it is said to them be humble before the beneficent, they say: who is the beneficent, should we prostrate (and be humble) to what you order us? And it increases their disgust (and hatred).
25|61| Blessed is the One who placed constellations in the sky and placed a lamp (the sun) and a shining moon in it.
25|62| And He is the One who made the night and the day following (each other), for anyone who wants to take notice or wants to be thankful.
25|63| And servants of the beneficent are those who walk on the earth modestly (and unselfishly), and when the ignorant ones talk to them, they say: peace (and well-being).
25|64| And those who spend the night prostrating (showing humbleness) and standing before their Master,
25|65| and those who say: our Master, turn punishment of hell away from us, indeed its punishment is everlasting.
25|66| It is indeed a bad living place and a bad residence (and position).
25|67| And those who when they spend, they are not excessive and they are not stingy, and he maintains a proper balance between that. 
25|68| And those who do not call on any other god with God, and they do not kill anyone except justifiably (in the due process of law) as God made (the life) sacred, and do not commit adultery (and fornication). And anyone who does that faces punishment for his sins.
25|69| The punishment is doubled for him on the resurrection day, and he remains in there forever disgraced.
25|70| Except anyone who repents and believes and does good work, then God changes their bad deeds into good, and God is forgiving and merciful.
25|71| And whoever repents and does good work, the indeed he turns to God, a true repentance.
25|72| And those who do not bear false witness and when they encounter the useless (acts and talks) they pass by it honorably.
25|73| And those who when they are reminded of their Master’s signs, they do not fall down on them deaf and blind (not listening and seeing the signs).
25|74| And those who say: our Master, give us joy of eyes (and delight) by our spouses and children, and make us leader of those who control themselves.
25|75| They are rewarded with the chambers (in paradise) for what they persevered, and they are met with welcome and peace (and well-being) in it.
25|76| remaining in there forever. It is a good living place and a good residence (and position).
25|77| Say: my Master does not care about you if it was not for your calls. But you have certainly denied (the truth), so there will be an inevitable (punishment).
26|1| T. S. M. (Ta. Sin. Mim.)
26|2| These are verses of the clear (and clarifying) book.
26|3| You may kill yourself with grief because they do not become believers.
26|4| If We want, We send down a sign to them from the sky so their necks bend in humility for it.
26|5| No new reminder comes to them from the beneficent, unless they turn away from it.
26|6| They have denied, so the news of what they used to ridicule it is going to come to them.
26|7| Or did they not look at the earth, that how many of all kind of splendid plants did We grow in it?
26|8| Indeed there is a sign in that, and most of them are not believers.
26|9| And indeed your Master, He is the powerful and the merciful.
26|10| And (remember) when your Master called Moses: go to the wrongdoing people,
26|11| people of Pharaoh, (and ask) would they not be cautious (of God)?
26|12| He said: my Master, I am afraid that they deny me,
26|13| and my chest becomes tight and my tongue stutters, so send (the message) to Aaron.
26|14| And they have a charge against me, so I am afraid that they kill me.
26|15| He (God) said: no way, you two go with Our signs, We are with you, listening.
26|16| So you two go to Pharaoh and say: indeed we are messengers of the Master of Human kind,
26|17| send the children of Israel with us.
26|18| He (Pharaoh) said: did we not bring you up among us as a child, and you stayed among us for years of your life?
26|19| And you did your work that you did (and committed murder), and you are of the ungrateful ones.
26|20| He (Moses) said: I did it while I was of the lost ones (from the right path),
26|21| then I ran away from you because I was afraid of you, then my Master gave me wisdom and made me of the messengers.
26|22| And that is a favor that you tell me off about it, that you enslaved children of Israel (and you did not enslave or kill me)?
26|23| Pharaoh said: and what is Master of humankind?
26|24| He (Moses) said: Master of the skies and the earth and whatever between them, if you are sure.
26|25| He said to those around him: do you not hear (what he says)?
26|26| He (Moses) said: your Master and Master of your forefathers.
26|27| He said (to the others): your messenger, the one who was sent to you is certainly crazy.
26|28| He (Moses) said: Master of the east and the west and whatever between them, if you understand.
26|29| He said: if you take any god other than me, I shall make you of the prisoners.
26|30| He (Moses) said: even if I bring you something obvious.
26|31| He said: then bring it, if you are of the truthful ones.
26|32| So he threw his cane and it immediately was a visible serpent.
26|33| And he took out his hand, and it was white to the viewers.
26|34| He said to the assembly around him: indeed this is a knowledgeable (and skillful) magician.
26|35| He wants to drive you out of your land with his magic, so what do you instruct?
26|36| They said: put him and his brother off (for a while) and send gatherers to the cities
26|37| to bring you every skillful magician.
26|38| So the magicians were collected for an appointment on a known day. 
26|39| And people were told: would you come together?
26|40| We may follow the magicians if they are the winners.
26|41| So when the magicians came, they said to Pharaoh: is there a reward for us if we are the winners?
26|42| He said: yes, and then you will certainly be among the close ones.
26|43| Moses said to them: throw what you are throwing.
26|44| So they threw their ropes and their canes and they said: by Pharaoh’s power, we shall be the winners.
26|45| Then Moses threw his cane, and it immediately swallowed whatever they faked.
26|46| So the magicians fell, prostrating (and showing humbleness).
26|47| They said: we believed in the Master of Human kind,
26|48| Master of Moses and Aaron.
26|49| He (Pharaoh) said: did you believe in him before I give you permission? He is certainly your superior, the one who taught you the magic, and you will certainly know that I shall cut off your hands and feet on opposite side, and I shall crucify you all.
26|50| They said: no problem, indeed we are returners to our Master.
26|51| Indeed we hope that our Master forgives us our faults because we are the first of the believers.
26|52| And We revealed to Moses: travel with My servants by night, indeed you will be followed.
26|53| So Pharaoh sent gatherers to the cities,
26|54| (saying) indeed these are a small group,
26|55| and they certainly angered us
26|56| and we are all certainly alert (and ready).
26|57| So We drove them out of gardens and springs,
26|58| and treasures and honorable position.
26|59| That is how it was, and We left them as inheritance for children of Israel. 
26|60| So they (Pharaoh’s army) followed them at sunrise.
26|61| So when the two crowds saw each other, companions of Moses said: indeed we will be caught.
26|62| He (Moses) said: no way, indeed my Master is with me, He is going to guide me.
26|63| And We revealed to Moses to strike the sea with your cane. So it opened up, and each side became like a great mountain.
26|64| And We brought the others (Pharaoh’s army) near there.
26|65| And We saved Moses and those with him altogether.
26|66| Then We drowned the others.
26|67| Indeed there is a sign in that, and most of them are not believers.
26|68| And indeed your Master is the powerful and the merciful.
26|69| And read Abraham’s story to them.
26|70| When he said to his father and his people: what do you serve?
26|71| They said: we serve idols, and we continue to be devoted to them.
26|72| He said: do they hear you when you call on them?
26|73| Or do they benefit you or harm you?
26|74| They said: no, but we found our fathers doing like this.
26|75| He said: did you think what you were serving,
26|76| you and your forefathers?
26|77| Indeed they are my enemies, except the Master of Human kind,
26|78| the One who created me, and He guides me,
26|79| and the One who gives me food and gives me drink,
26|80| and when I get sick, then He heals me,
26|81| and the One who make me die, then He makes me alive,
26|82| and the One who, I hope that He forgives my mistakes on the judgment day.
26|83| My Master, give me wisdom and join me with the righteous,
26|84| and give me a good name on the tongue of the later ones (and future generations),
26|85| and make me among inheritors of garden of the delight,
26|86| and forgive my father, indeed he is of the lost ones,
26|87| and do not humiliate me on a day that they are raised,
26|88| a day that wealth and children have no benefit,
26|89| except anyone who brings a sound (and pure) heart to God.
26|90| And the garden is brought near for those who control themselves.
26|91| And the hellfire is made apparent to the misled ones. 
26|92| And it is said to them: where are what you were serving
26|93| other than God? Can they help you or help themselves?
26|94| So they and the misled ones are thrown headfirst into it (hellfire) 
26|95| and troops of Iblis (Satan), altogether.
26|96| And while they dispute about it, they say:
26|97| by God that we were in an obvious error,
26|98| when we made you equal to the Master of Human kind. 
26|99| And no one misguided us except the guilty ones.
26|100| So, we do not have any mediators
26|101| and no true friend.
26|102| And if there was a return for us (to live again), then we would become of the believers.
26|103| Indeed there is a sign in that, and most of them are not believers.
26|104| And indeed your Master is the powerful and the merciful.
26|105| People of Noah denied the messengers.
26|106| When their brother Noah said to them: would you not be cautious (of God)?
26|107| I am an honest messenger for you,
26|108| so be cautious of God and obey me.
26|109| And I do not ask you for any wage, for my wage is only responsibility of the Master of Human kind,
26|110| so be cautious of God and obey me.
26|111| They said: should we believe in you while the meanest (and the worst) follow you?
26|112| He said: I have no knowledge of what they used to do.
26|113| Their account is only upon my Master, if you realize.
26|114| And I do not drive away the believers.
26|115| I am only a clear warner.
26|116| They said: Noah, if you do not stop, you shall become among the stoned ones.
26|117| He said: my Master, indeed my people denied me,
26|118| so judge decisively (or open an opening) between me and them, and save me and anyone who is with me of the believers.
26|119| So We saved him and anyone with him in the loaded Ark.
26|120| Then afterward We drowned the rest.
26|121| Indeed there is a sign in that, and most of them are not believers.
26|122| And your Master is certainly powerful and merciful.
26|123| (People of) Aad denied the messengers,
26|124| when their brother Hud said to them: would you not be cautious (of God)?
26|125| I am an honest messenger for you,
26|126| so be cautious of God and obey me.
26|127| And I do not ask you for any wage, for my wage is only responsibility of the Master of Human kind.
26|128| Do you build a sign on every high place to fool around?
26|129| And you take up castles that you may live forever?
26|130| And when you attack, you attack as tyrants?
26|131| So be cautious of God and obey me.
26|132| And be cautious of the One who helped you with what you know.
26|133| He helped you with livestock and children
26|134| and gardens and springs.
26|135| Indeed I am afraid of the punishment of a great day upon you.
26|136| They said: it is the same to us whether you advise or are not of the advisors,
26|137| this is only character of the earlier ones,
26|138| and we will not be punished.
26|139| So they denied him, then We destroyed them. Indeed there is a sign in that, and most of them are not believers.
26|140| And indeed your Master is the powerful and the merciful.
26|141| (People of) Thamud denied the messengers,
26|142| when their brother Salih said to them: would you not be cautious (of God)?
26|143| I am an honest messenger for you,
26|144| so be cautious of God and obey me.
26|145| And I do not ask you for any wage, for my wage is only responsibility of the Master of Human kind.
26|146| Would you be left safe (and secure) in what is here?
26|147| In gardens and springs
26|148| and plantations and a palm tree with its ripe (and delicious) fruit cluster
26|149| and houses you skillfully carve out of the mountains.
26|150| So be cautious of God and obey me,
26|151| and do not obey order of the excessive ones,
26|152| those who commit corruption on the earth and do not reform.
26|153| They said: you are only of the bewitched ones,
26|154| you are only a human being like us, so bring a miracle if you are of the truthful ones.
26|155| He said: this is a (female) camel, she has (a portion of) drink and you have your (portion of) drink, on a known day.
26|156| And do not touch her with harm otherwise the punishment of a great day takes you.
26|157| So they killed her, then they became regretful.
26|158| Then the punishment took them. Indeed there is a sign in that, and most of them are not believers.
26|159| And indeed your Master is the powerful and the merciful.
26|160| People of Lot denied the messengers,
26|161| when their brother Lot said to them: would you not be cautious (of God)?
26|162| I am an honest messenger for you,
26|163| so be cautious of God and obey me.
26|164| And I do not ask you for any wage, for my wage is only responsibility of the Master of Human kind.
26|165| Do you approach the males among humankind?
26|166| And you leave what your Master created for you as your wives? No, but you are people who exceed the limits.
26|167| They said: Lot, if you do not stop, you shall be of those driven out.
26|168| He said: indeed I am of those who despise your action.
26|169| My Master, save me and my family from what they do.
26|170| So We saved him and his family altogether,
26|171| except an old woman (his wife who was) among those staying behind. 
26|172| Then We destroyed the others.
26|173| And We poured down a rain on them, and it was an awful rain on those who were warned.
26|174| Indeed there is a sign in that, and most of them are not believers.
26|175| And indeed your Master is the powerful and the merciful.
26|176| The inhabitants of the woods (people of Midian) denied the messengers,
26|177| when Shu'aib said to them: would you not be cautious (of God)?
26|178| I am an honest messenger for you,
26|179| so be cautious of God and obey me.
26|180| And I do not ask you for any wage, for my wage is only responsibility of the Master of Human kind.
26|181| Give the full measure, and do not be of those who give less (than due),
26|182| and weigh with accurate scale,
26|183| and do not shortchange people their things and do not do mischief on the earth as corruptors.
26|184| And be cautious of the One who created you and the earlier generations.
26|185| They said: indeed you are of the bewitched ones,
26|186| you are only a human being like us, and we think you are among the liars.
26|187| So, make pieces of the sky fall on us, if you are of the truthful ones.
26|188| He said: my Master knows best what you do.
26|189| So they denied him, then the punishment of day of the covering clouds (of fire) took them. Indeed it was the punishment of a great day.
26|190| Indeed there is a sign in that, and most of them are not believers.
26|191| And indeed your Master is the powerful and the merciful.
26|192| And it (Quran) is certainly a sending down by the Master of Human kind.
26|193| The honest spirit (Gabriel) came down with it
26|194| to your heart so that you be of the warners,
26|195| in clear Arabic language.
26|196| And indeed it is in the scriptures of the earlier ones.
26|197| Is it not a sign for them that the knowledgeable children of Israel know it?
26|198| And if We had sent it down to someone of the non-Arabs,
26|199| and he had read it to them, they would not have been believers in it. 
26|200| That is how We insert/pass it through the hearts of guilty ones,
26|201| they would not believe in it until they see the painful punishment.
26|202| And it comes to them suddenly while they do not realize.
26|203| Then they say: may we be given a delay?
26|204| Do they still want to rush Our punishment?
26|205| So did you think that if We make them enjoy for some years,
26|206| then what they were promised (the punishment) comes to them,
26|207| what they were made to enjoy would not be of any use to them?
26|208| We did not destroy any town (or population) unless there were warners for it
26|209| to remind, and We were not unjust.
26|210| And the devils did not come down with it (Quran).
26|211| It is not appropriate for them, and they can not.
26|212| Indeed they are blocked from the hearing (of it).
26|213| So do not call on another god with God, otherwise you become of the punished ones.
26|214| And warn your closest family (and tribe members).
26|215| And lower your wing (and be kind) for anyone who follows you among the believers.
26|216| And If they disobey you, then say: I am clear of what you do.
26|217| And put your trust in the powerful, the merciful.
26|218| The One who sees you when you stand (for prayer)
26|219| and your movement among those who prostrate (and show humbleness).
26|220| Indeed He hears all and knows all.
26|221| Should I inform you of whom the devils come down on?
26|222| They come down on every lying sinner,
26|223| who give ear (and listen to the devils), and most of them are liars.
26|224| And the poets, the misled ones (those who lost the right way) follow them.
26|225| Did you not see that they drift into every valley (and subject),
26|226| and they say what they do not do?
26|227| Except those (poets) who believe and do good works and often remember God and help/defend themselves after they are wronged. And those who do wrong are going to know to what return they will return.
27|1| T. S. (Ta. Sin.). These are verses of the Quran and a clear (and clarifying) book,
27|2| a guide and good news for the believers.
27|3| Those who perform the mandatory prayer and give to the mandatory charity and they are certain of the hereafter.
27|4| Indeed those who do not believe in the hereafter, We beautified their works for them, so they are blindly wandering.
27|5| They are those whom the bad punishment is for them and they are the worst losers in the hereafter.
27|6| And you certainly receive the Quran from a wise and knowledgeable One.
27|7| (Remember) when Moses said to his family: I noticed a fire, I am going to bring some news from it or I bring a burning stick of it so that you may warm yourselves.
27|8| So when he got to it, he was called: blessed is He who is in the fire and anyone around it, and glory to God, Master or humankind,
27|9| Moses, indeed it is I, God, the powerful, the wise.
27|10| Throw down your cane. So when he saw it wiggling as if it was a serpent, he turned back running away and he did not look back. Moses, do not be afraid, indeed the messengers are not afraid before Me,
27|11| and neither is anyone who did wrong then he changed to goodness after badness, as indeed I am forgiving and merciful.
27|12| And put your hand into the opening of your shirt, it comes out white without any disease, these are among nine miracles for Pharaoh and his people. Indeed they are disobedient people.
27|13| So when Our eye opening miracles came to them, they said: this is an obvious magic.
27|14| And they rejected it wrongfully and arrogantly while their souls were certain of it. So see what the end of the corruptors was.
27|15| And We have certainly given David and Solomon knowledge, and they both said: all praise belongs to God, the One who preferred us over many of His believing servants.
27|16| And Solomon inherited from David, and he said: people, we were taught the language of the birds, and were given from everything. Indeed this is the obvious grace.
27|17| And his troops of Jinn and humans and the birds were gathered before Solomon, and they were set in rows.
27|18| Until when they came to the valley of the ants. An ant said: ants, get into your nests, so Solomon and his troops do not crush you while they do not realize.
27|19| So he smiled, laughing from her word and said: my Master, enable me to thank for Your favors that You granted me and my parents, and to do good work to please You, and admit me among Your righteous servants by Your mercy. 
27|20| And he inspected the birds, then he said: what is with me, I do not see hoopoe, is he absent?
27|21| I shall punish him, a severe punishment, or I shall slaughter him unless he brings me a clear reason.
27|22| So he waited not too long, then he said: I found out what you did not know it, and I brought you confirmed news from Sheba.
27|23| I found that a woman rules them and she was given from everything and she has a great throne.
27|24| I found her and her people prostrate (and show humbleness) to the sun instead of God, and Satan beautified their deeds for them, and kept them away from the (right) way, so they are not guided,
27|25| that they do not prostrate before God, the One who brings out the hidden things in the skies and the earth, and He knows what you hide and what you disclose.
27|26| God, there is no god except Him, Master of the great throne.
27|27| He (Solomon) said: we are going to see if you told the truth or you are of the liars.
27|28| Go with this letter of mine and deliver it to them, then leave them and see what they return (as answer).
27|29| She (the queen of Sheba) said: counselors, indeed an honorable letter was delivered to me.
27|30| It is from Solomon, and it (reads): in the name of God the beneficent, the merciful.
27|31| Do not be arrogant against me, and come to me surrendered.
27|32| She said: counselors, advise me in my affair, for I am not to decide on any matter until you are present (and bear witness).
27|33| They said: we have power and we have great fighting (capabilities), but the command is yours, so see what you command.
27|34| She said: indeed when the kings enter any town, they ruin it, and they make its most powerful (and respected) people most humiliated, and that is what they do.
27|35| And I am going to send them a gift and see with what the messengers return.
27|36| So when he came to Solomon, he (Solomon) said: do you help me with wealth? What God gave me is better than what He gave you, yet you are happy about your gift.
27|37| Return to them, for we shall come to them with troops that they have no power to face it, and we shall drive them out of there in humiliation while they are subdued.
27|38| He said: counselors, which one of you brings me her throne before they come to me surrendered?
27|39| A bold one of the Jinn said: I bring it to you before you get up from your position, and I am certainly strong and honest for it.
27|40| Someone who had knowledge of the book said: I bring it to you before you blink. So when he saw it placed before him, he said: this is from my Master's grace in order to test me whether I am grateful or ungrateful, and whoever is grateful then he is only grateful for himself, and whoever is ungrateful then indeed my Master is rich (and without needs) and noble.
27|41| He said: disguise her throne for her, so we see if she discovers it or she is one of those who do not discover.
27|42| So when she came, she was told: is your throne like this? She said: it is like it, and we were given the knowledge before that and we were surrendered.
27|43| And what she used to served other than God held her off (from the truth). Indeed she was one of the disbelieving people.
27|44| She was told: enter the palace. So when she saw it, she thought it is deep water and she exposed her legs (by pulling up her dress). He said: it is a palace paved with glasses/crystals. She said: my Master, indeed I did wrong to myself, and I submit with Solomon to God, Master of humankind.
27|45| And we have certainly sent their brother Salih to Thamud (saying): serve God. Then all of a sudden they were two groups disputing (with each other).
27|46| He said: my people, why do you rush to the badness before the goodness, why do you not ask forgiveness from God, so that you may receive mercy?
27|47| They said: we consider you and anyone with you as bad omen. He said: your bad omen is from God, but you are people being tested.
27|48| And they were nine heads of families in the city committing corruption in the land, and would not reform.
27|49| They said: (let us) swear by God that we shall attack (and kill) him and his family at night, then we shall say to his heirs (and friends) that we were not present at the killing of his family, and we are certainly truthful.
27|50| They plotted a plot, and We planned a plot, and they do not realize.
27|51| So see what the end of their plot was, We destroyed them and their people altogether.
27|52| These are their houses, fallen down (and ruined) because of what they did wrong. Indeed there is a sign in that for people who know.
27|53| And We saved those who believed and were controlling themselves.
27|54| And (remember) Lot when he said to his people: do you commit the indecency while you see (and notice)?
27|55| Do you approach men lustfully instead of women? You are ignorant people.
27|56| And the answer of his people was only to say: drive Lot’s family out of your town, indeed they are people who pretend to be (or want to remain) pure.
27|57| So We saved him and his family except his wife, whom We destined her among those staying behind.
27|58| And We poured down a rain (of stone) on them, and it was an awful rain on those who were warned.
27|59| Say: all praise belongs to God, and peace (and well-being) upon His servants whom He chose. Is God better or what you associate (with Him)?
27|60| Or One who created the skies and the earth and sent down rain for you from the sky, then We grew beautiful (and delightful) gardens with it that you could not grow their trees. Is there a god with God? No, but they are people who set up equals (for God).
27|61| Or One who made the earth a habitat and placed rivers through it and placed mountain for it and placed a barrier between the two seas? Is there a god with God? No, but most of them do not know.
27|62| Or One who answers the distressed when he prays to Him and He removes the badness and makes you successors (inheritors) on the earth? Is there a god with God? You take a little notice.
27|63| Or One who guides you in darkness of the land and the sea and One who sends the winds as good news before His mercy? Is there a god with God? God is above what they associate (with Him).
27|64| Or One who initiates the creation then brings it back and provides for you from the sky and the earth? Is there a god with God? Say: bring your proof if you are truthful.
27|65| Say: no one in the skies and on the earth knows the unseen except God, and they do not realize when they will be raised.
27|66| No, but their knowledge falls short about the hereafter, rather they are in doubt about it or they are blind about it.
27|67| And those who disbelieved say: are we brought out when we and our fathers become dust?
27|68| We and our fathers have certainly been promised this in the past. This is only stories of the earlier ones.
27|69| Say: travel throughout the earth and see what the end of the guilty ones was.
27|70| And do not be sad about them, and do not be troubled from what they plot.
27|71| And they say: when is this promise if you are truthful?
27|72| Say: perhaps, some of that which you want to be rushed is right behind you.
27|73| And indeed your Master is graceful to the people, but most of them do not thank.
27|74| And your Master indeed knows what their chests hide and what they disclose.
27|75| And there is nothing hidden in the sky and on the earth unless it is in a clear book.
27|76| Indeed this Quran tells the children of Israel most of what they disagree about it.
27|77| And indeed it is a guide and a mercy for the believers.
27|78| Indeed your Master judges between them with His command, and He is the powerful and the knowledgeable.
27|79| So put your trust in God, indeed you are on the clear truth.
27|80| Indeed you cannot make the dead hear, or make the deaf hear the call when they turn their back going away. 
27|81| And you are not a guide to the blind from their getting lost. You can only make someone listen who believes in Our signs and they are submitted.
27|82| And when the word (of punishment) happens to them, We bring out a creature from the earth for them, speaking to them that the people were not sure of Our signs.
27|83| And on a day that We gather from every community a group of those who denied Our signs, and they are set in rows.
27|84| Until when they come, He says: did you deny My signs while you did not fully understand them by (your) knowledge, what were you doing?
27|85| And the word (of punishment) happens to them because of what they did wrong, and they do not speak (a word).
27|86| Did they not see that We made the night in order to rest in it, and the day to see. There are certainly signs in that for people who believe.
27|87| And on a day that the trumpet is blown, then everyone in the skies and everyone on the earth are scared except anyone who God wants, and they all come to Him humbled.
27|88| And you see the mountains, thinking they are motionless while they move as the clouds move. God’s making, the One who made everything perfect. Indeed He is well aware of what you do.
27|89| Anyone who comes with the good (deeds), then there is better than that for him, and they are safe from fear on that day.
27|90| And anyone who comes with the bad (deeds), then he is thrown down into the fire on their faces, (and they are told) are you being repaid except for what you used to do?
27|91| I am ordered to only serve the Master of this land, the One who made it sacred and everything belongs to Him, and I am ordered to be of the submitted ones,
27|92| and to read the Quran. So anyone who is guided (to the right path),then he is only guided for himself, and anyone who loses the way then say: I am only of the warners.
27|93| And say: all praise belongs to God, He is going to show you His signs so you recognize them, and your Master is not unaware of what you do.
28|1| T. S. M. (Ta. Sin. Mim.)
28|2| These are verses of the clear (and clarifying) book.
28|3| We read to you from true story of Moses and Pharaoh, for people who believe.
28|4| Indeed Pharaoh was high (and mighty) in the land and made his people into sects, weakening a group of them (children of Israel), killing their sons and keeping their women alive. Indeed he was of the corruptors.
28|5| And We wanted to do a favor to those who were weak in the land and to make them leaders and to make them the inheritors,
28|6| And to establish them (and give them power) in the land and  to show Pharaoh and Haman and their troops what they used to fear.
28|7| And We revealed to Moses’ mother to nurse him, and when you are afraid for him then throw him in the sea/river and do not be afraid and do not be sad, We bring him back to you and We make him one of the messengers.
28|8| Then Pharaoh’s family picked him up, so that he would be an enemy and a sorrow for them. Indeed Pharaoh and Haman and their troops were sinners.
28|9| And Pharaoh’s wife said: (he is) joy of eye for me and for you, do not kill him, perhaps he benefits us or we take him as a son, and they did not realize (what they were doing).
28|10| And heart of Moses’ mother became empty (of sorrow or fear or patience). She almost exposed him if We had not strengthened her heart in order to be of the believers.
28|11| And she said to his sister: follow him. So she watched him from a distance, while they did not realize.
28|12| And We previously prohibited the nursing mothers from him, so she (Moses’ sister) said to them: should I show you a household to take care of him for you and they are well wishers for him.
28|13| So we gave him back to his mother to delight her and she would not be sad and so that she knows that God's promise is true, but most of them do not know.
28|14| And when he reached his maturity and he settled, We gave him wisdom and knowledge. And that is how We reward the good doers.
28|15| And he entered the city when its people were unaware, then he found two men fighting in it, this one from his own sect (Israelite), and that one from his enemy (Egyptian). Then the one from his sect asked for his help against the one from his enemy. So Moses punched him and killed him. He said: this was Satan's work, indeed he is an obvious misguiding enemy.
28|16| He said: my Master, indeed I did wrong to myself, so forgive me. So He forgave him. Indeed He is the forgiving, the merciful.
28|17| He said: my Master, because of what You favored upon me, I will never be a supporter of the guilty ones.
28|18| So he was in the city in the morning afraid and watchful, then all of a sudden the one who asked for his help yesterday cried out for his help (again). Moses told him: indeed, you are certainly an obvious troublemaker.
28|19| So when he wanted to attack the one who was enemy of both of them, he said: Moses, do you want to kill me as you killed a person yesterday? You only want to be a bully on the land and you do not want to be of the reformers.
28|20| And a man came to him rushing from the far side of the city, saying: Moses, indeed the assembly men are consulting about you to kill you, so get out (immediately), indeed I am of the well wishers for you.
28|21| So he went out of it afraid and watchful. He said: my Master, save me from the wrongdoing people.
28|22| And when he headed toward Midian, he said: perhaps my Master guides me to the right way.
28|23| And when he reached Midian’s water, he found a group of people watering (their animals) from it, and he found two women holding back (their animals) away from them. He said: what do you want? They said: we cannot water (our animals) until the shepherds drive (their animals) away, and our father is a very old man (Shu’aib or Jethro).
28|24| So he watered (their animals) for them, then he went back to the shade and said: my Master, indeed I am in need of whatever good you send down to me.
28|25| Then one of the two women came to him walking bashfully, and said: my father invites you to pay your wage for watering for us. So when he came up to him and told him the story, he said: do not be afraid, you are safe from the wrongdoing people.
28|26| One of two women said: my father, hire him, indeed the best one you want to hire is the strong and the honest.
28|27| He said: I want to marry off one of my two daughters to you, on condition that you work for me eight years, and if you complete ten, it is of your own choice, and I do not want to make it difficult for you, God willing, you are going to find me of the righteous.
28|28| He (Moses) said: this is (an agreement) between me and you, whichever of the two periods I complete, there should be no hostility against me, and God is the trustee over what we say. 
28|29| So when Moses completed the term and was traveling with his family, he noticed a fire from the side of the mountain (Mount Sinai). He said to his family: wait, I noticed a fire, maybe I can bring some news from it, or a piece of fire so you may warm yourselves.
28|30| So when he came up to it, he was called from the tree in a blessed spot on the right side of the valley: Moses, indeed I am God, Master of humankind,
28|31| throw down your cane. So when he saw it moving as if it was a serpent, he turned back running away and he did not look back. (He was told: ) Moses, come close and do not be afraid, indeed you are of the ones in safety.
28|32| Insert your hand into opening of your shirt, it comes out white without any disease, and press your arm to yourself (to be free) from the fear. These are two proofs from your Master for Pharaoh and his assembly. They are indeed disobedient people.
28|33| He said: my Master, I killed one of them, so I am afraid that they kill me.
28|34| And my brother Aaron, he is more eloquent in language than me, so send him with me as a support to confirm me, indeed I am afraid that they deny me.
28|35| He (God) said: We are going to strengthen your arm with your brother, and We give you both a reason so they would not touch either of you, and because of Our miracles you two and those who follow you are the winners.
28|36| So when Moses came up to them with Our clear miracles, they said: this is nothing but fabricated magic, and we did not hear of this from our forefathers.
28|37| And Moses said: my Master knows best who brought the guidance from Him, and who has the final home, indeed the wrongdoers would not succeed.
28|38| And Pharaoh said: counselors, I do not know of any god for you other than me, so Haman light me a fire for me over the clay (to bake bricks), then make me a palace so I may look at god of Moses, and indeed I think of him as one of the liars.
28|39| And he and his troops were unjustifiably arrogant on the land, and they assumed that they would not be returned to Us.
28|40| So We took him and his troops, then We threw them into the sea. So see what the end of the wrongdoers was.
28|41| And We made them leaders, inviting (people) to the fire, and they will not be helped on the resurrection day.
28|42| And We made a curse follow them in this world, and on the resurrection day they are among the ugly ones.
28|43| And We have certainly given Moses the book, after We destroyed the earlier generations, an insight and a guide and a mercy for the people, so that they may take notice.
28|44| And you were not on the western side (of the mountain) when We issued the order to Moses and you were not of the witnesses.
28|45| And We created generations (after Moses) and life was lengthened for them. And you were not staying among people of Midian to read Our signs to them, but We are the sender (of messengers).
28|46| And you were not on the side of the mountain (Mount Sinai) when We called (Moses), but this is a mercy from your Master to warn a people whom a warner did not come to them before you, so they may take notice.
28|47| And if they suffer a tragedy because of what their hands sent ahead (what they did), then they say: our Master, why did You not send us a messenger so we follow Your signs and we become of the believers?
28|48| Then when the truth came to them from Us, they said: why was he not given (miracles) like what Moses was given? Did they not previously disbelieve in what was given to Moses? They said: two magic (Torah and Quran) backing each other up. And they said: indeed we are disbelievers to all.
28|49| Say: if you are truthful, then bring a book from God which is a better guide than them that I follow it, if you are truthful.
28|50| So if they did not answer you, then know that they only follow their desires (and opinions). And who is more mistaken than someone who follows his desire (and opinion) without guidance from God? Indeed God does not guide the wrongdoing people.
28|51| And We have certainly connected the word for them so they may take notice.
28|52| Those whom We gave them the book before it, they believe in it.
28|53| And when it is read to them they say: we believed in it, indeed it is the truth from our Master, indeed we were submitted before it.
28|54| They are given their reward twice because of what they persevered, and they counter the badness with the goodness and they spend (in charity) from what We provide them.
28|55| And when they hear useless (talk) they stay away from it and say: our deeds for us and your deeds for you, peace (and well-being) upon you, we do not want (to have anything to do with) the ignorant ones.
28|56| Indeed you cannot guide anyone you like, but God guides anyone He wants, and He knows best who the guided ones are.
28|57| And they said: if we follow the guidance with you, we will be taken away from our land. Did We not establish them in a safe sanctuary, to which fruits of everything are brought as provision from Us? But most of them do not know.
28|58| And how many a town did We destroy that rejoiced (excessively) in their livelihood (and wealth)? So those are their houses, uninhabited after them, except a few. And We are the inheritors.
28|59| And your Master is not destroyer of the towns until He raises a messenger in their center, reading them Our signs. And We are not destroyer of the towns unless their people are wrongdoers.
28|60| And everything you are given is enjoyment of this world’s life and its decoration (and luxuries), and whatever (reward) is with God is better and more lasting. Do you not understand?
28|61| Is someone whom We promised him a good promise and he meets it, the same as someone whom We made him enjoy the enjoyments of this world’s life, then on the resurrection day he is among the summoned ones? 
28|62| On a day that He calls them out and He says: where are My partners, the ones you were claiming?
28|63| Those against whom the word (of punishment) is justified, say: our Master, these are the ones whom we misled, we misled them as we were misled, we clear ourselves (from them) before You, they were not serving us.
28|64| And it is said: call on your partners (of God). So they call them, but they do answer them and they see the punishment, (and they wish) if only they were guided.
28|65| And on a day that He calls them out, then He says: what did you answer the messengers?
28|66| On that day the information is unclear to them, so they do not (even) ask each other.
28|67| As for anyone who repented and believed and did good work, perhaps he will be of the successful ones.
28|68| And your Master creates what He wants and He chooses (what He wants). There is no choice for them. God is flawless and is above what they associate (with Him).
28|69| And your Master knows what their chests hide and what they disclose.
28|70| And He is God, there is no god except Him, all praise in the first (this life) and the last (the hereafter) belongs to Him, and the command (and making rules) belongs to Him, and you are returned to Him.
28|71| Say: what do you think if God makes the night continuous over you until the resurrection day, what god other than God brings you light? Do you not listen?
28|72| Say: what do you think if God makes the day continuous over you until the resurrection day, what god other than God brings you night to rest in it? Do you not see?
28|73| And He made the night and the day for you by His mercy in order for you to rest in it and to pursue His bounty, and you may be thankful.
28|74| On a day when He calls them out, then He says: where are My partners, those whom you were claiming?
28|75| And We pull out a witness from every group, then We say: bring your proof. Then they will know that the truth belongs to God, and what they used to make up abandoned them.
28|76| Indeed Qarun was from people of Moses, and he was unjust against them. And We gave him (so much) of the treasures that its keys was too heavy for a bunch of strong men. When his people said to him: do not be overjoyed, indeed God does not like those who are overjoyed,
28|77| and pursue the home of the hereafter by what God gave you, and do not forget your share of the world, and do good as God did good to you, and do not pursue corruption in the land, indeed God does not like the corruptors.
28|78| He said: it was only given to me because of my knowledge. Did he not know that God has destroyed (many) generations before him that were stronger than him and more than him in collecting (wealth)? And the guilty ones are not questioned about their sins.
28|79| Then (one day) he came out to his people (dressed) in his jewelry. Those who wanted this world’s life said: we wish we had the same as what was given to Qarun, indeed he has a great fortune.
28|80| And those who were given the knowledge said: woe to you, God’s reward for anyone who believes and does good works is better, and none gets it except those who persevere.
28|81| So We sank him and his house down in the earth, then he had no body to help him other than God, and he could not help/defend himself.
28|82| And those who desired his position in the day before began to say: wow, it seems like God increases and decreases the provision for anyone of His servants that He wants, and if it was not for God’s favor upon us He would have sunk us down (in the earth),  wow, it seems like the disbelievers would not succeed.
28|83| That is the home of the hereafter, We made it for those who do not want superiority on the earth or corruption. And the end belongs to those who control themselves.
28|84| Anyone who comes with the good (deed) then he has a better (reward) than that, and anyone who comes with the bad (deed) then those who did bad deed are only punished for what they used to do.
28|85| Indeed the One who mandated the Quran to you, certainly brings you back to place of return. Say: my Master knows best anyone who brought the guidance and anyone who is in obvious error.
28|86| And you did not hope (or expect) that the book be passed on to you except as a mercy from your Master, so do not be a supporter for the disbelievers.
28|87| And do not let them turn you away from God’s signs after it was sent down to you, and invite (people) to your Master, and do not be of  the polytheists.
28|88| And do not call on another god with God, there is no god except Him. Everything perishes except His essence (and His being). The command (and making rules) belongs to Him, and you are returned to Him.
29|1| A.L.M. (Alif. Lam. Mim.)
29|2| Do the people think that they are left alone and they are not tested if they say we believe?
29|3| And We have certainly tested those before them, so God certainly knows those who are truthful and He certainly knows the liars.
29|4| Or do those who do the bad deeds think that they outdo us? What a bad judgment the make.
29|5| Anyone who is hoping to meet God, (should know) that God’s appointed time is certainly coming, and He hears all and He knows all.
29|6| And anyone who tries (in God's way), indeed tries for himself. Indeed God doess not need any being.
29|7| And those who believed and did good works, We shall remove their bad deeds from them and We shall reward them better than what they were doing.
29|8| And We instructed the human being to be good to his parents, and if they try to make you associate (partners) with Me that which you have no knowledge of it, then do not obey them. Your return is to Me, and I inform you of what you were doing.
29|9| And those who believed and did good works, We shall admit them among the righteous. 
29|10| And some of the people say we believed in God, but when he is harassed because of God, he considers people’s harassment as God’s punishment, and if help (and victory) comes from your Master they shall say: indeed we were with you. Does not God know better what is in the minds of humankind?
29|11| And God certainly knows those who believed and He certainly knows the hypocrites.
29|12| And those who disbelieved say to those who believed: follow our way and we shall carry (and take responsibility for) your sins. But they are not carriers of the least bit of their sins, they are certainly liars.
29|13| And they shall carry their loads and loads (of others) with their loads, and on the resurrection day they shall be questioned about what they used to fabricate.
29|14| And We have certainly sent Noah to his people and he stayed (and lived) among them a thousand years less fifty years (or nine hundred fifty years), then the flood took them while they were wrongdoers.
29|15| Then We saved him and inhabitants of the Ark, and We made it a sign for humankind.
29|16| And (remember) Abraham when he said to his people: serve God and be cautious of Him, that is better for you if you knew.
29|17| You only serve idols other than God, and you create a lie. Indeed those whom you serve other than God do not possess any provision for you, so look for the provision from God and serve Him and be thankful to Him, as you are returned to Him.
29|18| And if you deny, groups before you have also denied, and the messenger's responsibility is only the clear preaching.
29|19| Did you not see how God initiates the creation and then brings it back? Indeed that is easy for God.
29|20| Say: travel throughout the earth and see how He initiated the creation, then God creates another creation, God is capable of everything.
29|21| He punishes anyone He wants and has mercy on anyone He wants, and you are turned over to Him.
29|22| And you cannot weaken/escape (God) on the earth or in the skies, and there is no protector or helper for you other than God.
29|23| And those who disbelieved in God's signs and meeting Him (in the hereafter), they are hopeless of My mercy and they have a painful punishment.
29|24| So there was no answer from his people except to say: kill him or burn him. So God saved him from the fire. Indeed there are signs in that for people who believe.
29|25| And he said: you only took idols other than God because of friendship among yourselves in this world’s life, then on the resurrection day some of you reject the others and some of you curse the others, and the fire is your housing and you will have no helpers.
29|26| Then Lot believed in him and he (Abraham or Lot) said: indeed I am an emigrant to my Master, indeed He is he powerful and the wise.
29|27| And We gave him Isaac and Jacob and We put the prophethood and the book for his descendants, and We gave him his reward in the world, and in the hereafter he is certainly of the righteous.
29|28| And (remember) Lot when he said to his people: you certainly commit the indecency that none of humankind did it before you.
29|29| Do you approach the males and cut off the way and you commit the unacceptable in your gatherings? But there was no answer from his people except to say: bring us God’s punishment if you are of the truthful.
29|30| He said: my Master, help me against the corrupting people.
29|31| And when Our messengers brought Abraham the good news, they said: indeed we are destroyers of this town's people, for its people are wrongdoers.
29|32| He said: indeed Lot is in it. They said: we know better who is in it, we shall save him and his family except his wife who is among those staying behind.
29|33| And when Our messengers came to Lot, he was upset about them and he felt uneasy about them, and they said: do not be afraid and do not be sad, for we are you and your family’s savior except your wife who is among those staying behind.
29|34| Indeed We are bringing down a punishment on people of this town from the sky because they were disobeying.
29|35| And We have certainly left part of it as a clear sign for people who understand.
29|36| And (We sent) their brother Shu'aib to Midian. Then he said: my people, serve God and expect the last day and do not do mischief on the earth as corruptors.
29|37| So they denied him, then the earthquake took them, and they became motionless bodies in their houses.
29|38| And (We destroyed) Aad and Thamud, and it has become clear to you by their houses. Satan beautified their works for them, turning them away from the way even though they were able to see.
29|39| And (We destroyed) Qarun and Pharaoh and Haman. And Moses has certainly brought them the clear proofs, but they were arrogant on the earth, and they were not overtaking (Our punishment).
29|40| We took each one (into punishment) for his sin, We sent some of them a sandstorm, and We took some of them with the awesome roar, and We sank some of them down into the earth, and We drowned some of them. God was not wrong to them, but they were doing wrong to themselves.
29|41| The example of those who took a protector other than God is like the spider that makes a house for herself, and indeed the weakest house is the spider’s house, if they knew.
29|42| Indeed God knows anything they call on besides Him, and He is the powerful and the wise.
29|43| And these are examples, We give them for the people and only the knowledgeable understand them.
29|44| God created the skies and the earth rightfully. Indeed there is a sign in that for the believers.
29|45| Read what is revealed to you from the book and perform the mandatory prayer, for the mandatory prayer prevents from the indecency and the wrong (and unacceptable), and God's remembrance is certainly greater, and God knows what you do.
29|46| And do not argue with people of the book except by that which is best (in manner and in reasoning), except those of them who did wrong, and say: we believe in that which was sent down to us and was sent down to you, and our God and your god is One (and the same), and we submit to Him.
29|47| And that is how We sent down the book to you, so those whom We gave them the book believe in it, and some of these are those who believe in it, and no one rejects Our signs except the disbelievers.
29|48| And you were not reading any book and you did not write any book with your right hand before it (Quran), for in that case those who follow falsehood would have certainly doubted.
29|49| No, but it is clear signs in the mind of those who were given the knowledge. And no one rejects Our signs except the wrongdoers.
29|50| And they said: why was not any miracle sent down to him from his Master? Say: all the miracles are with God, and I am only a clear warner.
29|51| Or was it not enough for them that We sent down to you the book that is read to them? Indeed there is a mercy and a reminder in that for people who believe.
29|52| Say: God is enough as a witness between me and between you, He knows whatever is in the skies and the earth, and those who believed in the falsehood and disbelieved in God, they are the losers.
29|53| They ask you to hurry up with the punishment. If it was not for a finite time, the punishment would have come to them, and it shall come to them suddenly while they do not realize.
29|54| They ask you to hurry up with the punishment, and certainly hell surrounds the disbelievers.
29|55| On a day that the punishment covers them from above them and from under their feet, and He says: taste (the result of) what you were doing.
29|56| My servants, those who believe, indeed My earth is vast, so serve only Me.
29|57| Every person tastes the death, then you are returned to Us.
29|58| And those who believed and did good works, We shall put them up in chambers of the garden which rivers flow through it, remaining in there forever. What an excellent reward for the doers (of good),
29|59| those who persevered and put their trust in their Master.
29|60| And how many of a creature does not carry its provision? God provides for them and for you, and He hears all and knows all.
29|61| And if you ask them: who created the skies and the earth and controlled the sun and the moon? They shall say: God. So how do they deviate?
29|62| God increases and decreases the provision for anyone He wants among His servants. Indeed God knows everything.
29|63| And if you ask them: who sent down rain from the sky and with it brought the land back to life after its death? They shall say: God. Say: all praise belongs to God. But most of them do not understand.
29|64| And this world’s life is only an amusement and a play, and indeed the home of the hereafter is the (real) life, if they knew.
29|65| So when they get on the ship, they call on God being sincere (and devoted) to Him in the religion, then when He saves them to the land, all of a sudden they associate (partners with Him),
29|66| in order to be ungrateful for what We gave them, and to enjoy (for a while), but they will know.
29|67| Or did they not see that We made a safe sanctuary (Sacred Mosque), while people were snatched away from around them? Then, do they believe in the falsehood and disbelieve in God’s favor.
29|68| And who is more wrong than someone who makes up a lie (and attributes it) to God or denies the truth when it comes to him? Is there not a place for the disbelievers in hell?
29|69| And those who try hard for Us, We shall guide them to Our ways, and God is certainly with the good doers.
30|1| A.L.M. (Alif. Lam. Mim.)
30|2| The Romans were defeated
30|3| in the lowest part of the earth, and they are going to be victorious after their defeat 
30|4| within a few (3 to 9) years. The command (and the judgment) belongs to God, in the past and in the future. And on that day the believers rejoice
30|5| in God’s help, as He helps anyone He wants and He is the powerful and the merciful.
30|6| (This is) God’s promise, and God does not break His promise, but most people do not know.
30|7| They know appearance (and facade) of this world’s life while they are negligent of the hereafter.
30|8| Or did they not think about themselves that God did not create the skies and the earth and whatever between them except with the truth and (for) a finite time? And indeed most of the people are disbelievers in meeting their Master.
30|9| Or did they not travel throughout the earth to see what the end of those before them was? They were more powerful than them and affected the earth more, and developed it more than they developed it, and their messengers brought them the clear proofs. It was not God who wronged them, but they were doing wrong to themselves.
30|10| Then the end of those who did bad was bad, because they denied God’s signs and they were ridiculing it.
30|11| God initiates the creation then brings it back then you are returned to Him.
30|12| And on a day that the hour establishes, the guilty are hopeless.
30|13| And there would not be any mediator for them among their partners (of God), and they become disbelievers in their partners.
30|14| And on a day that the hour establishes, on that day they are divided.
30|15| As for those who believed and did good works, then they are delighted in a meadow.
30|16| And as for those who disbelieved and denied Our signs and meeting of the hereafter, they are brought into the punishment.
30|17| So glorify God when you turn in at the night and when you get up in the morning. 
30|18| And all praise in the skies and the earth and evening and during noon belongs to Him.
30|19| He brings out the living from the dead and He brings out the dead from the living and He brings the land back to life after its death. And that is how you are brought out (back to life).
30|20| And among His signs is that He created you from dust, then all of a sudden you are human beings spreading out (on the earth).
30|21| And among His signs is that He created spouses for you from yourselves to be tranquil with them, and He put friendship and kindness between you. Indeed there are signs in that for people who think.
30|22| And among His signs is creation of the skies and the earth and the difference of your languages and your colors. Indeed there are signs in that for humankind.
30|23| And among His signs is your sleep at the night, and the day while you pursuit His bounty. Indeed there are signs in that for people who listen.
30|24| And among His signs is His showing you the lightning as a fear and a hope, and He sends down rain from the sky bringing the land back to life with it after its death. Indeed there are signs in that for people who understand.
30|25| And among His signs is that the skies and the earth carry out by His command, then when He calls you from the earth with a call, you immediately come out.
30|26| And everyone in the skies and the earth belong to Him, they are all obedient to Him.
30|27| He is the One who initiates the creation then brings it back, and that is easier for Him. And the highest attributes in the skies and the earth belong to Him. And He is the powerful and the knowledgeable.
30|28| He gave you an example of yourselves. Is there, among those whom your right hand owns, any partner that you are equal in what we provided you and you are afraid of them as you are afraid of each other? That is how We explain the signs to people who understand? That is how We explain the signs to people who understand.
30|29| No, but those who do wrong follow their desires without any knowledge. Then who guides anyone whom God has misguided? And there are no helpers for them.
30|30| So set your course (and purpose) to the way of life of monotheism, God’s system (and constitution) which He created the people based upon it. There is no change in God’s creation. That is the lasting religion, but most of the people do not know.
30|31| Turning to Him (in repentance) and be cautious of Him and perform the mandatory prayers and do not be of the polytheists,
30|32| from those (polytheists) who divided their religion and became sects, every group happy with what is with them.
30|33| And when trouble touches the people, they call on their Master turning to Him (in repentance), then when He makes them taste from His mercy, then all of a sudden some of them associate (partners) with their Master,
30|34| in order to be unthankful for what We gave them. So enjoy (for a while), then you will know.
30|35| Or did We send down any reason to them and it speaks of what they were associating with Him?
30|36| And when We make the people taste a mercy, then they are happy with it, and if something bad happens to them because of what their hands sent ahead (and what they did) then they lose hope.
30|37| Or did they not see that God increases and decreases the provision for anyone He wants. Indeed there are signs in that for people who believe.
30|38| So give the relatives (and close ones) and the needy and the traveler (in need) their due. That is better for those who want God’s attention (and His pleasure), and they are the successful ones.
30|39| And whatever usury (excessive interest) you give to increase wealth of the people, it does not increase with God, while whatever you give in mandatory charity, wanting God's attention (and His pleasure), then those are the multiplied ones.
30|40| God is the One who created you, then provided for you, then makes you die, then makes you live. Is there any of your partners (of God) who can do any of those things? God is flawless and is above what they associate (with Him).
30|41| The corruption (and famine and drought) appeared in the land and the sea because of what the people’s hand did, so that He makes them taste some of that which they did, so they may return.
30|42| Say: travel throughout the earth and see what the end of those before (you) was. Most of them were polytheists.
30|43| So set your course (and purpose) to the lasting religion before a day comes that there is no return for it from God, on that day they are separated.
30|44| Anyone who disbelieves, then his disbelief is against him, and anyone who does good works, then they are provisioning (a good reward) for themselves.
30|45| So that He rewards those who believed and did good works from His grace. Indeed He does not like the disbelievers.
30|46| And among His signs is that He sends the winds bringing good news and to make you taste from His mercy, and so that the ships sail by His command and so that you pursue His bounty, and you may be thankful.
30|47| And We have certainly sent messengers to their people before you, and they brought them the clear proofs. Then We took revenge from those who were guilty, and helping the believers is Our responsibility.
30|48| God is the One who sends the winds to stir up (and raise) cloud, then He spreads it in the sky as He wants, and He makes it into pieces, then you see raindrops coming out from within it, then when He makes it fall on any of His servants that He wants, then they become cheerful,
30|49| even though they were hopeless before it was sent down on them.
30|50| So look at effects of God’s mercy, how He gives life to the land after its death. Indeed that is (God) giver of life to the dead, and He is capable of everything.
30|51| And if We send a wind that they see it turn (their crops) yellow, they certainly become ungrateful after that.
30|52| And indeed you cannot make the dead hear and you cannot make the deaf hear the call when they turn back going away.
30|53| And you are not a guide to the blind (who does not one to see the truth) about their error. You can only make someone listen who believes in Our signs and they are submitted.
30|54| God is the One who created you from (a state of) weakness, then He makes strength after weakness, then He makes weakness and gray hair (and old age) after strength. He creates what He wants, and He is the knowledgeable and the capable.
30|55| And on a day that the hour establishes, the guilty ones swear that they only stayed (dead) for an hour. That is how they used to deviate.
30|56| And those who were given the knowledge and the belief say: you have certainly stayed until the resurrection day according to God’s book (and His mandate), so this is the resurrection day, but you did not know.
30|57| So on that day, apology of those who did wrong has no benefit, and they are not asked to plea (to appease God). 
30|58| And We have certainly given all kinds of example in this Quran for the people, and if you bring them a sign (miracle), those who disbelieve shall say: you are only falsifiers.
30|59| That is how God puts a seal on the hearts of those who do not know.
30|60| So persevere (and be patient) for God’s promise is indeed true, and do not let those who are uncertain look down upon you.
31|1| A.L.M. (Alif. Lam. Mim.)
31|2| These are verses of the wise Book,
31|3| a guide and a mercy for the good doers,
31|4| those who perform the mandatory prayer and give to the mandatory charity and they are certain of the hereafter.
31|5| They are on guidance from their Master, and they are the successful ones.
31|6| And some of the people buy (and accept) the amusing (and baseless) saying in order to misguide (people) from God's way without knowledge, and they take it as a joke. They have a humiliating punishment.
31|7| And when Our verses are read to him, he turns away arrogantly as if he did not hear it or as if his ears are hard of hearing, so give him the news a painful punishment.
31|8| Indeed those who believed and did good works, gardens of the delight are for them,
31|9| remaining in them forever. God’s promise is true, and He is the powerful and the knowledgeable.
31|10| He created the skies without any pillars that you see it, and He placed firm mountains in the earth so that it does not shake you (as violently), and He scattered all kinds of creatures in it. And We sent down rain from the sky, then We grew all types of splendid plants in it.
31|11| This is God’s creation, so show me what did those besides Him created. No, but he wrongdoers are in an obvious error.
31|12| And We have certainly given Luqman the wisdom (saying): be thankful to God, And whoever is grateful, then he is only grateful for himself, and whoever is ungrateful then indeed God is needless and praiseworthy.
31|13| And (remember) when Luqman said to his son while advising him: my son, do not associate (any partner) with God, for associating (partners with God) is certainly a great wrongdoing.
31|14| And We instructed the human being about his parents, his mother carried him (getting) weaker and weaker, and his weaning (off breastfeeding) is in two years. You should be thankful to Me and your parents. The final return is to Me. 
31|15| And if they try to make you associate (partners) with Me that which you have no knowledge of, then do not obey them, but continue to be nice to them in this world, and follow the way of everyone who returned to Me (in repentance), then your return is to Me, and I inform you of what you were doing.
31|16| My son, indeed if it (your action) is the weight of a mustard seed and it is in a rock or in the skies or on the earth, God brings it (into account). Indeed God is nice and well informed.
31|17| My son, perform the mandatory prayer and instruct to the right (and acceptable) and prohibit from the wrong (and unacceptable) and be patient about what happens to you, indeed that is the matters of great determination .
31|18| And do not turn your cheek away from the people, and do not walk on the earth arrogantly, for God does not like every selfish show offs.
31|19| And be modest in your walking and lower your voice, for the most awful voice is certainly voice of the donkey.
31|20| Did you not see that God brought whatever in the skies and whatever on the earth under your control (and at your service), and He abundantly gave you His favor, apparent and hidden? And some of the people argue about God without any knowledge and without any guidance and without an enlightening book.
31|21| And when they are told follow what God sent down, they say: no, but we follow what we found our fathers upon it. Even if Satan was inviting them to the punishment of the burning fire.
31|22| And anyone who submits his manner (of life) to God and he is a good doer then he has indeed grabbed on to the firm handle, and the end of the affairs is with God.
31|23| And anyone who disbelieves, then do not let his disbelief make you sad. Their return is to Us, and We inform them of what they did. Indeed God knows well what is inside the chests (minds).
31|24| We let them enjoy for a little, then We force them to a severe punishment.
31|25| And if you ask them who created the skies and the earth? They shall say: God. Say: all praise belongs to God. No, but most of them do not know.
31|26| Whatever in the skies and the earth belongs to God. Indeed God is the rich (and needless) and the praiseworthy.
31|27| If whatever tree on the earth is (made into) pens, and the sea fill it up (with ink) and seven more seas (replenish it) after that, God’s words would not finish. Indeed God is powerful and knowledgeable.
31|28| Your creation and your resurrection is only like (creation of) a single person. Indeed God hears all and sees all.
31|29| Did you not see that God makes the night pass through the day and makes the day pass through the night, and He controlled the sun and the moon, each running (its course) in a finite time, and God is well informed of what you do?
31|30| That is because God is the truth, and that whatever they call on other than Him is the falsehood, and that God is the superior, the great.
31|31| Or did you not see that the ship sails in the sea by God’s favor, so that He shows you some of His signs? For there are certainly signs in that for every patient and thankful (person).
31|32| And when a wave covers them like the shades, they call on God being sincere to Him in the religion, then when He saves them to the land, some of them keep to the middle course, and no one rejects Our signs except every ungrateful traitor.
31|33| People, be cautious of your Master and fear a day when no father repays for his child and no child can repay anything for his father. Indeed God’s promise is true, so do not be deceived by this world’s life, and do not be deceived by the deceiver (Satan) about God.
31|34| Indeed knowledge of the hour is with God, and He sends down the rain and knows what is in the wombs, and no one knows what it will do tomorrow and no one knows in which land it will die. Indeed God is knowledgeable and well informed.
32|1| A.L.M. (Alif. Lam. Mim.)
32|2| Without a doubt, sending down the book is from the Master of Human kind.
32|3| Or do they say he made it up? No, but it is the truth from your Master in order for you to warn people whom a warner did not come to them before you, so that they may be guided.
32|4| God is the One who created the skies and the earth and whatever between them in six stages then He settled on the throne. There is no protector and no mediator for you other than Him. Do you not take notice?
32|5| He directs the affair from the sky to the earth then it goes up to Him in a day that its duration is one thousand years of what you count. 
32|6| This is knower of the unseen and the visible, the powerful, the merciful.
32|7| The One who created everything well, and He began the creation of the human being from clay.
32|8| Then He made his descendants from an extract of a despicable (and slimy) liquid. 
32|9| Then He shaped him and He blew from His breath/spirit into him, and He made you the hearing, the sight, and the heart. You give little thanks. 
32|10| And they said: when we disappear in the earth, will we be in a new creation? No, but they are disbelievers in meeting of their Master
32|11| Say: the angel of death, the one who is put in charge of you, makes you die, then you are returned to your Master.
32|12| And if you see when the guilty ones hang their heads down before their Master (saying):  our Master, we saw and we heard, so send us back that we do good works, we are certain.
32|13| And if We wanted, We would have given everyone its guidance, but the word from Me was proved, that I shall fill hell with the Jinn and the people altogether.
32|14| So taste (the punishment) because you forgot the meeting of this day of yours, (therefore) We forgot you, and taste the eternal punishment for what you were doing.
32|15| Only those believe in Our signs that when they are reminded of it, they fall down prostrating (showing humbleness), and with praise of their Master they glorify Him, and they are not arrogant.
32|16| Their sides separate from the beds (as they get up) to call on their Master afraid and hopeful, and they spend (in God's way) from what We provided them.
32|17| And no one knows what joy of eyes (and delights) is hidden for them as a reward for what they were doing.
32|18| Is someone who is a believer the same as someone who is disobedient? They are not equal.
32|19| As for those who believed and did good works, then they have (eternal) housing in gardens as entertainment for what they were doing.
32|20| And as for those who were disobedient, then their (eternal) housing is the fire. Whenever they want to get out of it, they are sent back in it, and they are told: taste punishment of the fire, that which you used to deny it.
32|21| And We shall make them taste from the lesser punishment (of this world) besides the greater punishment (of the hereafter), so that they may return.
32|22| And who is more wrong than someone who is reminded of His Master's signs, then he stays away from it? Indeed We take revenge from the guilty ones.
32|23| And We have certainly given Moses the book, so do not be in doubt about meeting Him, and We made it a guide for the children of Israel.
32|24| And We appointed leaders among them to guide by Our command because they persevered and were certain of Our signs,
32|25| Indeed on the resurrection day your Master judges between them about what they were disagreeing about it.
32|26| Or did it not guide them (the fact) that how many generations before them We destroyed, which (now) they walk in their houses? For there are certainly signs in that. Do they not listen?
32|27| Or did they not see that We drive the rain to the barren land, then We bring out crops with it, that their livestock and themselves eat from it? Do they not see?
32|28| And they say: when is the judgment/victory if you are truthful?
32|29| Say: on the judgment/victory day, believing of those who disbelieved does not benefit them, and they are not given any delay.
32|30| So stay away from them and wait, for they are also waiting. 
33|1| Prophet, be cautious of God and do not obey the disbelievers and the hypocrites. Indeed God is knowledgeable and wise. 
33|2| And follow what is revealed to you from your Master. Indeed God is well informed of what you do.
33|3| And put your trust in God, and God is enough as an advocate.
33|4| God did not give any man two hearts inside of him, and He did not make your wives, those you divorce by declaring them as your mother’s back, your mothers. And He did not make your adopted sons, your sons. That is only your words of your mouths, but God speaks the truth and He guides to the (right) way.
33|5| Call them by their father’s (name), it is more just before God. And if you do not know their fathers, then they are your brothers in the religion and your friends. And there is no blame on you about what you made a mistake in it, but (you are responsible) for what your hearts intended (and you did intentionally). God is forgiving and kind.
33|6| The prophet is more entitled to the believers than themselves, and his wives are (like) their mothers. And in God’s book, blood relatives (and close relatives) are more entitled to (inherit from) each other than the believers and the migrants unless you (want to) do some good to your friends. This is written in the book.
33|7| And (remember) when We took from the prophets their commitment, and from you and from Noah and Abraham and Moses and Jesus son of Mary, and We took a firm commitment from them. 
33|8| So that He questions the truthful ones about their truthfulness, and He has prepared a painful punishment for the disbelievers.
33|9| You who believe, remember God’s favor to you when troops came to you (and attacked you), so We sent a wind and troops against them that you did not see them. And God sees what you do.
33|10| When they came to you (and attacked) from above you and from below you, and when the eyes turned aside (in fear) and the hearts reached up to the throats and you thought of God doubtfully.
33|11| It was then that the believers were tested, and they were shaken, a strong shake.
33|12| And (remember) when hypocrites and those who had a disease in their hearts said: God and His messenger did not promise us except a delusion.
33|13| And (remember) when a group of them said: people of Yathreb (Medina), there is no place for you, so return. And a part of them asked permission from the prophet, saying: our homes are unprotected (and defenseless). While they were not unprotected, they only wanted to run away.
33|14| And if they (the enemy) had entered upon them from its boroughs and they were asked for the disloyalty, they would have certainly done it, and they would have only hesitated a little.
33|15| And they had certainly promised God in the past that they would not turn their backs (and run away). And promise to God is questioned (and is a responsibility).
33|16| Say: the escape would never benefit you if you escape from the death or the killing, and even then you only enjoy for a little while.
33|17| Say: who is the one defending you against God if He wants harm for you or if He wants mercy for you? And they will not find any protector and no helper for them besides God.
33|18| God also knows those holding others back among you, and those who say to their brothers: come to us. And only a few of them come to the battle.
33|19| Covetous (and stingy) toward you, and when fear comes, you see them looking at you rolling their eyes like someone who faints because of the death , and when the fear goes away, they are going to slash you with the sharp tongues being covetous of the good (that comes to you). They did not believe, therefore God made their works useless, and that is easy for God.
33|20| They think that the coalition forces did not go away, and if the coalition forces come they wish they were nomads among the desert Arabs asking about your news, and if they were among you, they would have fought a little.
33|21| There has certainly been a good example in God's messenger for you and for anyone who hopes for God and the last day and remembers God often.
33|22| And when the believers saw the coalition forces they said: this is what God and His messenger promised us, and God and His messenger told the truth. And it only increased their belief and their submission.
33|23| There are men among the believers who were true to what they promised it to God, and some of them fulfilled their vows (and died) and some of them are waiting, and they did not change (their promise) by any changes.
33|24| So that God rewards the truthful for their truth, and punishes the hypocrites if He wants, or turns to them (in mercy). Indeed God is forgiving and merciful.
33|25| And God turned back those who disbelieved, in their rage and they did not gain any good. And God spared the believers of the fight. God is strong and powerful.
33|26| And God brought down those among the people of the book who supported them (the coalition forces) from their fortresses, and He threw horror in their hearts, (so that) you kill a part of them and you capture a part of them.
33|27| And He made you inherit their land and their houses and their possessions and a land that you did not yet set foot on it. And God is capable of everything.
33|28| Prophet, say to your wives: if you want this world’s life and its decoration (and luxuries), then come, I compensate you and I let you go free (and divorce you), a nice leaving.
33|29| And if you want God and His messenger and the home of the hereafter, then indeed God has prepared a great reward for the good doers among you.
33|30| Wives of the prophet, anyone among you who commits an obvious indecency, the punishment is multiplied for her twofold. And that is easy for God.
33|31| And anyone among you who is obedient to God and His messenger and does good works, We give her twice her reward, and We have prepared a noble provision for her. 
33|32| Wives of the prophet, you are not like anyone of the women. If you are cautious (of God), then do not be soft in the speech so the one who has a disease in his heart does not desire (you), and speak in proper word (and manner).
33|33| And stay in your houses and do not display your beauties like displaying in the old days of ignorance, and perform the mandatory prayer and give to the mandatory charity and obey God and His messenger. God only wants to remove the filth from you, people of the household (of the prophet), and to cleanse you, a total cleansing.
33|34| And remember what is read to you in your houses from God’s signs (verses) and the wisdom. Indeed God is nice and well informed.
33|35| Indeed the submitted men and the submitted women, and the believing men and the believing women, and the obedient men and the obedient women, and the truthful men and the truthful women, and the persevering men and the persevering women, and the humble men and the humble women, and the charitable men and the charitable women, and the fasting men and the fasting women, and the men guarding their private parts and the women guarding (theirs), and the men remembering God often and the women remembering (Him often), God has prepared forgiveness and a great reward for them.
33|36| It is not for a believing man or a believing woman, that when God and His messenger decided on a matter, to have a choice in their matter. And whoever disobeys God and His messenger has certainly erred, an obvious error.
33|37| And (remember) when you said to the one whom God favored upon him and you favored upon him: keep your wife for yourself, and be cautious of God. And you hid in yourself what God was to disclose it. And you feared people, while God is more deserving that you fear Him. So when Zaid finished with her (and divorced her), We married her to you so that there would be no difficulty for the believers about (marrying) wives of their adopted sons when they are finished with them (and have divorced them). And God’s command is to be done.
33|38| There is no difficulty on the prophet about (doing) what God mandated to him. This is God’s way about those who passed away in the past. And God’s command is a mandated destiny.
33|39| Those who preach God’s message and fear Him and do not fear anyone except God, (they know that) God is enough for accounting.
33|40| Muhammad is not father of any of your men, but (he is) God’s messenger and the seal (and the last) of the prophets. And God knows everything. 
33|41| You who believe, remember God, remembering often
33|42| and glorify Him morning and afternoon.
33|43| He is the One who sends blessings to you and (so do) His angles to bring you out of the darkness to the light. And He is merciful to the believers.
33|44| Their greeting on a day that they meet Him is: peace (and well-being). And He has prepared a noble (and generous) reward for them.
33|45| Prophet, We sent you as a witness and a giver of good news and a warner,
33|46| and a caller toward God by His permission, and as a shining lamp.
33|47| And give good news to the believers that they have a great bounty from God.
33|48| And do not obey the disbelievers and the hypocrites and disregard their harassment and put your trust in God. God is enough as an advocate.
33|49| You who believe, when you marry the believing women and then divorce them before you touch them, then they are not responsible for any waiting period for you that you count it, so compensate them and let them go free, a nice leaving.
33|50| Prophet, We made lawful for you, your wives that you gave them their compensations (marriage portions), and those whom your right hand owns (slaves) from what God gave you as spoil, and daughters of your paternal uncle (your father’s brother), and daughters of your paternal aunts (your father’s sister), and daughters of your maternal uncles (your mother’s brother), and daughters of your maternal aunts (your mother’s sister) who migrated with you, and a believing woman who gives herself to the prophet (without asking for marriage portion) if the prophet wants to marry her, this (last group) is only for you and not the other believers. We also know what We mandated to them (the believers) regarding their wives and those whom their right hands own, so that there would be no difficulty (or blame) on you. And God is forgiving and merciful.
33|51| You may put off anyone of them (your wives) you want, and take to yourself anyone you want. And there is no blame on you to desire anyone of those whom you set aside. That is more likely to delight their eyes and that they do not be sad and be pleased with what you give all of them. And God knows what is in your hearts. And God is knowledgeable and patient.
33|52| Women are not lawful for you from now on, and neither is exchanging them for other wives, even though their beauty impresses you, except those your right hand owns. God is watchful over everything.
33|53| You who believe, do not enter the prophet’s houses unless permission is given to you for a meal without waiting for its preparation. But when you are invited then enter, and when you ate then disperse and do not look for staying for a conversation. Indeed that is annoying the prophet, but he is shy from you, but God is not shy about the truth. And when you ask them (prophet’s wives) for anything, then ask them from behind a curtain (or a partition). That is purer for your hearts and their hearts. And it is not for you to annoy God’s messenger, and do not ever marry his wives after him, indeed that is awful in God's sight. 
33|54| If you disclose anything or hide it, indeed God is knowledgeable about everything.
33|55| There is no blame on them about their fathers or their sons or their brothers or their brother’s son or their sister’s sons or their women, or those whom their right hands own. And (you, wives of the prophet) be cautious of God, for God is witness over everything.
33|56| God and His angels send blessings to the prophet. You who believe, send blessings to him and great him, a respectful greeting (or submit to his instructions, completely).
33|57| Indeed those who harass God and His messenger, God curses them in this world and the hereafter and He has prepared a humiliating punishment for them.
33|58| And those who harass the believing men and the believing women for other than what they did, then they have carried (the guilt of) a false accusation and an obvious sin.
33|59| Prophet, tell your wives and your daughters and women of the believers to draw their outer garment near over themselves. That is more likely that they are recognized and are not harassed. And God is forgiving and merciful.
33|60| If the hypocrite and those who have a disease in their hearts and those who spread false rumors in the city do not stop, We shall provoke you against them, then they will only be your neighbors in there for a short while.
33|61| They are cursed, and wherever they are found they are taken and they are killed.
33|62| God’s way about those who passed away in the past. And you never find any change in God’s way.
33|63| People ask you about the hour, say: its knowledge is only with God. And how would you know, the hour may be near?
33|64| Indeed God cursed the disbelievers and has prepared a burning fire for them,
33|65| remaining in there forever and ever, and they do not find any protector or any helper.
33|66| In a day that their faces are turned over in the fire, they say: we wish we had obeyed God and obeyed the messenger. 
33|67| And they say: our Master, we obeyed our leaders and our elders (and great ones), and they misled us from the way,
33|68| Our Master, give them double the punishment and curse them, a great curse.
33|69| You who believe, do not be like those who harassed Moses, then God cleared him of what they said, and he is respected before God.
33|70| You who believe, be cautious of God and say right (and appropriate) word,
33|71| so He corrects (and improves) you works for you, and to forgive your sins for you. And whoever obeys God and His messenger then he has achieved a great victory.
33|72| Indeed We offered the trust to the skies and the earth and the mountains, but they refused to undertake it and they were afraid of it, but the human being undertook it. Indeed he is wrongdoer and ignorant.
33|73| So that God punishes the hypocrite men and the hypocrite women, and the polytheist men and the polytheist women, and He turns (in mercy) to the believing men and the believing women. And God is forgiving and merciful.
34|1| All praise belongs to God, the One that whatever in the skies and whatever on the earth belongs to Him, and all praise in the hereafter belongs to Him, and He is the wise and the well informed.
34|2| He knows what goes into the earth and what comes out of it, and what comes down from the sky and what goes up to it, and He is the merciful, the forgiving.
34|3| And those who disbelieved said: the hour would not come to us. Say: yes, by my Master, knower of the unseen, it shall come to you, a tiny particle in the earth and in the skies does not escape from Him, and neither anything smaller than that or larger, unless it is (written) in a clear book.
34|4| So that He rewards those who believed and did good works. They have forgiveness and a noble provision.
34|5| And those who tried to disable (and invalidate) Our signs, they have punishment of a painful filth.
34|6| And those who were given the knowledge see that what is revealed to you from your Master is the truth and it guides to the path of the powerful, the praiseworthy.
34|7| And those who disbelieved said: should we point you out to a man who tells you that you will certainly be (raised) in a new creation when you are torn into pieces, completely torn apart?
34|8| Did he make up a lie (and attributed it) to God or is he mad? No, but those who do not believe in the hereafter are in the punishment and in the extensive (and major) error.
34|9| Did they not look at what is in front of them and what is behind them from the sky and the earth? If We want, We would sink them down into the earth or We make a piece of the sky fall on them. Indeed there is a signs in that for every repenting servant.
34|10| And We have certainly given David advantage from Us, (and We said): mountains and the birds, repeat (and echo) with him (glorifying Me). And We made the iron soft for him.
34|11| (Telling him) that make loose and long coats of armor, and measure the links accurately, and do good works. Indeed I see whatever you do.
34|12| And (We made) the wind (compliant) to Solomon, its morning journey a month and its evening journey a month. And We made spring of melted copper flow for him, and some of the Jinn some working in front of him by his Master’s permission, and anyone of them who deviated from Our command, We made him taste punishment of the burning fire. 
34|13| They did for him whatever he wanted, from temples and statues and large bowls like reservoirs and fixed cooking pots. (We said to) David’s family: do be thankful. And a few of My servants are thankful. 
34|14| So when We ordered the death upon him, nothing pointed out his death to them except a creature of the earth (a termite) eating his staff. But when he fell down, it became clear to the Jinn that had they known the unseen, they would not have remained in the humiliating punishment.
34|15| There has certainly been a sign for (the people of) Sheba in their residence, two gardens, on right and left. (We told them:) eat from the provision of your Master and be thankful to Him. A good land and a forgiving Master.
34|16| Then they turned away, so We sent the devastating flood on them, and We changed their two gardens into two gardens having bitter fruits and tamarisks, and a little bit of a Lote (Sidra) tree.
34|17| That is how We punished them because they disbelieved, and do We punish (anyone) except the ungrateful?
34|18| And We placed visible (and accessible) towns between them and the towns that We blessed it, and We mandated travel in them (and said): travel safely between them at nights and days.
34|19| Then they said: our Master, prolong between our journeys. And they did wrong to themselves, so We made them stories (for people to talk about) and We broke them up into pieces, a total break up. Indeed there are signs in that for every patient and thankful (person).
34|20| And Iblis (Satan) has certainly proved his guess to be true about them, and they followed him except a part of the believers.
34|21| And there was no authority (and power) for him over them, except so that We know anyone who believes in the hereafter from anyone who is in doubt about it. And your Master is guardian of everything.
34|22| Say: call on those whom you claimed (as god) other than God, they do not own a tiny particle in the skies or on the earth, and they have no partnership in them, and there is no supporter for Him among them.
34|23| And the mediation before Him does not benefit, except for someone whom He permits for him. When horror is removed from their hearts, they say: what did you Master say? They would say: the truth, and He is the superior, the great.
34|24| Say: who provides for you from the skies and the earth? Say: God, and indeed we or you are on right guidance or in an obvious error.
34|25| Say: you will not be questioned about what we did wrong, and we will not be questioned about what you do.
34|26| Say: our Master collects us together, then He judges between us in truth, and He is the knowledgeable judge.
34|27| Say: show me those you joined with Him as associates. No way, but He is God, the powerful and the wise.
34|28| And We did not send you except as a giver of good news and a warner for the whole people, but most of the people do not know.
34|29| And they say: when is this promise if you are truthful?
34|30| Say: you have appointment of a day which you cannot put it back for an hour or put it forward.
34|31| And those who disbelieved said: we would never believe in this Quran, or in that which is sent before it. And if you see when the wrongdoers are standing before their Master, returning the word to each other (and arguing), those who were weak say to those who were arrogant: if it was not for you, we would have certainly been believers.
34|32| Those who were arrogant say to those who were weak: did we block you from the guidance after it came to you? No, but you were guilty.
34|33| And those who were weak say to those who were arrogant: no, but (it was) a plot at night and day, when you ordered us to disbelieve in God and to set up equals for Him. And they hide the regret when they see the punishment, and We put the shackles around the necks of those who disbelieved. Are they punished except for what they were doing?
34|34| And We did not send any warner in any town, unless its rich (and wealthy) said: indeed we disbelieve in what you are sent with it.
34|35| And they said: we have more wealth and children, and we will not be punished.
34|36| Say: indeed my Master increases and decreases the provision for anyone He wants, but most of the people do not know.
34|37| And it is not your wealth or your children that bring you closer to Us, but anyone who believed and did good works, then they have the double reward for what they did, and they will be safe (and secure) in the chambers.
34|38| And those who try to disable (and invalidate) Our signs, they are brought into the punishment.
34|39| Say: Indeed my Master increases and decreases the provision for anyone He wants among His servants, and anything you spend (in God's way), then He replaces it, and He is the best of the providers.
34|40| And on a day that He gathers them altogether, then He says to the angels: did these used to serve you?
34|41| They say: Glory to You (You are flawless), You are our protector, not them, no but they used to serve the Jinn, and most of them were believers in them.
34|42| So today you do not have any benefit or harm for one another, and We say to those who did wrong: taste the punishment of the fire that you used to deny it.
34|43| And when Our clear signs are read to them, they say: this is only a man who wants to prevent you from what your fathers used to serve. And they say: this is only a fabricated lie. And those who disbelieve say about the truth when it comes to them: this is only an obvious magic.
34|44| And We did not give them any books to study it, and We did not send any warner to them before you.
34|45| And those before them also denied, and these did not reach one tenth of what gave them, then they denied My messengers, so how was My rejection (and their punishment)?
34|46| Say: I only advise you of one thing, that you rise up for God in two or individually, then think that your friend is not mad, he is only a warner for you about a severe punishment that is at hand (and is coming).
34|47| Say: whatever wage I asked you, it is yours, my wage is only God's responsibility, and He is witness over everything.
34|48| Say: indeed my Master shows the truth, He knows the unseen. 
34|49| Say: the truth came and the falsehood does not initiate (anything) and it does not return. 
34|50| Say: if I go wrong, then I go wrong only against myself, and if I am guided then it is because of what my Master revealed to me. Indeed He hears all and is near.
34|51| And if you could see when they are scared but there is no escape and they are taken from a nearby place,
34|52| and they say: we believed in it. But how can they attain it from a faraway place?
34|53| And they have disbelieved in it in the past, and accuse (and cast doubt about) the unseen from a faraway place.
34|54| And between them and what they desire was separated as was done with their kind in the past. Indeed they were in a disturbing doubt.
35|1| All praise belongs to God, creator of the skies and the earth, Who appointed the angels who have two and three and four wings as messengers. He adds to the creation whatever He wants. Indeed God is capable of everything.
35|2| Whatever God opens to the people from mercy, then there is no withholder for it, and whatever He withholds, then there is no sender for it after Him. And He is the powerful and the wise.
35|3| People, remember God’s favor upon you. Is there any creator other than God who provides you from the sky and the earth? There is no god except Him, so how do you deviate (from the truth)?
35|4| And if they deny you, messengers before you were also denied. And all the affairs are returned to God.
35|5| People, indeed God’s promise is true, so do not let this world’s life deceive you, and do not let the deceiver (Satan) deceive you about God.
35|6| Indeed Satan is your enemy, so take him as an enemy. He only invites his party so that they become among inhabitants of the burning fire.
35|7| Those who disbelieved have a severe punishment, and those who believed and did good works have forgiveness and a great reward.
35|8| Is someone whose bad work was decorated for him to see it as good (like someone who is not like that)? For indeed God misguides anyone He wants and guides anyone He wants, so do not kill yourself by regret about them. Indeed God knows what they do.
35|9| God is the One who sent the winds, then they put cloud in motion, then We drive it to a dead land and with it We bring the earth back to life after its death. The resurrection is like that.
35|10| Anyone who wants the power, (should know that) all the power belongs to God, the good talk goes up to Him, and the good work raises it up. And those who plot the bad (things) have a severe punishment, and their plot leads to nothing.
35|11| And God created you from dust, then from fertilized egg, then He made you couples. And no female carries (and gets pregnant) and do not gives birth without His knowledge. And anyone who is given life is not given a long life and his life is not shortened unless it is (recorded) in a book. Indeed that is easy for God.
35|12| And the two seas are not the same. Drink of this one is fresh, sweet, and pleasant, and that one salty and bitter. And you eat fresh meat (fish) from both, and you bring out jewelry that you wear it, and you see ships slicing (and sailing) through them so that you look for His bounty, and so that you may be thankful.
35|13| He makes the night pass through the day and makes the day pass through the night, and He regulated the sun and the moon, each running (its course) in a finite time. This is God, your Master, the rule belongs to Him. And those whom you call on besides Him do not own the skin of a date’s pit.
35|14| If you call on them, they do not hear your call, and even if they hear, they would not answer you, and on the resurrection day they deny your associating (them as God's partners). And none tells you like the well informed (God).
35|15| People, you are in need of God, and God is the rich (and needless) and the praiseworthy.
35|16| If He wants, He does away with you and brings a new creation. 
35|17| And that is not difficult for God.
35|18| And no bearer bears burden of another. And if one with heavy load (of burdens) calls on (others) to carry it, nothing of it is carried even if they are relatives. You can only warn those who secretly fear their Master and perform the mandatory prayer. And anyone who purifies (and absolves) then he only purifies for himself. And the final return is to God.
35|19| And the blind and the seeing are not equal,
35|20| neither are the darkness and the light,
35|21| nor are the shade and the (sun’s) heat.
35|22| And the living and the dead are not equal. Indeed God makes anyone He wants listen. And you cannot make those who are in the graves listen.
35|23| Indeed you are only a warner.
35|24| Indeed We sent you with the truth as a giver of good news and as a warner. And there is not any community unless a warner has passed through it.
35|25| And if they deny you, those before them also denied (even though) their messengers brought them the clear proofs and the scriptures and the enlightening book.
35|26| Then I took those who disbelieved, so how was My rejection (and their punishment)?
35|27| Did you not see that God sent down rain from the sky, then We brought out produce of various colors with it, and some of the mountains have streaks of white and red, various colors and dark black.
35|28| And likewise, the people and the creatures and the livestock are different colors. Only the knowledgeable among His servants fear God. Indeed God is powerful and forgiving..
35|29| Indeed those who read God’s book, and perform the mandatory prayer and spend (in God's way) secretly and openly from what We provided them, hope for a trade that would never fail,
35|30| that He pays them back their rewards in full and increases them (their reward) from His grace. Indeed He is forgiving and appreciative.
35|31| And that which We revealed to you from the book is the truth, confirming what is before it. God is certainly well informed and observant of His servants.
35|32| Then We gave the book as inheritance to those We chose among Our servants, and some of them were wrongdoer to themselves, and some of them were moderate, and some of them exceeded in good deeds by God’s permission. That is the great grace.
35|33| (Their reward is) eternal gardens which they enter them, and they are decorated with bracelets of gold and pearl in them, and their clothes is silk in them.
35|34| And they say: all praise belongs to God, the One who removed the sadness from us, our Master is certainly forgiving and appreciative,
35|35| the One who settled us in the everlasting house out of His grace, suffering would not touch us in it and fatigue would not touch us in it.
35|36| And those who disbelieved, fire of hell is for them, and it will not be decided for them that they die (to stop the punishment), and its punishment will not be reduced for them. That is how We punish every ungrateful one. 
35|37| And they cry out in it: our Master, bring us out, we will do good works other than what we used to do. (They will be told): did We not make your life long enough so that anyone who takes notice would take notice in it, and the warner came to you? So taste (the punishment), for there is no helper for the wrongdoers.
35|38| Indeed God is knower of the unseen (secrets) of the skies and the earth. Indeed He knows what is inside the chests and (and minds).
35|39| He is the One who made you successors on the earth. So anyone who disbelieves, then his disbelief is against him. And disbelief of the disbelievers only increases hatred of their Master, and disbelief of the disbelievers only increases (their) loss.
35|40| Say: what do you think of your partners (of God), those you called on besides God, show me what they created on the earth, or do they have any share (in the creation) of the skies, or did We give them a book so they are on a clear proof from it? No, but the wrongdoers only promise each other a delusion.
35|41| Indeed God keeps the skies and the earth so that they do not stop (functioning), and if they stop no one can keep them (functioning) after Him. Indeed He is patient and forgiving.
35|42| And they solemnly swear by God that if a warner comes to them, they shall become better guided than any of the communities. But when a warner came to them, it only increased their disgust
35|43| (because) of arrogance on the earth and plotting bad (things). But the bad plot only falls on its people (who plotted it). So, are they looking for other than way of (dealing with) the earlier ones? And you will never find any change in God’s way, and you will never find any revision in God’s way. 
35|44| Or did they not travel throughout the earth to see what the end of those before them was, while they were more powerful than them? And God is not to be incapacitated by anything in the skies or on the earth. Indeed He is knowledgeable and capable.
35|45| And if God takes the people for what they did, He would not leave a living creature on its back, but He postpones them for a limited period. And when their appointed time comes, then indeed God is observant of His servants.
36|1| Y. S. (Ya. Sin.)
36|2| By the wise Quran,
36|3| indeed you are one of the messengers,
36|4| on a straight path.
36|5| (Quran is a) sent down by the powerful and the merciful,
36|6| so that you warn a people whose fathers were not warned, therefore they are negligent.
36|7| Certainly the word is justified against most of them, for they would not believe.
36|8| Indeed We put shackles around their necks, and it is up to the chins, so their heads are raised (and they cannot see ahead of them).
36|9| And We put an obstacle in front of them and an obstacle behind them and We covered them, so they do not see.
36|10| And it is the same to them whether you warn them or do not warn them, they would not believe.
36|11| You only warn someone who follows the reminder (Quran) and secretly fears the beneficent, so give him good news of forgiveness and a noble reward.
36|12| Indeed We give life to the dead and We write what they send ahead and they leave behind, and We keep track of everything in a clear logbook.
36|13| And give them an example of inhabitants of the town when the messengers came to it.
36|14| When We sent them two, they denied them both, so We empowered them with a third, and they said: indeed we are sent to you.
36|15| They said: you are only a human being like us, and the beneficent did not send down anything, you are only lying.
36|16| And they said: our Master knows that indeed we are sent to you,
36|17| and our responsibility is only the clear preaching.
36|18| They said: we consider you as bad omen, if you do not stop, we shall stone you and a painful punishment by us shall touch you.
36|19| They said: your bad omen is with yourselves. Is it because you are reminded (that you say this)? No, but you are excessive people.
36|20| And a man came running from farthest part of the city. He said: my people, follow the messengers.
36|21| Follow those who do not ask you for any wage, and they are guided.
36|22| And why should I not serve the One who created me, and you are returned to Him?
36|23| Should I take gods other than Him? If the beneficent wants any harm for me, their mediation would not be of any use to me at all and they would not save me.
36|24| Then, I am certainly in obvious error.
36|25| Indeed I believed in your Master, so listen to me.
36|26| (After his death) he was told: enter the garden. He said: I wish my people know
36|27| how my Master forgave me and made me of the honored ones.
36|28| And We did not send down any troops from the sky against his people after him, and We are not sending down (troops).
36|29| It was only a single awesome roar, then they were immediately silenced.
36|30| Unfortunate for the servants, no messenger came to them unless they used to ridicule him.
36|31| Did they not see how many generations We destroyed before them, that they do not return to them?
36|32| And they are all brought before Us, everyone of them
36|33| And the dead earth is a sign for them, We bring it back to life and We bring grain out of it and they eat from it.
36|34| And We made gardens of palms and grapes in it, and We made the springs flow out of it. 
36|35| So that they eat from its produce and what their hands made it. So will they not be thankful?
36|36| Glory to the One (who is flawless and) who created the types (or the pairs), all of them, of what the earth grows and of themselves and of what they do not know.
36|37| And the night is a sign for them, We strip off the daylight from it, and then they are in darkness.
36|38| And the sun circulates in a place for it (in its orbit). That is determination of the powerful and the knowledgeable.
36|39| And the moon, We determined phases for it until it returns like the old (dried out) date branch. 
36|40| It is not appropriate (or required) of the sun to catch up with the moon, and not the night to get ahead of the day, and each flow in an orbit.
36|41| And a sign for them is that We carried their descendants in the loaded ship,
36|42| and We created the like of it for them that they ride.
36|43| And if We want We drown them, then they have no one to cry out to, and they would not be saved,
36|44| except by a mercy from Us, and as an enjoyment for a while.
36|45| And when it is said to them: be cautious of what is in front of you and what is behind you so you may receive mercy (they don’t pay attention).
36|46| And no sign of their Master's sign came to them, unless they were turning away from it.
36|47| And when it is said to them: spend (in God's way) from what God provided you. Those who disbelieved say to those who believed: should we feed someone that if God wants He would feed him? You are only in an obvious error.
36|48| And they say: when is this promise if you are truthful?
36|49| They only await a single awesome roar which takes them while they dispute.
36|50| They cannot make any recommendation (or instruction) and they do not return to their families.
36|51| And the trumpet is blown, then immediately they rush to their Master from the graves.
36|52| They say: woe to us, who raised us from our resting place (graves)? This is what the beneficent promised and the messengers told the truth.
36|53| It is only a single awesome roar, then immediately all of them are brought before Us. 
36|54| So today, no one is wronged at all, and you are only rewarded for what you used to do.
36|55| Indeed inhabitants of the garden are happily busy today,
36|56| they and their spouses are leaning on couches in shade.
36|57| They have fruits in it and whatever they call for.
36|58| Peace (and well-being) is word of merciful Master (to them).
36|59| And you the guilty ones, split up today.
36|60| Children of Adam, did I not charge you that you should not serve Satan? Indeed he is your obvious enemy.
36|61| And that you should (only) serve Me. This is a straight path.
36|62| And he certainly misguided a great number of you. Did you not use to understand?
36|63| This is hell that you were promised.
36|64| Enter (and burn in) it today, because of what you used to disbelieve.
36|65| We set a seal on (and shut) their mouth today, and their hands speak to Us and their feet testify to what they were doing.
36|66| And if We want, We would blind their eyes, then they would rush toward the path, but how would they see?
36|67| And if We want, We would immobilize them in their places, then they could not proceed or return.
36|68| And whomever We give him long life, We reverse him in the creation (and make him weak), so do they not understand?
36|69| And We did not teach him the poetry, and it is not appropriate for him. This is only a reminder and a clear (and clarifying) Quran,
36|70| to warn anyone who is alive and to prove the word (of God) against the disbelievers.
36|71| Or did they not see that We created livestock for them, by what Our hands (power) did, and they are their owners?
36|72| And We tamed them for them, and some of them are their rides and they eat some of them.
36|73| And there are (other) benefits and beverages for them in them, so would they not thank?
36|74| And they took gods other than God so that they may be helped.
36|75| They (those gods) cannot help them, while they are present for them as (ready and loyal) troop. 
36|76| So do not be sad by their word. Indeed We know what they hide and what they disclose.
36|77| Or did not the human being see that We created him from a fertilized egg, and then he is an obvious adversary?
36|78| And he set out an example for Us, and he forgot his creation, he said: who gives life to the bones when they are decomposed?
36|79| Say: the One who gave them life creating them the first time, and He knows every (kind of) creation,
36|80| the One who made fire for you from the green tree, and then you light (fire) from it.
36|81| Or is the One who created the skies and the earth not able to create similar to them? Yes, and He is the knowledgeable creator.
36|82| When He wants anything, His order for it is only to say: be, and it will be.
36|83| So glory to the One that kingdom of everything is in His hand, and you are returned to Him.
37|1| By those who lined up in rows,
37|2| and those who drive away (evil or clouds) vigorously,
37|3| and those reading a reminder,
37|4| that your god is certainly One.
37|5| Master of the skies and the earth and what is between them, and Master of the easts.
37|6| Indeed We beautified the sky of the world with beauty of the stars
37|7| and as a guard against every defiant devil.
37|8| They would not listen to the high assembly, for they are pelted from every side,
37|9| chased away, and they have an everlasting punishment.
37|10| Except someone who snatches (and overhears) the snatch (the word), then a piercing shooting flame follows him.
37|11| So ask their opinion: are they a harder creation or those We created (such as angels and the universe)? Indeed We created them from sticky clay.
37|12| No, but you wonder while they ridicule.
37|13| And when they are reminded, they do not take notice.
37|14| And when they see a sign they ridicule,
37|15| and they say: this is only an obvious magic,
37|16| are we raised after when we are dead and turned into dust and bones,
37|17| or our forefathers?
37|18| Say: yes, and you are humiliated.
37|19| It is only a single shout, and then they see,
37|20| and they say: woe to us, this is the judgment day.
37|21| This is the day of separation/decision, the one that you used to deny it.
37|22| Gather those who did wrong and their types and what they used to serve
37|23| other than God, and lead them to path of the hellfire.
37|24| And stop them (on the way), indeed they are questioned (and are responsible).
37|25| What is with you that you do not help each other?
37|26| No, but today they are surrendered.
37|27| And they turn to each other asking one another,
37|28| they say: indeed you were coming to us from the right (to seduce us).
37|29| They (the others) say: no, but you were not believers,
37|30| and there was no authority for us over you, but you were rebellious people,
37|31| so the word of our Master is justified against us, indeed we will taste (the punishment).
37|32| So we misled you, as we were indeed misled.
37|33| And indeed on that day they are partners in the punishment.
37|34| Indeed that is what We do to the guilty ones.
37|35| Indeed when it was said to them there is no god except God, they were arrogant.
37|36| And they would say: should we give up our gods for a mad poet? 
37|37| No, but he brought the truth and confirmed the messengers (before him).
37|38| Indeed you will taste the painful punishment.
37|39| And you are only punished for what you used to do.
37|40| Except for God's devoted servants.
37|41| They have a known provision,
37|42| (all kind of) fruits, and they are honored 
37|43| in gardens of the delight,
37|44| on sofas facing each other.
37|45| A cup of spring water is circulated among them,
37|46| white and delicious for the drinkers,
37|47| no sickness in it, and they do not get exhausted (and drunk) from it.
37|48| And there are girls with them, with restrained glances and beautiful eyes
37|49| as if they were protected eggs.
37|50| And they turn to each other asking one another.
37|51| A talker among them say: indeed I had a close friend,
37|52| saying: are you among those confirming (the resurrection and the judgment)?
37|53| Would we indeed be judged when we die and become dust and bones?
37|54| He said: do you know (him)? 
37|55| So he looked and saw him in middle of the hellfire.
37|56| He said: by God, you almost ruined me,
37|57| and if it was not for my Master’s favor, I would have certainly been of those who are brought (to hell),
37|58| and are we not to die (again)
37|59| except our first death, and we are not punished? 
37|60| Indeed this is the great victory.
37|61| For (something) like this, the doers should do (good deeds).
37|62| Is this a better entertainment or the Zaqqum tree?
37|63| Indeed We made it a suffering for the wrongdoers.
37|64| It is a tree that comes out from bottom of the hellfire.
37|65| Its sprout is like heads of the devils.
37|66| And they certainly eat from it and fill their stomachs from it.
37|67| Then indeed they have a mixture of boiling water (to drink) over it.
37|68| Then their return is certainly to the hellfire.
37|69| Indeed they found their fathers lost (from the right path),
37|70| and yet they rushed on their footsteps.
37|71| And most of the earlier ones have certainly lost (the right path) before them.
37|72| And We have certainly sent warners among them.
37|73| So see what the end of those who were warned was,
37|74| except God's devoted servants.
37|75| And Noah has certainly called Us, and We are certainly best of the responders.
37|76| And We saved him and his family from the great distress.
37|77| And We made his descendants the survivors.
37|78| And We left for him (a good name) among the later ones.
37|79| Peace (and well-being) upon Noah among humankind.
37|80| That is how We reward the good doers.
37|81| Indeed he was among Our believing servants.
37|82| So We drowned the others.
37|83| And indeed among his followers was Abraham.
37|84| When he came to his Master with a sound heart.
37|85| When he said to his father and his people: what do you serve?
37|86| Do you want false gods other than God?
37|87| So what do you think about the Master of Human kind?
37|88| Then he looked a glance at the stars.
37|89| Then he said: indeed I am sick.
37|90| So they turned away from him going back.
37|91| Then he turned to their gods and said: do you not eat?
37|92| What is with you that you do not speak?
37|93| Then he turned on them, striking (them) with the right hand.
37|94| So they (his people) came to him in a hurry.
37|95| He said: do you serve what you carve,
37|96| while God created you and what you do (and make)?
37|97| They said: build for him a structure (of fire), and throw him into the burning fire.
37|98| They wanted to plot for him, but We made them the lower ones (failing in their plot).
37|99| And he said: indeed I go to my Master, He is going to guide me,
37|100| my Master, give me (a son) from the righteous.
37|101| So We gave him good news of a patient boy.
37|102| So when he reached the working (age) with him, he said: my son, indeed I saw in the dream that I sacrifice you, so see what do you think? He said: my father, do what you are ordered, God willing you are going to find me of the patient ones.
37|103| So when they both submitted and he (Abraham) put him down on the forehead,
37|104| and We called him: Abraham,
37|105| you have fulfilled the vision. Indeed that is how We reward the good doers
37|106| Indeed this was the obvious test,
37|107| and We ransomed him with a great sacrifice.
37|108| And We left for him (a good name) among the later ones.
37|109| Peace (and well-being) on Abraham.
37|110| That is how We reward the good doers.
37|111| Indeed he was among Our believing servants.
37|112| And We gave him good news of Isaac, a prophet from the righteous.
37|113| And We blessed him and Isaac, and from their descendants, (some) are good doers and (some) are obviously wrongdoers to themselves.
37|114| And We have certainly favored to Moses and Aaron.
37|115| And We saved them both and their people from the great distress.
37|116| And We helped them, so they became the winners.
37|117| And We gave them the clear (and clarifying) book,
37|118| and We guided them to the straight path.
37|119| And We left both of them (a good name) among the later ones.
37|120| Peace (and well-being) on Moses and Aaron.
37|121| Indeed that is how We reward the good doers.
37|122| Indeed they were both among Our believing servants.
37|123| And indeed Elias was one of the messengers.
37|124| When he said to his people: would you not be cautious (of God),
37|125| do you call on Baal and you abandon best of the creators?
37|126| God is your Master and Master of your forefathers.
37|127| So they denied him, therefore they are brought (to the punishment),
37|128| except God's devoted servants.
37|129| And We left for him (a good name) among the later ones.
37|130| Peace (and well-being) on El Yasin (or Elias).
37|131| Indeed that is how We reward the good doers.
37|132| Indeed he was among Our believing servants.
37|133| And indeed Lot was one of the messengers.
37|134| When We saved him and his family altogether.
37|135| Except an old woman (his wife who was) among those staying behind.
37|136| Then We destroyed the others.
37|137| And indeed you pass by them in the morning
37|138| and by the night. Do you not understand?
37|139| And indeed Jonah was one of the messengers.
37|140| When he ran away to the loaded ship.
37|141| Then he drew lots and he was of those proven false.
37|142| So the whale swallowed him, and he was to blame.
37|143| And if he was not among those who glorify (God), 
37|144| he would have remained in its belly until the day of rising.
37|145| So We threw him on the bare shore while he was sick.
37|146| And We made a plant of squash grew over him.
37|147| And We sent him to a hundred thousand or more (people).
37|148| And they believed, so We let them enjoy for a while.
37|149| So ask their opinion: are the daughters for your Master, and the sons for them?
37|150| Or did We create the angels as females, and they were witnesses?
37|151| Know that, indeed they say as part of their lies:
37|152| God fathered (children). And they are certainly liars.
37|153| Did He choose the daughters over the sons?
37|154| What is with you? How do you judge?
37|155| Do you not take notice?
37|156| Or do you have a clear reason?
37|157| Then bring your book (document), if you are truthful.
37|158| And they put a relationship between Him and the Jinn, while the Jinn have certainly known that they shall be brought (to punishment),
37|159| God is flawless (and beyond) what they describe,
37|160| except God's devoted servants (who are saved from punishment).
37|161| So indeed you and what you serve,
37|162| you are not able to mislead any one (of God's devoted servants),
37|163| except someone who enters (and burns in) the hellfire. 
37|164| And (the angels say): no one is from us unless he has a known position,
37|165| and we are certainly those lined up in rows,
37|166| and we are certainly those who glorify (God).
37|167| And they (the disbelievers) were certainly saying:
37|168| indeed if we had a reminder (or a scripture) from the earlier ones with us,
37|169| we would have certainly been of God's devoted servants.
37|170| And they disbelieved in it (Quran), so they will know.
37|171| And Our word already went out to Our servants, the messengers,
37|172| that they are certainly helped,
37|173| and indeed Our troops are the winners.
37|174| So turn away from them for a while,
37|175| and see them, for they will see.
37|176| Do they want Our punishment in a hurry?
37|177| Then when it comes down to their courtyard, it is a bad morning for those who were warned.
37|178| And turn away from them for a while,
37|179| and see, for they will see.
37|180| Your Master, the Master of power (and honor), is flawless (and He is beyond) what they describe.
37|181| And peace (and well-being) upon the messengers.
37|182| And all praise belongs to God, Master of humankind.
38|1| S. (Saad). By the Quran, having the reminder.
38|2| Yet those who disbelieve are in self-admiration and opposition.
38|3| How many of a generation did We destroy before them, and they called out (for help) and it was too late to escape?
38|4| And they were surprised that a warner came to them from them, and the disbelievers said: this is a lying magician. 
38|5| Did he make the gods into one god? This is certainly a strange thing.
38|6| And the leaders of them went off (saying): go on and persevere about your gods, indeed this is certainly something wanted (and expected from you).
38|7| We did not hear this in the previous faith, this is only an invention.
38|8| Was the reminder (only) sent down to him among us? No, they are in doubt about My reminder, rather they have not tasted My punishment.
38|9| Or the treasures of mercy of your Master the powerful and the giver are with them?
38|10| Or do they have the rule of the skies and the earth and whatever between them? (If they do) then they should go up by the means (they have).
38|11| They are a defeated army of the coalitions in there.
38|12| People of Noah and Aad and Pharaoh the owners of the stakes (pyramids) denied before them.
38|13| And Thamud and people of Lot and the inhabitants of the woods (people of Shu'aib), they were the coalitions (that denied the messengers).
38|14| They all denied the messengers, so they deserved My punishment.
38|15| And these are only awaiting a single awesome roar, which there would not be any delay for it (or any comeback).
38|16| And they said: our Master, rush our share (of punishment) for us before the day of accounting.
38|17| Be patient about what they say, and remember Our servant David having the power, indeed he was repentant.
38|18| Indeed We controlled the mountains to glorify (Us) with him in the evening and the sunrise.
38|19| And the birds gathering, all returning to him (to glorify God).
38|20| And We strengthened his kingdom and We gave him the wisdom and the decisive (and expressive) speech.
38|21| And did the news of the adversaries come to you when they climbed the chamber?
38|22| When they entered upon David and he was afraid of them, they said: do not fear, we are two adversaries, one of us wronged the other, so judge between us with the truth and do not be unfair, and guide us to the even (and right) path.
38|23| Indeed this is my brother, and he has ninety nine female sheep and I have a single female sheep and he says put her in my care, and he overpowers me in the speech.
38|24| He (David) said: he has certainly wronged you by asking (to add) your female sheep to his female sheep, and indeed most partners do wrong to one another, except those who believed and did good works, and they are few.  And David assumed that We tested him, so he asked forgiveness of his Master, and fell down humbly and repented.
38|25| So We forgave him that, and indeed he has closeness with Us and a good place of return.
38|26| David, indeed We made you a successor on the earth, so judge between the people with the truth and do not follow the desire, for it misguides you from God's way. Indeed those who lose God's way have a severe punishment because they forgot the day of accounting.
38|27| And We did not create the sky and the earth and whatever is between them without purpose. That is the thinking of those who disbelieve. So woe to those who disbelieved, from the fire. 
38|28| Or should We place those who believed and did good works same as the corruptors on the earth, or should We place those who control themselves same as the immoral ones?
38|29| (This is) a blessed book that We sent it down to you, so that they think about its verses, and so that the people of understanding (reasonable people) take notice.
38|30| And We gave David Solomon, the good servant, indeed he was repentant.
38|31| When he was presented with the stallions of excellent bread in the evening.
38|32| Then he said: indeed I liked love of the good thing over remembrance of my Master, until they disappeared behind the curtain.
38|33| (He said) bring them back to me, and he rubbed the legs and the necks (of the horses).
38|34| And We certainly tested Solomon by throwing a (dead) body on his chair, then he repented.
38|35| He said: my Master, forgive me, and give me a kingdom that is not likely for anyone after me, indeed you are the giver. 
38|36| Then We brought the wind under his control to blow gently by his command wherever he wanted,
38|37| and the devils, all builder and diver
38|38| and others, tied together.
38|39| (We told him): this is Our gift, so give or keep without any limit.
38|40| And indeed he has closeness with Us and a good place of return.
38|41| And remember Our servant Job, when he called his Master: indeed Satan touched me with pain and suffering.
38|42| (We told him:) stomp with your foot, this is cool water to wash and to drink.
38|43| And We gave him his family and the like of them with them (doubled his family) as a mercy from Us and as a reminder for the people of understanding (reasonable people).
38|44| (We told him:) take a bunch (of hay) in your hand and strike with it and do not break your oath. Indeed We found him patient, the good servant, indeed he was repentant.
38|45| And remember Our servants, Abraham and Isaac and Jacob, men of power and insight. 
38|46| And We made them devoted by sincerely remembering the home (of the hereafter).
38|47| And indeed they are among the best of the chosen in Our view.
38|48| And remember Ishmael and Al-Yasa'a (Elisha) and Zul-kifl (man of the responsibility), all among the best.
38|49| This (Quran) is a reminder, and indeed for those who control themselves is a good place of return.
38|50| Eternal gardens, with the doors opened for them,
38|51| reclining (and relaxing) in them, they call for many fruits and drinks in them,
38|52| and there are girls of equal age and restrained glances with them.
38|53| This is what you are promised for the day of accounting.
38|54| Indeed this is Our provision, which there is no end to it.
38|55| This (is for the believers), and for the rebellious there is a bad place of return.
38|56| Hell, they enter (and burn in) it, and it is a bad resting place.
38|57| This (is for the disbelievers), so they should taste it, boiling water and pus,
38|58| and other kinds of that type.
38|59| This is a group rushing (and pushing) with you, there is no welcome to them, indeed they enter (and burn in) the fire.
38|60| They say: no, there is no welcome to you (either), you brought it upon us, and it is a bad place to stay.
38|61| They say: our Master, whoever brought this upon us, then double (or multiply) his punishment in the fire.
38|62| And they say: what is with us, we do not see men whom we used to count them among the bad ones?
38|63| Did we make fun of them (by mistake), or did the eyes overlook (and missed) them?
38|64| Indeed that, dispute of the people of fire, is true.
38|65| Say: I am only a warner, and there is no god except God, the one, the supreme (and dominant),
38|66| the Master of the skies and the earth and whatever is between them, the powerful, the forgiver.
38|67| Say: it is a great news,
38|68| that you turn away from it,
38|69| I have no knowledge of the high assembly (angels) when they disputed,
38|70| it is only revealed to me that I am a clear warner.
38|71| When your Master said to the angels: I am creator of a human being from clay,
38|72| so when I shape him and blow My breath/spirit into him, then fall down prostrating (and humbly) for him.
38|73| So the angels, all of them together, prostrated (and showed humbleness),
38|74| except Iblis (Satan) who was arrogant and became one of the disbelievers.
38|75| He (God) said: Iblis, what prevented you from prostrating (and being humble) before what I created with My hands (and My power), are you arrogant or are you among the supreme ones?
38|76| He said: I am better than him, You created me from fire and You created him from clay.
38|77| He (God) said: then, get out of it, indeed you are expelled,
38|78| and indeed My curse is upon you until the judgment day.
38|79| He said: give me time until the day that they are raised.
38|80| He (God) said: indeed you are of those given a delay,
38|81| until the known time.
38|82| He said: by Your honor (and power) I shall mislead them all,
38|83| except your devoted servants among them.
38|84| He (God) said: this is the truth and I say the truth,
38|85| I shall fill hell from you and from those of them who follow you, altogether.
38|86| Say: I do not ask you for any wage for it and I am not of the pretenders (and fakes).
38|87| This (Quran) is only a reminder for humankind.
38|88| And you shall know its news after a while.
39|1| Sending down of the book (Quran) is from God, the powerful, the wise.
39|2| Indeed We sent down the book to you with the truth, so serve God, being sincere (and devoted) to Him in the way of life (religion).
39|3| Know that the devoted way of life (religion) is for God. And those who take protectors (or masters) other than Him (say:) we only serve them so that they bring us closer to God. Indeed God judges between them in what they disagree about it. Indeed God does not guide anyone who is a disbelieving liar.
39|4| If God wanted to take a child (son), He would have chosen what He wants from what He creates. He is flawless, He is God, the one, the supreme (and dominant).
39|5| He created the skies and the earth with the truth. He wraps the night over the day and wraps the day over the night and He controls the sun and the moon, each running (its course) for a finite time. Know that He is the powerful, the forgiver.
39|6| He created you from a single being, then He made its spouse from it, and He sent down eight pairs of (various) livestock for you. He creates you in your mothers' wombs, creation after creation, in three (layers of) darkness. That is God, your Master, the rule belongs to Him, there is no God except Him. So how are you turned away?
39|7| If you disbelieve, (know that) indeed God does not need you (or your belief), and He is not pleased for the ungratefulness of His servants, and if you are thankful, He is pleased with you. And no bearer bears burden of another. Then your return is to your Master and He informs you of what you were doing. Indeed He knows what is inside the chests.
39|8| And when a hardship touches the human being, he calls on his Master turning to Him. Then when He gives him a favor from Himself, he forgets what he previously called Him for, and sets up equals for God to misguide (people) from His way. Say: enjoy a little with your disbelief, indeed you are among inhabitants of the fire.
39|9| Is someone who is obedient, prostrating (and showing humbleness) and standing (in prayer) in the night's hours, fearing the hereafter and hoping for his Master’s mercy (better off or a disbeliever)? Say: are those who know and those who do not know equal? Only the people of understanding (reasonable people) take notice.
39|10| Say: My servants who believed, be cautious of your Master. For those who do good in this world is a good (reward), and God's earth is vast. Indeed those who persevere are paid back their reward in full without any limit.
39|11| Say: indeed I am ordered to serve God, being sincere (and devoted) to Him in the way of life (religion),
39|12| and I am ordered to be the first (and the best) of the submitted ones.
39|13| Say: indeed I am afraid of the punishment of a great day if I disobey my Master.
39|14| Say: indeed I serve God, being sincere (and devoted) to Him in my way of life (religion),
39|15| so serve whatever you want besides Him. Say: indeed the losers are those who lose themselves and their families on the resurrection day. Know that this is the obvious loss.
39|16| They have canopies of the fire from above them and canopies (of the fire) from beneath them. That is what God scares His servants with it. So My servants be cautious of Me.
39|17| And those who avoid serving the rebellious and turn to God, they have the good news. Give good news to My servants,
39|18| those who listen to the word and follow the best of it. They are those whom God guided them, and they are people of understanding (reasonable people).
39|19| Can you save someone whom the word of punishment is justified against him from the fire?
39|20| But those who are cautious of their Master have chambers built over chambers, rivers flowing beneath them. God’s promise and God does not break His promise.
39|21| Did you not see that God sent down rain from the sky and made it flow as springs in the earth, then He produces crops of different colors with it, then they dry up and you see them turn yellow, then He makes them into debris? There is certainly a reminder in that for the people of understanding (reasonable people).
39|22| Is someone whom God opened his chest for submission (Islam), and he is on a light from his Master (like someone who is hard-hearted)? So woe to those whose hearts are hardened against remembering God. They are in an obvious error.
39|23| God sent down the best saying as a book (with its verses) similar and often repeated, the skins of those who fear (disobeying) their Master shivers from it, then their skins and their hearts relaxes by God's remembrance. That is God’s guidance, He guides anyone He wants with it (according to His laws), and there is no guide for whomever God misguides.
39|24| Is someone who protects against the terrible punishment of the resurrection day with his face (same as one who has no punishment)? And it is said to the wrongdoers: taste what you were doing.
39|25| Those before them (also) denied, so the punishment came upon them from where they did not realize.
39|26| So God made them taste the humiliation in this world’s life, and certainly the punishment of the hereafter is greater. If they knew.
39|27| And We have certainly given every kind of example for the people in this Quran so that they may take notice.
39|28| An Arabic Quran without having any crookedness (or anomaly) so that they may control themselves.
39|29| God gave an example of a man belonging to quarreling partners and a man fully belonging to a man. Are the two examples equal? All praise belongs to God. No, but most of them do not know.
39|30| Indeed you die and indeed they die,
39|31| then you dispute before your Master on the resurrection day .
39|32| Who is more wrong than someone who lies against God and denies the truth when it comes to him? Is there not a place for the disbelievers in hell?
39|33| And the one who brings the truth and those who confirm it, they are those who control themselves.
39|34| They have whatever they want with their Master. That is reward of the good doers.
39|35| So that God removes worst of that which they did from them and He rewards them their wage with the best of that which they were doing.
39|36| Is God not enough for His servant, while they scare you from those other than Him? And there is no guide for whomever God misguides.
39|37| And whomever God guides, then no one misleads him. Is not God powerful and revengeful?
39|38| And if you ask them who created the skies and the earth, they shall say: God. Say: So did you think that whatever you call on other than God are they remover of His harm if God wants a harm for me, or are they withholder of His mercy if He wants a mercy for me? Say: God is enough for me, those who trust put their trust in Him.
39|39| Say: my people, do what you are capable of, indeed I am a doer (of what I should), you will know
39|40| to whom a punishment comes humiliating him, and on whom the lasting punishment befalls. 
39|41| Indeed We sent down the book to you with the truth for the people. So whoever is guided, it is for himself (and for his own benefit) and whoever loses (the right path) the he only makes a mistake against himself, and you are not their advocate.
39|42| God takes back the consciousness/souls during their death, and (also) the one who did not die in their sleep, then He keeps the one whom He decided the death for them and sends the others back for a limited period. Indeed there are signs in that for people who think. 
39|43| Or did they take mediators other than God? Say: even though they do not own anything and they do not understand?
39|44| Say: the mediation entirely belongs to God, the rule of the skies and the earth belongs to Him, then you are returned to Him.
39|45| And when God alone is mentioned, the hearts of those who do not believe in the hereafter is disgusted, and when those other than Him are mentioned then they are glad.
39|46| Say: God, creator of the skies and the earth, knower of the unseen (secrets) and the visible, You judge between Your servants about what they used to disagree about it.
39|47| And if those who did wrong had all that is on the earth and the like of it with it (twice as much), they would have offered it as ransom for the bad punishment of the resurrection day. And what they were not counting on, would appear for them from God.
39|48| Badness of what they did appears to them, and what they used to ridicule surrounds them.
39|49| When harm touches the human being, he calls on Us, then when We give him a favor from Us, he says: I was only given it because of (my) knowledge. No, rather it is a test and most of them do not know.
39|50| Those before them also said it, and what they were doing was of no use to them.
39|51| So the badness (and consequence) of what they did, struck them. And those who did wrong among these are going to be struck by the badness of what they did, and they cannot disable/escape it.
39|52| Or did they not know that God increases or decreases the provision for anyone He wants. Indeed there are signs in that for people who believe.
39|53| Say: My servants, those who were excessive against themselves, do not lose hope of God’s mercy, indeed God forgives all the sins, indeed He is the forgiving, the merciful.
39|54| And turn to your Master (in repentance) and submit to Him before the punishment comes to you, then you are not helped.
39|55| And follow the best of what was sent down to you from your Master (the Quran) before the punishment comes to you suddenly while you do not realize,
39|56| so that no one says: I regret over what I neglected (of my duties) in regard to God and that I used to be among those who ridiculed.
39|57| Or says: if God had guided me, I would have certainly been among those who control themselves.
39|58| Or when he sees the punishment he says: if I had another chance, then I would have been of the good doers.
39|59| (He is told:) no, but My signs have come to you and you denied them, and you were arrogant, and you were among the disbelievers.
39|60| And on the resurrection day, you see the faces of those who lied about God are blackened (and shameful). Is there not a place for the arrogant ones in hell?
39|61| And God saves those who controlled themselves because of their achievement, the badness does not touch them and they would not be sad.
39|62| God is creator of everything and He is advocate (and in charge) of everything.
39|63| The keys of the skies and the earth belong to Him, and those who disbelieved in God's signs, they are the losers.
39|64| Say: ignorant ones, do you order me to serve other than God?
39|65| And He has certainly revealed to you and to those before you that if you associate partners (with God) your work shall be made useless and you shall become among the losers,
39|66| but rather serve God and be of the thankful ones.
39|67| They did not value God, His true worth, while the whole earth is in His grip on the resurrection day, and the skies are rolled up by His right hand. He is flawless and above what they associate (with Him).
39|68| And the trumpet is blown then everyone in the skies and everyone on the earth lose consciousness except anyone that God wants, then it is blown in it again, and immediately they stand up looking (and waiting).
39|69| And the earth lights up with the light of its Master, and the book (of record) is placed, and the prophets and witnesses are brought, and it is judged between them in truth and they are not wronged.
39|70| And every person is paid back in full for what it did, and He knows better what they do.
39|71| And those who disbelieved are driven to hell in groups until they come to it, then its gates are opened and its guards say to them: did not a messenger from among you come to you, reading your Master’s verses to you and warning you about meeting of this day of yours? They say: yes, but word of the punishment is justified against the disbelievers.
39|72| It is said: enter gates of hell, remaining in there forever, a bad place for the arrogant ones.
39|73| And those who were cautious of their Master are driven to the garden in groups until they come to it, and its gates are opened and its guards say to them: peace (and well-being) upon you, you are welcome, so enter it remaining forever.
39|74| And they say: all praise belongs to God, the One who kept His promise to us and He made us inherit the earth, we settle in the garden anywhere we want, an excellent reward for the doers (of good).
39|75| And you see the angels circling around the throne, glorifying their Master with His praise. And it is judged between them (the people) in truth, and it is said: all praise belongs to God, Master of humankind.
40|1| H. M. (Ha. Mim.)
40|2| Sending down of the book is from God, the powerful, the knowledgeable.
40|3| Forgiver of the sin, acceptor of the repentance, severe in the punishment, having superiority (and bounty), there is no god except Him, the final return is to Him.
40|4| No one argues about God's signs except those who disbelieved, and their moving about the lands (and being successful) should not deceive you.
40|5| Before them, people of Noah and other groups after them denied (their messengers), and every community intended to take (capture) their messenger, and they argued by the falsehood to disprove the truth with it. So I took them (in punishment), and how was My punishment?
40|6| And that is how your Master's word was justified against those who disbelieved, that they are inhabitants of the fire.
40|7| Those who carry the throne and those around it glorify their Master with praise, and believe in Him, and ask forgiveness for those who believed (saying): our Master, Your mercy and knowledge includes everything, so forgive those who repented and followed Your way and protect them from punishment of the hellfire,
40|8| Our Master, admit them and anyone who did good among their fathers and their wives and their descendants into eternal gardens which you promised them, indeed You are the powerful, the wise,
40|9| and protect them from the badness, and whomever you protect from the badness on that day, you have had mercy on him, and that is the great victory.
40|10| Indeed those who disbelieved are called out: certainly God’s hatred is greater than your hatred of yourselves (or one another), for you were called to believe and you disbelieved. 
40|11| They say: our Master, you made us die twice and you gave us life twice, and we confess our sins, so is there a way out (of punishment)?
40|12| (They are told:) that is because you disbelieved when God alone was called, and you believed when partners was associated with Him, and the judgment (and the rule) belongs to God, the superior, the great.
40|13| He is the One who shows you His signs and sends down provision for you from the sky, and none takes notice except someone who turns (to God).
40|14| So call on God, being sincere (and devoted) to Him in the religion, even though the disbelievers dislike it.
40|15| Raiser of the ranks (and highest of the ranks), owner of the throne, He sends the spirit by His command to anyone of His servants that He wants in order to warn (people) about the meeting day,
40|16| a day when they come out, nothing about them is hidden from God. To whom belongs the rule today? To God, the one, the supreme (and dominant).
40|17| Today every person is rewarded for what they did, no injustice today. Indeed God is quick in accounting.
40|18| And warn them of the upcoming day, when the hearts are at the throats, full of suppressed anger. There is no friend or mediator for the wrongdoers who is obeyed (and is listened to).
40|19| He knows the secretive peeks (and the deceptive eyes) and what is hidden in the chests (and minds).
40|20| And God judges (and rules) with the truth, and those they call on besides Him do not judge (or rule) anything. Indeed God hears all, sees all.
40|21| Or did they not travel on the earth to see what the end of those who were before them was? They were more powerful than them on the earth and had more effects (and marks), but God took them for their sins and there was no protector (and defender) for them against God. 
40|22| That is because their messengers were bringing them the clear proofs but they disbelieved, so God took them. Indeed He is strong, severe in punishment.
40|23| And We have certainly sent Moses with Our signs and a clear authorization
40|24| to Pharaoh and Haman and Qarun, but they said: a lying magician.
40|25| So when he (Moses) brought them the truth from Us, they said: kill sons of those who believed with him and keep their women alive. And the plot of the disbelievers is nothing but a mistake.
40|26| And Pharaoh said: let me kill Moses and he should call on his Master, indeed I am afraid that he changes your way of life (religion) or he causes the corruption to appear on the land.
40|27| And Moses said: I seek shelter with my Master and your Master from every arrogant one who does not believe in the accounting day.
40|28| And a believing man from Pharaoh’s people who was hiding his belief said: do you kill a man because he says my Master is God, and he has brought you the clear proofs from your Master? If he is a liar then his lie is against him, and if he is truthful then some of what he promises you will happen to you, indeed God does not guide an excessive liar.
40|29| My people, today the rule is yours, prominent on the land, but who helps us against God's punishment if it comes to us? Pharaoh said: I only point out to you what I observe and I only guide you to the right way.
40|30| And the one who believed said: my people, indeed I fear the same (outcome) for you as the day of the coalitions (before you),
40|31| same manner as Noah's people and Aad and Thamud and those after them, and God does not want any injustice for His servants.
40|32| And my people, I am afraid of the day of calling one another for you.
40|33| a day when you turn back escaping, there is no defender for you against God, and whomever God misguides then there is no guide him.
40|34| And certainly Joseph has come to you with the clear proofs in the past, but you did not stop to be in doubt about what he brought you until when he died, you said: God would never send any messenger after him. That is how God misguides anyone who is an excessive doubter,
40|35| Those who argue about God’s signs without any reason coming to them, it is greatly hateful in God's view and view of those who believed. That is how God puts a seal on the heart of every arrogant tyrant.
40|36| And Pharaoh said: Haman, build me a palace so that I may reach the roads (ways of access to),
40|37| roads of the skies, so that I may look at god of Moses, and I certainly think of him as a liar. And that is how his bad deed was beautified for Pharaoh and he was kept from the (right) way. And Pharaoh’s plot was only a failure.
40|38| And the one who believed said: my people, follow me, I guide you to the right way.
40|39| My people, this world's life is indeed an enjoyment, and the hereafter is indeed the settlement home (and everlasting home)
40|40| Whoever does a bad deed, then he is only punished equal to it, and whoever does good, whether male or female and is a believer then they enter the garden in which they have provision without any limit.
40|41| And my people, what is with me that I call you to the salvation and you call me to the fire?
40|42| You invite me to disbelieve in God and to associate (partners) with Him what I have no knowledge of, while I invite you to the powerful, the forgiver.
40|43| No doubt that there is no calling (and no answer) in the world and in the hereafter for what you call me to it, and that our return is to God, and indeed the excessive ones are inhabitants of the fire.
40|44| You are going to remember what I say to you, and I entrust my affair to God. Indeed God sees His servants.
40|45| So God protected him from badness of what they plotted, and the bad punishment surrounded people of Pharaoh,
40|46| the fire. They are presented to it morning and evening, and on a day that the hour begins (it is said): admit Pharaoh’s people into the most severe punishment.
40|47| And when they argue in the fire, then the weak say to those who were arrogant: we were your followers, so would you turn away a portion of the fire from us?
40|48| Those who were arrogant say: we are all in it, God has judged between His servants.
40|49| And those who are in the fire say to guards of hell: call on your Master to reduce our punishment by a day.
40|50| They (the guards) say: did not your messengers bring you the clear proofs? They say: yes. They say: so call, for call of the disbelievers is only a mistake (and is useless).
40|51| We certainly help Our messengers and those who believed in this world's life and on the day that witnesses stand (to testify).
40|52| A day when the wrongdoers would not benefit from their apology and the curse would be theirs and the bad home would be theirs..
40|53| And We have certainly given Moses the guidance (the Torah) and We made children of Israel inherit the book,
40|54| a guide and a reminder for the people of understanding (reasonable people).
40|55| So persevere (and be patient), indeed God’s promise is true, and ask forgiveness for your sin, and glorify your Master with praise in the evening and the early morning.
40|56| Indeed those who argue about God's signs without any reason coming to them, there is nothing in their chests except (desire for) greatness that they will not reach it. So look for God’s protection as indeed He hears all, sees all.
40|57| The creation of the skies and the earth is certainly greater than creation of the people, but most of the people do not know.
40|58| The blinds and those who see are not equal, and neither are those who believed and did good works and the bad doer. You take a little notice.
40|59| The hour is certainly coming, there is no doubt in it but most people do not believe.
40|60| And your Master says: call on Me, I respond to you, indeed those who are arrogant about serving Me are going to enter hell in humiliation.
40|61| God is the One who made the night for you to rest in it and the day to see. God is indeed gracious to the people, but most people are not thankful.
40|62| That is God your Master, creator of everything, there is no god except Him, so how do you deviate?
40|63| That is how those who were rejecting God's signs deviated (from the truth).
40|64| God is the One who made the earth a habitat for you and the sky a structure (to shield you) and He shaped you, and made your shapes well and provided you with good things. That is God your Master, so blessed is God, Master of humankind.
40|65| He is the living, there is no god except Him, so call on Him being sincere (and devoted) to Him in the religion. All praise belongs to God, Master of humankind.
40|66| Say: I am forbidden to serve those whom you call on besides God since clear proofs came to me from my Master, and I am ordered to submit to the Master of Human kind.
40|67| He is the One who created you from dust, then from a fertilized egg, then from a (dangling, clinging, and leach like) blood clot, then He brings you out as a baby, then (He lets) you reach your full maturity (and strength), then you become old while some of you die before that, so that you reach a defined period, and that you may understand.
40|68| He is the One who gives life and causes death, and when He decides on an issue, then He just says for it: be, and it will be.
40|69| Did you not see how those who argue about God's signs are turned away (from the truth)?
40|70| Those who denied the book and what We sent Our messengers with it, they will know
40|71| when the shackles and the chains are around their necks and they are dragged
40|72| into the boiling water, then they are burned in the fire.
40|73| Then it is said to them: where are what you were associating (as partners),
40|74| besides God? They say: they abandoned us, rather we were not calling on anything in the past. That is how God misguides the disbelievers.
40|75| That is because you used to rejoice unjustifiably (and excessively) on the earth, and because you used to exuberate.
40|76| Enter gates of hell, remaining in there forever, and what a bad place for the arrogant ones.
40|77| So persevere (and be patient), indeed God’s promise is true. And whether We show you some of that which We promised them (the punishment) or We make you die (before that), they are returned to Us.
40|78| And We have certainly sent messengers before you. We told you stories of some of them and We did not tell you stories of some of them. And it is not (possible) for any messenger to bring a sign (or a miracle) except with God’s permission. So when God’s order comes, it is judged with the truth, and those who falsify lose in there.
40|79| God is the One who made the livestock for you so that you ride some of them and you eat some of them,
40|80| and there are (other) benefits in them for you, and for you to reach a need that is in your chests (by riding) on them, and you are carried upon them and upon the ships.
40|81| And He shows you His signs, so which (one) of God’s signs do you deny?
40|82| Did they not travel on the earth to see what the end of those before them was? They were more than them and were more powerful and had more effects (and marks) on the earth, and what they did was of no use to them.
40|83| So when their messengers brought them the clear proofs, they were glad with whatever they had from the knowledge, and what they used to ridicule it surrounded them.
40|84| So when they saw Our punishment, they said: we believed in God, He is One, and we disbelieved in what we used to associate with Him.
40|85| But their belief did not benefit them when they saw Our punishment, (this is) God’s way that has passed among His servants, and the disbelievers lose there.
41|1| H. M. (Ha. Mim.)
41|2| A sending down from the beneficent, the merciful.
41|3| A book that its verses are fully explained, a Quran in Arabic for people who know,
41|4| giver of good news and a warner, but most of them stayed away and they do not listen.
41|5| And they said: our hearts are in covers from what you call us to it, and in our ears is deafness, and there is a barrier between us and between you, so do (what you want), and indeed we are doers (as we please). 
41|6| Say: I am only a human being like you, it is revealed to me that your god is the One god, so go straight to Him and ask his forgiveness, and woe to the polytheists,
41|7| those who do not give the mandatory charity, and they are disbelievers in the hereafter. 
41|8| Indeed those who believed and did good works have an unending reward.
41|9| Say: do you really disbelieve in the One who created the earth in two days (stages), and you set up equals for Him? That is Master of humankind.
41|10| And He placed in it firm mountains (rising) above it, and He blessed it, and He assigned its foods in it in four stages, equally (available) to those who ask.
41|11| Then He turned to the sky while it was a smoke (cloud of gas), then He said to it and to the earth: come willingly or unwillingly. They both said: we come willingly.
41|12| Then He completed them, as seven skies in two days/stages and revealed to each sky its order. And We beautified the sky of the world with lamps (stars) and as a shield. That is determination of the powerful, the knowledgeable.
41|13| So if they stay away, then say: I warn you of a thunderbolt like thunderbolt of Aad and Thamud.
41|14| When the messengers came to them from in front of them and from behind them (saying): serve none but God. They said: if our Master wanted, He would have sent down angels, so indeed we disbelieve in what you were sent with it.
41|15| And as for Aad, they were unjustifiably arrogant on the earth, and they said: who is more powerful than us? Did they not see that God, the One who created them, is more powerful than them? And they used to reject Our signs.
41|16| So We sent a brutal cold wind upon them for several miserable days in order that We make them taste the humiliating punishment in this world’s life while the punishment of the hereafter is certainly more humiliating, and they will not be helped.
41|17| And as for the Thamud, We guided them but they preferred the blindness over the guidance, so thunderbolt of the degrading punishment took them, for what they used to do.
41|18| And We saved those who believed and they were controlling themselves.
41|19| And on a day when the enemies of God are gathered toward the fire while they are restrained,
41|20| until they come to it (the fire), their ears and their eyes and their skins testify against them for what they used to do.
41|21| And they say to their skins: why did you testify against us? They (their skins) say: God made us speak, the One who made everything speak, and He created you the first time and you are returned to Him.
41|22| You were not hiding (your sins) that your ears and your eyes and your skins do not testify against you (because you did not believe they will), but you assumed that God does not know most of what you do.
41|23| And that thinking of yours, which you assumed about your Master, destroyed you and so you became of the losers.
41|24| And if they are patient, then (they find out that) the fire is a place for them, and if they want to plea (to appease God), they are not of those whose plea is accepted.
41|25| And We assigned companions for them who made what is in front of them and what is behind them look beautiful to them, and the word (of punishment) about groups of Jinn and humans who passed away before them became due on them, indeed they were losers.
41|26| And those who disbelieved said: do not listen to this Quran, and talk nonsense in it (when it is read) so that you may win.
41|27| And We shall make those who disbelieved taste a severe punishment, and We shall punish them for the worst of what they used to do.
41|28| That is punishment of God’s enemies, the fire, they have the eternal home in it, as a reward because they were rejecting Our signs.
41|29| And those who disbelieved say: our Master, show us those among Jinn and humans who misguided us so that we put them under our feet (and stomp on them) so that they become of the lowest ones.
41|30| Indeed those who said our Master is God, then they stood firm, the angels come down to them (saying): do not be afraid and do not be sad and receive the good news of the garden that you were being promised.
41|31| We are your protectors (and friends) in this world's life and in the hereafter, and you have whatever you desire in it and you have whatever you ask for in it,
41|32| an entertainment from a merciful forgiver.
41|33| And whose word is better than someone who invites to God and does good works and says I am of the submitted ones?
41|34| And the good and the bad are not equal. Repel (and respond) with that which is better, then all of a sudden the one that there is an enmity between you and him becomes as if he is your close friend. 
41|35| And none is given it (that character) except those who are patient, and none is given it except those having a great fortune.
41|36| And if a temptation of Satan tempts you, then look for God’s protection, as He hears all, knows all.
41|37| And among His signs are the night and the day, and the sun and the moon. Do not show humbleness for the sun or the moon, but show humbleness for God, the One who created them if you are serving Him.
41|38| But if they are arrogant (do not be upset), as those who are with your Master glorify Him in the night and the day and they do not get tired.
41|39| And among His signs is that you see the earth is barren, and then when We send down the rain on it, it revives and it grows. Indeed the One who gives it life certainly gives life to the dead. Indeed He is capable of everything.
41|40| Indeed those who drift from Our signs (verses) are not hidden from Us. Is someone who is thrown into the fire better or someone who comes to the judgment day safely? Do what you want, indeed He sees whatever you do. 
41|41| Indeed those who disbelieved in the reminder when it came to them (are inhabitants of the fire), and indeed it is a powerful (and compelling) book.
41|42| The falsehood does not come to it from front of it or from behind it (nothing can ever prove it false), a sending down from a praiseworthy wise.
41|43| Nothing is said to you (and about you) except what has been said to the messengers before you. Indeed your Master has forgiveness and has a painful punishment.
41|44| And if We had made it a foreign language Quran, they would have certainly said: why its verses are not explained (in Arabic), a foreign language and an Arab? Say: it is guidance and a healing for those who believed, and those who do not believe there is deafness in their ears and they are blind about it, (as if) they are called from a faraway place.
41|45| And We have certainly given Moses the book, then they disagreed about it. And if it was not for a word that previously came from your Master, it would have been judged between them. And they are indeed in a serious doubt about it.
41|46| Whoever does good work then it is for himself, and whoever does bad then it is against it, and your Master is not unjust to His servants.
41|47| The knowledge of the hour is referred to Him. And no fruit come out of its coverings, and no female gets pregnant and gives birth without His knowledge. And on a day that He calls them (saying): where are My associates? They say: we notified You that there is no witness among us.
41|48| And what they used to call on in the past abandoned them, and they realize that there is no way (or place) of escape for them.
41|49| The human being does not get tired of praying for the good (things), but if the badness touches him then he becomes hopeless and discouraged.
41|50| And if We make him taste of a mercy from Us after harm touches him, he shall say: this is because of me, and I do not think that the hour is established, and if I am returned to my Master, indeed there is better (things) for me with Him. We shall inform those who disbelieved of what they did, and We shall make them taste from a severe punishment.
41|51| And when We favor upon the human being, he turns away and moves away to his side, and when the badness touches him then he has a lengthy prayer.
41|52| Say: what do you think if it (Quran) is from God and you disbelieve in it, who is more mistaken than someone who is in extreme opposition (to it)?
41|53| We are going to show them Our signs in the horizons (of universe) and in themselves until it is clarified for them that He is the truth. Or is it not enough that your Master is indeed a witness over everything?
41|54| Know that indeed they are in doubt about meeting their Master. Know that indeed He surrounds everything.
42|1| H. M. (Ha. Mim.)
42|2| A. S. Q. (Ain. Sin. Qaf.)
42|3| That is how God the powerful, the wise, reveals to you and to those before you.
42|4| Whatever in the skies and whatever on the earth belongs to Him, and He is the superior, the great.
42|5| The skies are about to tear apart from above them, and the angels glorify their Master with praise and ask forgiveness for whoever is on the earth. Know that indeed God is the forgiving, the merciful.
42|6| And those who took protectors (and supporters) other than Him, God is guarding over them, and you are not their advocate.
42|7| And that is how We revealed an Arabic Quran to you, so that you warn (the people of) the mother of the towns (Mecca) and its vicinity, and you warn of the day of assembly which there is no doubt in it, a group in the garden and a group in the burning fire.
42|8| And if God wanted, He would have made you a single community (of faith), but He admits anyone He wants into His mercy. And the wrongdoers have no protector and no helper.
42|9| Or did they take protectors other than God? Whereas God is the protector and He gives life to the dead and He is capable of everything.
42|10| And anything you disagree about it, then its judgment (and decision) is with God. That is God, my Master, I trust in Him and I return to Him (in repentance).
42|11| Creator of the skies and the earth, He made spouses for you from yourselves, as well as mates for the livestock, by which He multiplies (and disperses) you in it. There is nothing like Him, and He hears all, sees all.
42|12| The keys of the skies and the earth belong to Him, He increases and decreases the provision for anyone He wants. Indeed He knows everything.
42|13| He legislated for you the religion (way of life) that He instructed Noah to it, and that which We revealed to you, and what We instructed Abraham and Moses and Jesus to it, to uphold the religion and do not become divided in it. What you invite them to it, is difficult for the polytheists. God chooses anyone He wants for Himself, and He guides to Himself anyone who turns (in repentance).
42|14| And they only became divided after the knowledge came to them because of jealousy between them. And if it was not for a word that previously came from your Master for a limited period, it would have been judged between them. And indeed those who were made to inherit the book after them are in a serious doubt about it.
42|15| So invite for that (observing religion and not being divided in it), and stand firm as you were ordered, and do not follow their desires, and say: I believed in whatever book/mandate that God sent down, and I am ordered to be just (and fair) between you, God is our Master and your Master, our deeds for us and your deeds for you, there is no argument between us and you, God brings us together, and the final return is to Him.
42|16| And those who argue about God after they answered to Him, their argument is invalid with their Master, and anger (of God) is upon them, and a severe punishment is for them.
42|17| God is the One who sent down the book and the scale (of good and bad) with truth. And how would you know, the hour may be near?
42|18| Those who do not believe in it want to rush it, and those who believed are afraid of it and they know that it is indeed the truth. Know that those who dispute about the hour are indeed lost far (from the right path).
42|19| God is nice to His servants, He provides for anyone He wants, and He is the strong, the powerful.
42|20| Anyone who desires the harvest of the hereafter, We increase his harvest for him, and anyone who desires the harvest of this world, We give him from it, but in the hereafter there is no portion for him.
42|21| Or do they have associates who legislate part of the religion for them, which God did not permit it? And if it was not for the decisive word (of God), it would have been judged between them. And indeed the wrongdoers have a painful punishment.
42|22| You see the wrongdoers are afraid because of what they earned, and it (punishment) happens to them. And those who believed and did good works are in meadows of the gardens, they have whatever they want with their Master. That is the great bounty.
42|23| That is what God gives good news (of it) to His servants, those who believed and did good works. Say: I do not ask you for any wage except for the love among the close ones (or the love of the closeness to God). And whoever commits a good deed, We increase its goodness for him. Indeed God is forgiving, appreciative.
42|24| Or do they say: he made up a lie (and attributes it) to God? Then if God wants, He would seal your heart, but God eliminates the falsehood and proves the truth with His words. Indeed He knows what is inside the chests.
42|25| And He is the One who accepts the repentance from His servants and excuses the bad deeds and knows what you do.
42|26| And He answers those who believed and did good works, and He gives them more from His grace (and bounty), and the disbelievers have a severe punishment.
42|27| And if He increases the provision of His servants, they would certainly commit injustice on the earth, but He sends down in amount that He wants. Indeed He is well informed and observant about His servants.
42|28| And He is the One who sends down the rain after they lost hope and He spreads His mercy. And He is the praiseworthy protector.
42|29| And among His signs is creation of the skies and the earth and whatever creature He scattered in them. And He is capable of bringing them together when He wants.
42|30| And whatever tragedy happens to you is because of what your hands have done, and He excuses a lot.
42|31| And you cannot weaken/escape (God) on the earth, and there is no protector or helper for you other than God.
42|32| And among His signs are the sailing ships in the sea like the mountains/road signs.
42|33| If He wants He makes the wind stand still, then they would become motionless on its back (sea's surface). Indeed there are signs in that for every patient and thankful (person).
42|34| Or He would destroy them for what they did, but He forgives a lot.
42|35| And those who argue about Our signs should know that they have no way (or place) to escape.
42|36| So everything you were given is an enjoyment of this world's life, but what is with God is better and more lasting for those who believed and trust in their Master,
42|37| and those who avoid the great sins and indecencies, and they forgive when they are angry,
42|38| and those who answered (the call of) their Master, and performed the mandatory prayer, and (conducted) their affairs by consultation among them, and spend (in God's way) from what We provided them.
42|39| And those who defend themselves (or take revenge) when they suffer an injustice,
42|40| (should know that) punishment of a bad deed is a bad deed like it, and anyone who excuses and settles then his reward is upon God. Indeed He does not like the wrongdoers.
42|41| And certainly anyone who defends himself (or takes revenge), then there is no way against them.
42|42| The way is only against those who do wrong to the people and unjustifiably commit injustice on the earth. They have a painful punishment.
42|43| And anyone who is patient and forgives, indeed that is because of great determination (and willpower).
42|44| And whomever God misguides then he has no protector after Him. And you see the wrongdoers when they see the punishment, saying: is there any way to return?
42|45| And you see them presented to it (the fire) humiliated from the disgrace, looking with a secret glance. And those who believed say: indeed the losers are those who lose themselves and their families on the resurrection day. Know that indeed the wrongdoers are in a lasting punishment.
42|46| And there is no protector to help them other than God. And whomever God misguides, he has no way.
42|47| Answer your Master before a day comes that it has no turning back by God. On that day there is no refuge for you and there is no denial for you.
42|48| But if they stay away, We have not sent you as their guardian, you are only responsible for the preaching. And indeed when We make the human being taste from Our mercy he enjoys it, but if they suffer a tragedy because of what their hands sent ahead then indeed the human being is ungrateful.
42|49| The rule of the skies and the earth belongs to God. He creates what He wants. He gives daughters to anyone He wants and gives the sons to anyone He wants.
42|50| Or He combines them (giving them) sons and daughters and sons, and He makes anyone He wants infertile. Indeed He is knowledgeable and capable.
42|51| And it is not for any human being that God speaks to him, except through revelation or from behind a barrier or by sending a messenger (angel) to reveal what He wants with His permission. God is indeed superior, wise.
42|52| And like that We revealed to you a spirit by Our command. You did not used to know what the book or the belief/faith is, but We made it (Quran) a light and We guide anyone of Our servants that We want with it. And indeed you guide to a straight path (by this Quran),
42|53| path of God, the One that whatever in the skies and on the earth belongs to Him. Know that all affairs wind up with God.
43|1| H. M. (Ha. Mim.)
43|2| By the clear (and clarifying) book.
43|3| Indeed We made it an Arabic Quran so that you may understand.
43|4| And it is indeed in the main book with Us, (and it is) outstanding and wise.
43|5| Should We take the reminder away from you, ignoring you because you are excessive people?
43|6| And how many prophets did We send among the earlier ones?
43|7| And no prophet came to them, unless they were ridiculing him.
43|8| So We destroyed more courageous (and more powerful people) than them, and the example of the earlier ones passed by.
43|9| And if you ask them: who created the skies and the earth? They shall say: the powerful and the knowledgeable created them.
43|10| The One who made the earth a bed for you and He made roadways for you in it so that you may be guided (and find your way).
43|11| And the One who sent down rain from the sky with (proper) measure, then We brought dead land back to life with it. That is how you are brought out.
43|12| And the One who created pairs of everything, and made the ships and the livestock for you to ride.
43|13| So that you settle on its back, then when you are settled on it remember the favor of your Master and say: glory to the One (who is flawless) who brought this under our control (to be of service to us) while we were not capable of it.
43|14| And we certainly return to our Master.
43|15| And they made a part (an offspring) for Him from His servants. Indeed the human being is clearly ungrateful.
43|16| Did He take daughters (for Himself) from what He creates, and He chose sons for you?
43|17| And when one of them is given good news of what he assigns to the beneficent, his face turns dark (and shameful) while he holds back his anger.
43|18| Or (do they assign to God) someone who is raised in luxury, and who is unclear in the debate?
43|19| And they made the angels, those who are servants of the beneficent, females! Did they witness their creation? Their testimony is going to be written down and they will be questioned.
43|20| And they said: if the beneficent wanted, we would not have served them. They have no knowledge of that, they only guess.
43|21| Or did We give them a book before it, which they are adhering to it?
43|22| No, but they said: we found our fathers on a course, and we are guided by their footsteps.
43|23| And the same way, We did not send any town anyone as a warner before you, unless its rich (and wealthy) said: we found our fathers on a course, and we are following their footsteps.
43|24| He (the warner) said: even if I have brought you a better guidance than what you found your fathers upon it? They said: we disbelieve in what you were sent with it.
43|25| Then We took revenge from them, so see what the end of those who denied was.
43|26| And (remember) when Abraham told his father and his people: I am free of what you serve
43|27| except the One who created me, indeed He is going to guide me.
43|28| And he made it a lasting word among his descendants so that they may return (to God).
43|29| No, but I made these and their fathers enjoy until the truth and a clarifying messenger came to them.
43|30| And when the truth came to them, they said: this is a magic and we are disbelievers in it.
43|31| And they said: why this Quran was not sent down to a great man from the two towns (Mecca and Taif)?
43|32| Do they divide up (and distribute) your Master’s mercy? We divided their livelihood (and wealth) between them in this world’s life. And We raised some of them above the others in ranks so that some of them take the others into service. And your Master’s mercy is better than what they accumulate.
43|33| And if it was not that the people would become a single community (of disbelievers), We would have made houses, for anyone who disbelieves in the beneficent, with silver roofs and (silver) ladders to go up on it,
43|34| and  (silver) doors for their houses and (silver) couches that they lean on it,
43|35| and (gold) ornament. And all that is only an enjoyment of this world’s life while the hereafter with your Master is for those who control themselves.
43|36| And anyone who is blind about remembrance of the beneficent, We appoint a devil to him to be close to him,
43|37| and indeed they shall obstruct them from the (right) way, and they think they are guided.
43|38| Until when he comes to Us, saying: I wish there was distance of the two easts (the east and the west) between you (the appointed devil) and me, what a bad companion.
43|39| And (you regret) never benefits you today, since you did wrong, indeed you are partners in the punishment.
43|40| Can you make the deaf hear, or guide the blind and anyone who is in an obvious error?
43|41| So if We take you away (from this world), then indeed We take revenge from them.
43|42| Or (if) We show you that which We promised them, then We indeed have power over them (to do that).
43|43| So hold on to that which We revealed to you, indeed you are on a straight path.
43|44| And indeed it (Quran) is a reminder for you and for your people, and you will be questioned.
43|45| And ask (the followers of) Our messengers whom We sent before you: did We appoint any gods to be served other than the beneficent? 
43|46| And We have certainly sent Moses with Our signs to Pharaoh and his assembly, then he said: I am a messenger from the Master of Human kind.
43|47| But when he brought them Our miracles, they laughed at it.
43|48| And We did not show them any miracle unless it was bigger than its sister (the one before it). And We took them with the punishment so that they may return.
43|49| And they said: magician, call on your Master for us according to His agreement with you, as we are indeed guided.
43|50| But when We removed the punishment from them, they immediately broke (their promise).
43|51| And Pharaoh called out among his people, saying: my people, does not the rule of Egypt belong to me as do these rivers flowing underneath me? Do you not see?
43|52| Am I not better than this one who is despicable and cannot express (himself) clearly? 
43|53| So why bracelets of gold were not given to him or the angels did not come accompanying him?
43|54| Then he belittled his people and they obeyed him. Indeed they were disobedient people.
43|55| So when they enraged Us, We took revenge from them and drowned them all.
43|56| So We made them a thing of the past and an example for the later ones.
43|57| And when the son of Mary (Jesus) was given as an example, your people turned away from it (laughing and shouting).
43|58| And they said: are our gods better or is he? They only gave you (this example) to argue. No, but they are argumentative people.
43|59| He (Jesus) was only a servant whom We favored upon him and We made him an example for children of Israel.
43|60| And if We wanted, We would have made some of you angels on the earth, to succeed you.
43|61| And it is certainly an indication of the hour, so do not doubt it, and follow Me. This is a straight path.
43|62| And do not let Satan hold you up, as he is indeed your clear enemy.
43|63| And when Jesus brought the clear proofs, he said: I have certainly brought you the wisdom to clarify for you some of that which you disagree about it, so be cautious of God and obey me.
43|64| Indeed God is He who is my Master and your Master, so serve Him. This is a straight path.
43|65| But the parties disagreed among themselves, so woe to those who did wrong from punishment of a painful day.
43|66| Do they wait (for anything) except the hour to come to them suddenly, while they do not realize.
43|67| On that day, the friends are enemy of each other except those who controlled themselves.
43|68| My servants, there is no fear for you today, and you will not be sad.
43|69| Those who believed in Our signs and were submitted,
43|70| you and your spouses enter the garden, being delighted.
43|71| Golden plates and drinking glasses are circulated for them, and whatever the soul desires and pleases the eyes is in there, and you remain in it forever
43|72| And this is the garden that you are made to inherit because of what you were doing.
43|73| There are plenty of fruits for you to eat in it.
43|74| Indeed the guilty ones remain in the punishment of hell forever.
43|75| It is not reduced for them and they are hopeless in it.
43|76| We did not wrong them, but they were the wrongdoers.
43|77| And they call out: master (of hell), have your Master finish us off. He says: indeed you are staying.
43|78| We have certainly brought you the truth, but most of you dislike the truth.
43|79| Or did they firmly settle on an issue, then indeed We are firmly settled too.
43|80| Or do they think that We do not hear their secret and their whisper? Yes (We hear them), and Our messengers are with them writing.
43|81| Say: if there was a child for the beneficent, then I would be the first of the servants. 
43|82| Master of the skies and the earth, Master of the throne is flawless (and beyond) what they describe.
43|83| So leave them talk uselessly and play until they meet their day which they are promised.
43|84| And He is the One who is god in the skies and god in the earth, and He is the wise, the knowledgeable.
43|85| And blessed is the One that the rule of the skies and the earth and whatever between them belongs to Him, and the knowledge of the hour is with Him, and you are returned to Him.
43|86| And those you call on besides Him have no power of the mediation, except whoever testifies with the truth, and they know (the truth).
43|87| And if you ask them who created them? They shall say: God. So how do they deviate?
43|88| And his saying was: my Master, indeed these people do not believe.
43|89| (God said:) so pardon/ignore them and say peace (and well-being), they will know.
44|1| H. M. (Ha. Mim.)
44|2| By the clear (and clarifying) book.
44|3| Indeed We revealed it in a blessed night, indeed We are warners.
44|4| Every wise command is made distinct (and well defined) in it,
44|5| a command from Us. Indeed We are senders.
44|6| A mercy from your Master. Indeed He hears all, knows all.
44|7| Master of the skies and the earth and whatever is between them, if you are certain.
44|8| There is no god except Him, He gives life and causes death, your Master and Master of your forefathers.
44|9| No, but they play around in doubt.
44|10| So expect a day that the sky brings a visible smoke,
44|11| covering people. This is a painful punishment.
44|12| Our Master, remove the punishment from us, indeed we are believers.
44|13| How is the reminder (of any use) for them, while a clarifying messenger has come to them
44|14| and they turned away from him and they said he is a mad man taught (by others)?
44|15| We remove the punishment a little, (then) indeed you return (to disbelief).
44|16| On a day that We assault with the great assault, indeed We take revenge. 
44|17| And We have certainly tested people of Pharaoh before them, and a noble messenger came to them 
44|18| (saying) that: deliver the servants of God to me, I am an honest messenger for you,
44|19| and do not (try to) rise over God, indeed I brought you a clear reason.
44|20| And indeed I look for protection with my Master and your Master, that you don't stone me.
44|21| And if you do not believe me then stay away from me.
44|22| Then he (Moses) called on his Master: indeed these are guilty people.
44|23| (God told Moses:) So travel with My servants by night, indeed you will be followed,
44|24| and leave the sea calmly, indeed they will be a drowned army.
44|25| How many gardens and springs did they leave behind,
44|26| and plantations and superb residence,
44|27| and riches that they were happy in it?
44|28| It was like that, and We made other people inherit it.
44|29| And the skies and the earth did not cry over them, and they were not given any delay.
44|30| And We have certainly saved the children of Israel from the humiliating punishment
44|31| of Pharaoh. He was indeed foremost among the excessive ones.
44|32| And We have certainly chosen them knowingly above all other people.
44|33| And We gave them the signs, that in which there was a clear test.
44|34| Indeed these (people) say: 
44|35| there is only our first death, and we will not be raised (again),
44|36| if you are truthful then bring (back) our fathers.
44|37| Are they better or people of Tubba and those before them? We destroyed them, indeed they were guilty.
44|38| And We did not create the skies and the earth and whatever is between them playing around.
44|39| We did not create them except with the truth (and purpose), but most of them do not know.
44|40| Indeed the day of separation/decision is appointment for all of them.
44|41| A day when a friend is not of any use to any friend at all, and they are not be helped,
44|42| except whoever God has mercy (on him). He is indeed the powerful, the merciful.
44|43| Indeed the Zaqqum tree,
44|44| is food of the sinful.
44|45| It boils in the stomachs like melted metal (or burning oil),
44|46| like boiling of the boiling water.
44|47| Take him and drag him into the middle of the hellfire.
44|48| Then pour from punishment of the boiling water over his head.
44|49| Taste, indeed you (thought you) are the powerful and the noble!
44|50| Indeed this is what you used to doubt about it.
44|51| Those who control themselves will be in a safe position,
44|52| in gardens and springs.
44|53| They wear (clothes) from fine and heavy silk, facing each other.
44|54| It is like that. And We marry them to appealing girls with beautiful eyes.
44|55| They call for all kind of fruit in there safely.
44|56| They do not taste death in it except the first death, and He protected them from punishment of the hellfire.
44|57| A bounty (and a grace) from your Master. That is the great victory.
44|58| Indeed We made it (Quran) easy in your language so that they may take notice.
44|59| So watch, indeed they are watching (too).
45|1| H. M. (Ha. Mim.)
45|2| Sending down of the book is from God, the powerful, the wise.
45|3| Indeed there are signs in the skies and the earth for the believers.
45|4| And there are signs in your creation and creatures that He scatters (throughout the earth) for people who are certain .
45|5| And the alternation of the night and the day, and what God sends down as provision from the sky (rain), then He gives life to the earth after its death with it, and changing of the winds, are signs for people who understand.
45|6| These are God's signs that We read it to you in truth. So in what saying do they believe after God and His signs?
45|7| Woe to every lying sinner,
45|8| who hears God' signs that is read to him, then he arrogantly insists (on his disbelief), as if he did not hear them. So give him news of a painful punishment.
45|9| And when he learns something from Our signs, he takes it as a joke. They have a humiliating punishment.
45|10| Ahead of them is hell, and what they did is of no use to them at all, and neither is what they took as protectors other than God. And a painful punishment is for them.
45|11| This (Quran) is guidance, and those who disbelieved in their Master’s signs have a punishment of painful filth.
45|12| God is the One who brought the sea under your control (and at your service) so that the ships sail for you in it by His command, and so that you look for His bounty and you may be thankful.
45|13| And He brought whatever in the skies and whatever on the earth under your control (and at your service), all of which are from Him. Indeed there are sings in that for people who think.
45|14| Tell those who believed to forgive those who do not hope for God's days, so that He rewards people for what they were doing.
45|15| Whoever does good work then it is for himself, and whoever does bad then it is against himself, then you are returned to your Master.
45|16| And We have certainly given children of Israel the book and the authority and the prophethood, and We provided them with good things, and We preferred them over all other people.
45|17| And We gave them clear proofs in the matter (of religion), then they disagreed because of jealousy between them only after the knowledge came to them. Indeed your Master judges between them regarding what they were disagreeing about it, on the resurrection day.
45|18| Then We put you on a legislation of the affair (of religion), so follow it and do not follow the desires of those who do not know.
45|19| Indeed they will never be of any use to you against God at all. And the wrongdoers are indeed protectors (and supporters) of each other, and God is protector of those who control themselves.
45|20| This (Quran) is enlightenment for the people, and a guide and a mercy for people who are certain.
45|21| Or do those who committed the bad deeds think that We make them equal, in their life and in their death, to those who believed and did good works? They judge badly.
45|22| And God created the skies and the earth with the truth (and purpose), so that every person is rewarded for what it did, and they will not be wronged..
45|23| Did you see one who took his desires as his god, and God misguided him (according to His laws) in spite of his knowledge and sealed his hearing and his heart and put a cover on his eye? Who guides him after God? Do you not take notice?
45|24| And they say: There is nothing except our life of this world, we die and we live (and world goes on), and only time destroys us. And they have no knowledge of this, they only guess.
45|25| And when Our clear verses are read to them, their only argument is to say: bring our fathers back if you are truthful.
45|26| Say: God gives you life, then makes you die, then gathers you on the resurrection day that there is no doubt about it, but most people do not know.
45|27| And the rule of the skies and the earth belongs to God. And on a day that the hour establishes, on that day the falsifiers (and the followers of falsehood) lose.
45|28| And you see every community kneeling down, every community is called onto its book (and is told): today you are rewarded for what you were doing.
45|29| This is Our book speaking against you with the truth. We were writing out whatever you were doing.
45|30| As for those who believed and did good works, their Master admits them into His mercy. That is the clear victory.
45|31| And as for those who disbelieved (they are told): were not My verses read to you? But you were arrogant and you were guilty people.
45|32| And when it was said: God’s promise is indeed true, and there is no doubt about the hour. You said: we do not know what the hour is, we think it is only a guess, and we are not certain.
45|33| And badness of what they did appears to them, and what they used to ridicule surrounds them.
45|34| And it is said: today We forget you as you forgot meeting of this day of yours, and your housing is the fire, and there is no helper for you,
45|35| that is because you took God’s signs as a joke and this world’s life deceived you. So today they are not taken out of it, and they are not asked to apologize (to appease God).
45|36| All praise belongs to God, Master of the skies and Master of the earth, Master of humankind.
45|37| And the greatness (and the majesty) in the skies and the earth belongs to Him, and He is the powerful, the wise.
46|1| H. M. (Ha. Mim.) 
46|2| Sending down of the book is from God, the powerful, the wise.
46|3| We did not create the skies and the earth and whatever in between them except in truth and for a finite time. But those who disbelieved turn away from what they are warned about.
46|4| Say: what do you think of what you call on other than God, show me what they created of the earth or do they have a share in (the creation of) the skies? Bring me a book from before this or any indication of knowledge if you are truthful.
46|5| Who is more mistaken than someone who calls on anyone other than God who does not answer him (even) until the resurrection day, and they are unaware of their call?
46|6| And when the people are gathered, they are their enemies and they deny their servitude.
46|7| And when Our clear signs (verses) are read to them, those who disbelieved say about the truth that comes to them: this is a clear magic.
46|8| Or they say: he made it up. Say: if I made it up, then you do not have any power (to do anything) for me against God, He knows better what you discuss about it, He is enough as a witness between me and you, and He is the forgiving, the merciful. 
46|9| Say: I am not beginning (and the first) of the messengers, and I do not know what is done with me and with you, I only follow what is revealed to me, and I am only a clear warner.
46|10| Say: what do you thing if it (Quran) is from God and you disbelieved in it while a witness from children of Israel testified to its similarities and he believed (in it), and you were arrogant? Indeed God does not guide the wrongdoing people.
46|11| And those who disbelieved said to those who believed: if it was good, no one would be ahead of us (in believing) to it. And when they were not guided by it, then they are going to say: this is an old lie.
46|12| And book of Moses was a leader and a mercy before it, and this is a confirming book in Arabic language, in order to warn those who do wrong and as good news to the good doers.
46|13| Indeed those who said God is our Master, then they persevered, they have no fear and no sadness.
46|14| They are inhabitants of the garden, remaining in there forever, as a reward for what they were doing.
46|15| And We instructed the human being to kindness to his parent. His mother carried him in pain and gave birth to him in pain, and carried him and breastfed him for thirty months. When he reached his full maturity and he reached forty years, he said: my Master, enable me to thank for Your favor that you granted me and my parents, and to do good work that pleases You, and straighten out my descendants for me, indeed I turned to You (in repentance) and I am of the submitted ones.
46|16| They are those whom We accept the best of what they do from them, and We overlook their bad deeds, (they are) among inhabitants of the garden, the true promise that they were promised.
46|17| And the one who said to his parent: ugh (yuck) to you, do you promise me that I am brought out while generations before me have passed away (and they were not resurrected)? And they both ask for God’s help (saying): woe to you, believe, as God’s promise is indeed true. Then he says: this is only stories of the earlier ones.
46|18| They are those who deserve the word (of punishment) for groups of Jinn and humans that have passed away before them, indeed they are losers.
46|19| And everyone have (different) ranks because of what they did, so that He repays them for their deeds and they are not wronged.
46|20| And on a day when those who disbelieved are presented to the fire (they are told): you did away with your good things in your life of the world, and you enjoyed it, so today you are paid back with a humiliating punishment because you were unjustifiably arrogant on the earth and because you were disobedient. 
46|21| And remember (Hud), brother of (people of) Aad, when he warned his people at the dunes, while other warners have passed before him and after him, (saying): do not serve (anyone) except God, indeed I am afraid of the punishment of a great day upon you.
46|22| They said: did you come to us to turn us away from our gods? Then bring us what you promise us, if you are truthful.
46|23| He said: the knowledge (of it) is only with God, and I preach to you what I was sent with it, but I see that you are ignorant people.
46|24| So when they saw it (the punishment) as a cloud moving toward their valleys, they said: this is a cloud bringing us rain. No, but his is what you wanted it to be rushed, a wind with a painful punishment in it.
46|25| It destroys everything by order of its Master. Then they became such that only their houses is seen. That is how We pay back the guilty people.
46|26| And We have certainly given them powers in that which We did not give you power in it, and We gave them hearing and eyes and hearts, but their hearing and their eyes and their hearts was of no use to them at all when they were rejecting God’s signs, and what they used to ridicule it (the punishment) surrounded them.
46|27| And We have certainly destroyed the towns around you, and We explained the signs so that you may return.
46|28| So why those whom they took as gods besides God to get closer (to Him) did not help them? No, but they abandoned them. And that was their lie and what they used to make up.
46|29| And (remember) when We turned a number of the Jinn toward you listening to the Quran, so when they were in its presence, they said: be quiet (and listen). Then when it was over, they returned to their people, warning (them).
46|30| They said: our people, indeed we heard a book that was sent down after Moses, confirming what is before it, guiding to the truth and to a straight path.
46|31| Our people, answer God’s caller and believe in him/Him. He forgives some of your sins and protects you from a painful punishment.
46|32| And anyone who does not answer God’s caller, then he does not incapacitate (God) on the earth and there is no protector for him other than Him. They are in an obvious error.
46|33| Did they not see that God, the One who created the skies and the earth and he did not tire out by their creation, is able to give life to the dead? Yes, indeed He is capable of everything.
46|34| And on a day that those who disbelieved are presented to the fire (they are told): is this not the truth? They say: yes, by our Master (this is the truth). He says: so, taste the punishment because you used to disbelieve.
46|35| So persevere (and be patient) as the strong-willed (and determined) messengers were, and do not ask to rush (the punishment) for them. On a day that they see what they are promised, (it is) as if they only stayed (dead) for an hour of a day. This is a notification. So would anyone be destroyed except the disobedient people?
47|1| Those who disbelieved and obstructed God’s way, He made their works ineffective (and useless).
47|2| And those who believed and did good works and believed in what was sent down to Muhammad, which is the truth from their Master, He removed their sins from them and improved their condition.
47|3| That is because those who disbelieved followed the falsehood, while those who believed followed the truth from their Master. That is how God give the people their examples.
47|4| And when you encounter those who disbelieved (during war), then strike their necks until you have thoroughly overcome them, then fasten the ties firmly, then later (set them free) either by a favor or by a ransom until the war puts down its burdens (and comes to an end). So it is (God's will), and if God wants, He would take revenge from them, but (He doesn't) so that He tests some of you by the others. Those who are killed in God’s way, He never makes their works ineffective (and useless).
47|5| He is going to guide them and puts their condition in order,
47|6| and He admits them into the garden, which He described it for them.
47|7| You who believe, if you help God, He helps you and solidifies your steps.
47|8| And those who disbelieved, then they have misery, and He makes their works ineffective.
47|9| That is because they disliked what God sent down, so He made their works useless.
47|10| Did they not travel on the earth to see what the end of those before them was?  God destroyed them, and for the disbelievers is same as that.
47|11| That is because God is protector (and supporter) of those who believed while the disbelievers have no protector.
47|12| Indeed God admits those who believed and did good works to gardens which rivers flow through them. And those who disbelieved enjoy and eat as the livestock eat, and the fire is their place.
47|13| And how many towns, which were more powerful than your town which you were driven out of, did We destroy and they had no helper?
47|14| Is anyone who is on a clear proof from his Master like someone whom badness of his work is beautified for him and follows his desires?
47|15| Example of the garden that is promised to those who control themselves is: there are rivers of unpolluted water in it, and rivers of milk that its taste does not change, and rivers of wine that is delicious (and pleasing) for the drinkers, and rivers of purified honey, and they have all kind of fruits and forgiveness from their Master in it. (Are they like) someone who remains in the fire forever and drinks boiling water that cuts up their intestines?
47|16| And some among them (pretend to) listen to you, until they go away from you (and leave you), then they say to those who were given the knowledge: what did he say just now? They are those whom God sealed their hearts and they follow their desires.
47|17| And those who are guided, He increases their guidance and gives them their self control (against unlawful desires and sins).
47|18| So, are they waiting for anything but the hour to come to them suddenly, whereas its prerequisites have already come? So when it comes to them, how would their taking notice be (of any help) for them?
47|19| Know that indeed there is no god except God, and ask forgiveness for your sin and for the believing men and believing women, and God knows your movements and your resting places.
47|20| And those who believed say: why was not a chapter sent down? So when a firm (and decisive) chapter is sent down and the fighting is mentioned in it, you see those who have disease in their hearts look at you with the look of someone who is fainting because of the death. So (death) is more suitable for them.
47|21| Obedience and nice word (is more appropriate). And when the matter is decided, if they are true to God it would be better for them.
47|22| So if you take over, would you perhaps commit corruption on the earth and cut off your blood relatives (and your close relatives)?
47|23| They are those whom God cursed them, so He made them deaf and made their eyes blind.
47|24| Do they not think about the Quran, or are there locks on (their) hearts?
47|25| Indeed those who turned on their backs (to their old ways) after the guidance became clear for them, Satan seduced them and gave them false hopes. 
47|26| That is because they said to those who disliked what God sent down: we are going to obey you in some issues. While God knows their secrets.
47|27| So how would it be when the angels take their life, hitting their faces and their backs?
47|28| That is because they followed that which angered God and they disliked His pleasure, so He made their works useless.
47|29| Or did those in whose hearts is a disease think that God will never bring out (and expose) their grudges?
47|30| And if We want, We would show them to you, so you would know them by their appearance. And you would know them by tone of the words. And God knows your works.
47|31| And We shall test you until We know those among you who try hard and persevere, and We examine your news.
47|32| Indeed those who disbelieved and obstructed God’s way and opposed the messenger after the guidance became clear for them, they will never harm God a bit, and He is going to make their works useless.
47|33| You who believe, obey God and obey the messenger and do not invalidate your works.
47|34| Indeed those who disbelieved and obstructed God’s way, then died while they were disbelievers, God will never forgive them.
47|35| So do not be weak and do not call for peace while you are superior and God is with you, and He will never cheat you out of your works
47|36| And this world’s life is only a play and an amusement. And if you believe and control yourselves, He gives you your wages and He would not ask you for your possessions.
47|37| If He asks you for it (your possession) and presses you, you will be stingy and He would bring out (expose) your grudges.
47|38| Here you are, being called to spend in God’s way, but some of you are stingy, and anyone who is stingy is only stingy against himself. And God is rich (and needless) and you are poor (and needy). And if you turn away, He replaces you with people other than you, then they will not be like you.
48|1| Indeed We gave you victory, a clear victory.
48|2| So that God forgives your past sins and future ones, and completes His favor to you, and guides you to a straight path,
48|3| and that God helps you, a powerful help.
48|4| He is the One who sent down tranquility into the hearts of the believers, so that they add belief to their belief. And the armies of the skies and the earth belong to God, and God is knowledgeable and wise.
48|5| So that He admits the believing men and believing women to gardens which rivers flow through them, remaining in there forever, and He removes their sins from them. And that is a great victory with God.
48|6| And He punishes the hypocrite men and the hypocrite women and the polytheist men and the polytheist women who think bad thoughts about God. A circle of the badness is on them, and God’s anger is on them, and He cursed them and He prepared hell for them, and it is a bad destination.
48|7| And the armies of the skies and the earth belong to God, and God is knowledgeable and wise.
48|8| Indeed We sent you as a witness and a giver of good news and a warner.
48|9| That you believe in God and His messenger and assist him, and respect Him and glorify Him morning and afternoon.
48|10| Those who pledge allegiance to you are indeed pledging allegiance to God, God’s hand is above their hands (as a sign of God's pledge). So whoever breaks (his pledge), he only breaks it against himself, and whoever fulfills what he promised to God, then He is going to give him a great reward.
48|11| The desert Arabs who stayed behind are going to say to you: our possessions and our families kept us busy, so ask forgiveness for us. They say with their tongues that which is not in their hearts. Say: who has any power for you against God, if He wants any harm for you or He wants any benefit for you? But God is well informed of what you do.
48|12| No, but you assumed that the messenger and the believers never ever return to their families, and that was made appealing in your hearts and you assumed bad thoughts and you became doomed people.
48|13| And anyone who did not believe in God and His messenger, then indeed We prepared a burning fire for the disbelievers.
48|14| And the rule of the skies and the earth belongs to God. He forgives anyone He wants and punishes anyone He wants. And God is forgiving and merciful.
48|15| When you set out for the spoils (of war) to take it, those who stayed behind are going to say: let us follow you. They want to change God’s word. Say: you never follow us, which is what God said earlier. Then they are going to say: no, but you are jealous of us. No, but they only understand a little.
48|16| Say to the desert Arabs who stay behind: you are going to be called on against people of great strength, you fight them or/unless they surrender, so if you obey, God gives you a good reward and if you turn back as you turned back earlier, He punishes you a painful punishment.
48|17| There is no blame on the blind, and no blame on the lame (and crippled), and no blame on the sick (if they do not fight). And anyone who obeys God and His messenger, He admits him to gardens which rivers flow through them. And whoever turns back, He punishes him with a painful punishment.
48|18| God was certainly pleased with the believers when they pledged allegiance to you under the tree, then He knew what is in their hearts, so He sent down tranquility upon them and He rewarded them with a forthcoming victory,
48|19| and a lot of spoils (of war) that they take it, and God is powerful and wise.
48|20| God promised you a lot of spoils (of war) that you take it, then He rushed this for you, and He held back people’s hands from you so that it becomes a sign for the believers, and He guides you to a straight path.
48|21| And other which you did not have power over it, but God has surrounded it. And God is capable of everything.
48|22| And if those who disbelieved fight you, they certainly turn back (and run away), then they do not find any supporter or helper.
48|23| (this is) God’s way that has passed on from before, and you never find any change in God’s way. 
48|24| And He is the One who held back their hands from you and your hands from them inside Mecca after He made you victorious over them. And God is watchful of whatever you do.
48|25| They are those who disbelieved, and obstructed you from the Sacred Mosque, and the offering was prevented to reach its place (of sacrifice). And (you had attacked Mecca) if it was not for the believing men and believing women whom you did not know that you would have unknowingly trampled them and then you would have been afflicted by disgrace from them . For God admits anyone he wants into His mercy. If they (believers and disbelievers) were apart, We would have certainly punished those among them who disbelieved with a painful punishment.
48|26| When those who disbelieved put prejudice, the prejudice of the (days of) ignorance, in their hearts, then God sent down His serenity (and tranquility) to His messenger and to the believers and required word of self control from them, and they were more deserving of it and suited for it. And God knows everything. 
48|27| God has certainly proved the vision of His messenger with the truth, that if God wants you shall enter the Sacred Mosque having your heads shaved and (your hairs) shortened, safely and without being afraid. And He knew what you did not know, then He put a forthcoming victory besides that.
48|28| He is the One who sent His messenger with the guidance and the right way of life in order to inform him about all of the religion (God's recommended way of life). And God is enough as a witness.
48|29| Muhammad is God's messenger, and those with him are firm against the disbelievers and kind among themselves. You see them bowing down, showing humbleness, looking for God’s grace and pleasure. Their mark (appearance) is in their faces from effect of the humbleness. That is their example in the Torah, and their example in the Gospel: like a seed that brings out its shoots then strengthen it then becomes thick then it stands on its stem impressing the farmers, therefore He anger the disbelievers with them. God promised forgiveness and a great reward to those of them who believed and did good works.
49|1| You who believe, do not put (your opinion) ahead of God and His messenger and be cautious of God. Indeed God hears all, knows all. 
49|2| You who believe, do not raise you voices above the prophet's voice and do not talk to him loudly as you talk loud to each other, that your works becomes useless while you do not realize.
49|3| Indeed those who lower their voices before God’s messenger, they are those whom God tested their hearts for self control (against unlawful desires and sins), they have forgiveness and a great reward.
49|4| Indeed those who call you from behind the rooms (and chambers), most of them do not understand.
49|5| And if they wait until you come out to them, that is better for them. God is forgiving and merciful.
49|6| You who believe, if a disobedient one comes to you with any news, then clarify it so that you do not harm some people ignorantly, and you become sorry about what you did.
49|7| And know that God’s messenger is among you. If he obeys you in most of the issues, you would certainly be in trouble, but God made you like the belief and He beautified it in your hearts, and He made you dislike the disbelief and the disobedience and the rebellion. They are the rightly guided ones.
49|8| A grace and a favor from God, and God is knowledgeable and wise.
49|9| If two groups of the believers fight, then make peace between them, and if one of them treated the other unjustly then fight the one who did injustice until it returns to God’s command, and if it returned then make peace between them fairly and be just. Indeed God loves those who are just.
49|10| Indeed the believers are brothers, so make peace between your brothers, and be cautious of God, that you may receive mercy.
49|11| You who believe, people should not ridicule other people, as perhaps they may be better than them, and women should not (ridicule) other women, as perhaps they may be better than them, and do not criticize (and find fault about) each other, and do not call (and offend each other) by nicknames, as after the belief (calling by) the bad name is disobedience, and whoever does not repent then they are the wrongdoers.
49|12| You who believe, avoid most of the suspicions, as indeed some suspicions are sin, and do not snoop, and do not defame/backbite each other, for would any one of you like to eat his dead brother’s flesh? You would hate it. And be cautious of God. Indeed God is acceptor of repentance and merciful.
49|13| People, indeed We created you from a male and a female, and We made you into races (and nations) and tribes so that you know each other. Indeed the more honorable of you before God are those of you having most self control (against unlawful desires and sins). Indeed God is knowledgeable and well informed.
49|14| The desert Arabs said: we believe. Say: you did not believe, but say we surrendered (to you, and not yet to God), while the belief has not yet entered your hearts. And if you obey God and His messenger, He would not reduce anything from your works. God is forgiving and merciful.
49|15| Indeed the believers are those who believed in God and His messenger, then they did not doubt and they tried hard with their possessions and their lives in God’s way. They are the truthful ones.
49|16| Say: do you inform God about your way of life while God knows whatever is in the skies and whatever is on the earth? And God knows everything.
49|17| They consider it a favor to you that they submitted, say: do not consider your submission as a favor to me, but God favored you to guide you to the belief, if you are truthful.
49|18| Indeed God knows the unseen (and secrets) of the skies and the earth. And God sees whatever you do.
50|1| Qaf. By the glorious Quran.
50|2| They are surprised that a warner came to them from them, so the disbelievers said: this is a strange thing.
50|3| When we die and become dust (will we be raised)? This is an unlikely return.
50|4| We definitely know what the earth reduces from them, and a book that keeps (track of everything) is with Us.
50|5| No, but they denied the truth when it came to them, and they are in a state of confusion.
50|6| Did they not look at the sky above them, that how We built it and beautified it, and it has no cracks?
50|7| And We spread out the earth, and We placed firm mountains in it, and We grew all types of beautiful (plants) in it.
50|8| An observation and a reminder for every repenting servant.
50|9| And We sent down blessed rain from the sky, and with it We grew gardens and seed of the harvest,
50|10| and tall palm trees having layered cluster (of dates),
50|11| as a provision for Our servants, and We gave life to a dead land with it. The coming out (of graves) is like that.
50|12| People of Noah and inhabitants of Raas (the well) and Thamud denied before them
50|13| and Aad and Pharaoh and brothers of Lot,
50|14| and inhabitants of the wood and people of Tubba (a Yemenite dynasty), all of them denied the messengers, so My threat (of punishment) was necessary.
50|15| Were We tired by the first creation? No, but they are in doubt about the new creation.
50|16| And We have certainly created the human being and We know what his soul seduces him to it, and We are closer to him than the jugular vein, 
50|17| when the two receivers (or recorders) sitting on the right and on the left receive (and record his works).
50|18| He does not speak a word unless there is an observer with him ready (to record).
50|19| And the agony of death comes in truth, which is what you were keeping away from it. 
50|20| And the trumpet is blown. That is the day of the threat.
50|21| And every one comes with a driver (who steers him) and a witness. 
50|22| You were negligent of this, so We removed your cover from you, and today your eyesight is sharp.
50|23| And his companion (angel) says: this is what is ready with me (record of his deeds).
50|24| Throw into hell every stubborn disbelievers,
50|25| who prevented from the good, exceeded the limits, and was a doubter, 
50|26| the one who set up another god with God, so throw him into the severe punishment.
50|27| His companion (devil) says: our Master, I did not make him rebel, but he was lost far (from the right path).
50|28| He (God) says: do not dispute before Me while I have sent the threat to you in advance.
50|29| The word (of punishment) will not be changed with Me, and I am not a wrongdoer to My servants.
50|30| On a day that We say to hell: are you filled? And it says: are there some more?
50|31| And the garden is brought near for those who control themselves, and it is not far.
50|32| This is what was promised to all who turn (to God) keeping (His commands),
50|33| anyone who fears the beneficent in the secret and comes with a repenting heart,
50|34| (We tell him) enter it with peace (and well-being), this is the eternal day.
50|35| They have whatever they want in it, and there is more with Us.
50|36| And how many of generation did We destroy before them who were more courageous (and powerful) than them, and they explored throughout the land? Is there any way (or place) of escape?
50|37| There is certainly a reminder in that for anyone who has a heart or listens while he is present (and attentive).
50|38| And We have certainly created the skies and the earth and whatever is between them in six stages and no fatigue touched us.
50|39| So persevere (and be patient) about what they say and glorify your Master with praise before the sunrise and before the sunset.
50|40| And glorify Him part of the night and after showing humbleness.
50|41| And listen, on a day when the caller calls out from a nearby place,
50|42| a day when they hear the awesome roar in truth. That is the day of coming out (of graves).
50|43| Indeed We give life and We cause death, and the final return is to Us.
50|44| A day that the earth breaks open from them (and they come out of it) quickly. This is a gathering that is easy for Us.
50|45| We know better about what they say. You are not to force them. So remind anyone who fears My threat by the Quran. 
51|1| By the scattering (winds) that scatters,
51|2| and by the carriers of a heavy load (of rain),
51|3| and by the (ships) sailing with ease,
51|4| and by the distributor of affair (the angels),
51|5| what you are promised is certainly true,
51|6| and the judgment is certainly a reality.
51|7| And by the sky having pathways (and orbits),
51|8| indeed you are of different opinion.
51|9| Anyone who is deviated, he is deviated from it (Quran and the truth).
51|10| Death to the liars (and conjecturers).
51|11| Those who are neglectful in a flood (of ignorance).
51|12| They ask: when is the judgment day?
51|13| A day that they are tortured over the fire.
51|14| Taste (the result of) your trial, this is what you used to want it in a hurry.
51|15| Indeed those who control themselves are in gardens and springs.
51|16| Taking what their Master gave them. Indeed they were good doers before this.
51|17| They used to sleep a little of the night,
51|18| and they ask forgiveness by the dawns,
51|19| and there was a (portion) in their wealth due for the beggars and the disadvantaged.
51|20| And there are signs for those who are certain on the earth,
51|21| and in yourselves. Do you not see?
51|22| And your provision and what you are promised is in the sky.
51|23| By the Master of the skies and the earth, it is certainly true, same as (it is true that) you speak.
51|24| Did the story of the noble guests of Abraham reach you?
51|25| When they entered upon him and they said: peace (and well-being). He said: peace (and well-being) strangers.
51|26| Then he went to his family and brought a fat (roasted) calf.
51|27| Then he placed it close to them saying: do you not eat?
51|28| Then he felt afraid of them, they said: do not be afraid. And they gave him good news of a knowledgeable son.
51|29| Then his wife came forward screaming, striking her face, and she said: I am an infertile old woman.
51|30| They said: that is what your Master said, indeed He is the wise, the knowledgeable.
51|31| He said: you messengers, so what is your business?
51|32| They said: we were sent to a group of guilty ones,
51|33| so that we send upon them stones of clay,
51|34| marked by your Master for the excessive ones.
51|35| So We brought out anyone who was among the believers in it.
51|36| But We only found a house of the submitted ones in it.
51|37| And We left a sign in it for those who fear the painful punishment.
51|38| And in (the story of) Moses when We sent him to Pharaoh with a clear authorization.
51|39| Then he turned away with his base (of supporters) and said: a magician or a madman.
51|40| So We took him and his troops, then We threw them in the sea, and he was to blame.
51|41| And in (the story of) Aad when We sent upon them the destructive wind.
51|42| It did not leave anything that it came upon it, except making it as the decomposed thing.
51|43| And (the story of) Thamud when they were told: enjoy yourselves for a while.
51|44| Then they rebelled against their Master’s command, so the thunderbolt took them while they were looking.
51|45| Then they could not stand up and they could not take revenge (or defend).
51|46| And people of Noah in the past, indeed they were disobedient people.
51|47| We built the sky with Our power and We are certainly expanding (it).
51|48| And We spread out the earth, and how good We spread out.
51|49| And We created pairs of everything, so you may take notice.
51|50| So run away to God. Indeed I am a clear warner for you from Him.
51|51| And do not set up another god with God. Indeed I am a clear warner for you from Him.
51|52| Likewise, no messenger came to those before them unless they said: a magician or a madman.
51|53| Did they recommend (one another) to it? No, they are rebellious people.
51|54| So turn away from them, you are not to blame.
51|55| And (continue to) remind, as indeed the reminder benefits the believers.
51|56| And I did not create Jinn and humans except to serve Me (and no one else).
51|57| I do not want any provision from them and I do not want them to feed Me.
51|58| Indeed God is the provider having the power and the definitive strength.
51|59| So indeed there are shares (of punishment) for those who did wrong same as shares of their companions, so they should not ask Me to rush.
51|60| So woe to those who disbelieved from their day that they are promised.
52|1| By the mountain (Mount Sinai),
52|2| and by a written book
52|3| in unrolled scroll,
52|4| and by the thriving (and frequented) house,
52|5| and by the raised roof,
52|6| and by the blazing (and swollen) sea,
52|7| your Master’s punishment is certainly a reality.
52|8| No one (and nothing) can repel it.
52|9| A day when the sky swings back and forth,
52|10| and the mountains move about, traveling,
52|11| woe to the deniers on that day,
52|12| those playing around in useless talk.
52|13| A day when they are forcefully pushed into fire of hell.
52|14| This is the fire that you were denying it.
52|15| So is this a magic or you do not see?
52|16| Enter (and burn in) it, it is the same to you whether you are patient or you are not patient, you are only penalized for what you used to do.
52|17| Indeed those who control themselves are in gardens and in happiness.
52|18| Enjoying because of what their Master gave them and that their Master protected them from punishment of the hellfire.
52|19| Eat and drink joyfully because of what you were doing.
52|20| Leaning on couches lined up in rows, and We marry them to appealing girls with beautiful eyes.
52|21| And those who believed and their descendants who followed them in belief, We join their descendants with them and We do not reduce anything from their works. Every person is bound by what he did.
52|22| And We help them with whatever fruit and meat they desire.
52|23| They pass a cup to one another in there that there is nothing useless or sinful in it.
52|24| And young male servants who are like hidden pearl go around them for (serving) them.
52|25| And they turn to each other asking one another,
52|26| they say: indeed we were afraid among our people in the past,
52|27| but God favored upon us and protected us from the punishment of scorching wind.
52|28| Indeed we used to call on Him in the past. Indeed He is the good, the merciful.
52|29| So remind (them) that by your Master’s favor you are not a fortune-teller or a madman.
52|30| Or do they say: a poet, we wait for his time of misfortune (his death).
52|31| Say: wait and I wait with you.
52|32| Or does their imagination (and dreams) order them to this, or are they disobedient people?
52|33| Or they say he made it up? No, but they do not believe.
52|34| So let them bring a saying like it (Quran), if they are truthful.
52|35| Or were they created from nothing, or are they the creators?
52|36| Or did they create the skies and the earth? No, they are not certain.
52|37| Or are the treasures of their Master with them, or are they in charge (of them)?
52|38| Or do they have a ladder that they listen by it? Then their listeners should bring a clear reason.
52|39| Or does He have the daughters and you have the sons?
52|40| Or do you ask them for a wage, and they are weighed down by the debt?
52|41| Or is the unseen with them, and they write it?
52|42| Or do they want to plot? But those who disbelieved are plotted against.
52|43| Or do they have a god other than God? God is flawless of what they associate (with Him).
52|44| And if they see a piece of the sky falling down, they say: piled up clouds.
52|45| So leave them until they meet their day, in which they are thunderstruck (and die).
52|46| A day that their plot is of no use to them at all, and they are not helped.
52|47| And indeed for those who did wrong there is a punishment other than this, but most of them do not know.
52|48| And be patient for your Master’s command, as you are under Our eyes, and glorify your Master with praise when you get up.
52|49| And glorify Him part of the night and when the stars disappear.
53|1| By the star when it goes down,
53|2| your companion is not misguided and he was not deceived.
53|3| And he does not speak from the desire.
53|4| It (Quran) is not but a revelation that is revealed.
53|5| The very powerful (Gabriel) taught him,
53|6| being strong, he stood firmly.
53|7| And he was at the higher horizon,
53|8| then he came closer and he came down,
53|9| until he was at a distance of two bows or closer,
53|10| then he revealed to His servant what he revealed.
53|11| His (the prophet’s) heart did not deny what he saw.
53|12| Do you argue with him about what he sees?
53|13| And he has certainly seen him in another descent,
53|14| By the Lote (Sidra) tree at the utmost boundary.
53|15| Next to it is garden of the residence.
53|16| When that which covers covered the Lote (Sidra) tree.
53|17| The eye did not turn aside and did not outreach.
53|18| He has certainly seen some of the great signs of His Master.
53|19| What do you think of the Lat, the Uzza
53|20| and Manat, the third one (of them)?
53|21| Are the males for you and the females for Him!?
53|22| That is an unfair division.
53|23| They are only names which you and your fathers named it, whereas God did not send down any reason for it? They only follow the guess and what the souls desires, while the guidance has certainly come to them from their Master.
53|24| Or does the human being have whatever he desire?
53|25| While the last (the hereafter) and the first (this world) belongs to God.
53|26| And many angels are in the skies, that their mediation is of no benefit at all except after God gives permission for whom He wants and He approves.
53|27| Indeed those who do not believe in the hereafter shall name the angels the feminine names,
53|28| while they have no knowledge of it, they only the follow guesswork, and guesswork is of no use against the truth at all.
53|29| So stay away from anyone who turns away from Our reminder and only wants this world’s life.
53|30| That is their extent of the knowledge. Indeed your Master knows better anyone who lost His way and He knows better anyone who is guided.
53|31| And whatever in the skies and whatever on the earth belongs to God, so that He penalizes those who did bad in what they did and to reward those who did good with the better (reward than what they did),
53|32| those who avoid the big sins and the indecencies except the small ones. Your Master is vast in the forgiveness. He knows better about you, when He produced you from the earth and when you were hidden (as embryos) in your mothers’ wombs. So do not claim yourselves pure (and innocent), as He knows better who controls himself.
53|33| Did you see the one who turned away
53|34| and gave a little and was stingy?
53|35| Does he have knowledge of the unseen, so he sees?
53|36| Or was he not informed of what is in scriptures of Moses,
53|37| and Abraham, the one who fulfilled (his duties)?
53|38| That no bearer bears burden of another,
53|39| and that there is not (any reward) for the human being except what he tried for.
53|40| And that his efforts will be seen,
53|41| then he is rewarded with the full reward.
53|42| And that the final ending is to your Master.
53|43| And that He is he who makes (everyone) laugh and cry.
53|44| And He is he who causes death and gives life.
53|45| And that He created the two types, the male and the female,
53|46| from sperm when it is ejected.
53|47| And that the other creation is His responsibility.
53|48| And that He is he who makes rich and makes poor (or gives property).
53|49| And that He is he who is Master of the Sirius (the brightest star at night).
53|50| And that He destroyed the earlier Aad
53|51| and Thamud, and He did not leave (anyone alive).
53|52| And (He destroyed) people of Noah before (them), indeed they were more wrongdoer and more rebellious.
53|53| And He overthrew the turned over cities,
53|54| and it was covered by what covers.
53|55| So which of your Master's favors do you doubt?
53|56| This is a warner like the previous warners.
53|57| The upcoming (judgment day) is coming up.
53|58| No one other than God can expose it.
53|59| Are you surprised by this saying,
53|60| and you laugh and you do not cry
53|61| and you are negligent?
53|62| So show humbleness to God and serve Him.
54|1| The hour gets close and the moon splits.
54|2| And if they see a miracle they turn away and say: a continuous magic.
54|3| And they denied, and followed their desires. And all matters have a settlement.
54|4| And the news (of the earlier ones) have certainly come to them, that in which there is a deterrence,
54|5| a perfect wisdom, but warnings are of no use.
54|6| So stay away from them, a day (comes when) the caller calls them to a nasty thing.
54|7| With their eyes looking down (in humiliation), they come out of their graves as if they were spreading locusts.
54|8| Rushing toward the caller, the disbelievers say: this is a difficult day.
54|9| People of Noah denied before them, and they denied Our servant (Noah) and they said a madman, and he was outcast.
54|10| So he called on his Master: I am defeated, so help.
54|11| So We opened the gates of the sky with downpour of water.
54|12| And We gushed out springs from the earth. The waters joined for a matter that was destined (the flood).
54|13| And We carried him on (the Ark) having timbers and nails.
54|14| It sailed under Our eyes, a reward for him who was rejected (Noah).
54|15| And We have certainly left it as a sign, so does anyone take notice ?
54|16| So how were My punishment and My warnings?
54|17| And We have certainly made the Quran easy to understand, so does anyone take notice?
54|18| Aad denied, so how were My punishment and My warnings?
54|19| Indeed We sent a continuous ice cold wind upon them on a miserable day,
54|20| knocking the people over as if they were uprooted trunks of a palm tree.
54|21| So how were My punishment and My warnings?
54|22| And We have certainly made the Quran easy to understand, so does anyone take notice?
54|23| Thamud denied the warnings.
54|24| And they said: should we follow him, a single human being among us? Then indeed we are in error and madness.
54|25| Is the reminder only given to him among us? No, he is a rude liar.
54|26| Tomorrow they are going to know who the rude liar is.
54|27| Indeed We are senders of the female camel as a test for them, so watch them and be patient.
54|28| And inform them that the water is shared between them, and each drinking is to be attended.
54|29| But they called their companion, and he took (a knife) and killed (her).
54|30| So how were My punishment and My warnings?
54|31| Indeed We sent a single awesome roar upon them and they became like dried broken straws of a barn maker.
54|32| And We have certainly made the Quran easy to understand, so does anyone take notice?
54|33| People of Lot denied the warnings.
54|34| Indeed We sent a sandstorm upon them, except Lot’s family whom We saved them by dawn,
54|35| a favor from Us. That is how We reward anyone who thanks.
54|36| And he has certainly warned them of Our assault, but they doubted the warnings.
54|37| And they have certainly demanded his guest from him, so We blinded their eyes, so taste My punishment and My warnings.
54|38| And certainly a lasting punishment took them by early morning.
54|39| So taste My punishment and My warnings.
54|40| And We have certainly made the Quran easy to understand, so does anyone take notice?
54|41| And the warners have certainly come to Pharaoh’s people.
54|42| They denied all Our signs, so We took them (into punishment), a powerful and awesome taking.
54|43| Are your disbelievers better than them, or is there immunity for you in the scriptures?
54|44| Or do they say we are united and victorious?
54|45| They are all going to be defeated and turn their backs (running away).
54|46| No, the hour is their appointment time, and the hour is more awful and bitterer (than this world’s punishment).
54|47| Indeed the guilty ones are in error and madness.
54|48| A day when they are dragged into the fire on their faces (they are told): taste the touch of hell.
54|49| Indeed We created everything in correct proportion.
54|50| And Our command is only once, like a blink of an eye.
54|51| And We have certainly destroyed your kinds, so does anyone take notice?
54|52| And everything they did is in the books.
54|53| And everything small or big is written.
54|54| And indeed those who control themselves will be in gardens and rivers.
54|55| In a seat of truth, with a mighty ruler.
55|1| The beneficent
55|2| taught the Quran,
55|3| created the human being,
55|4| taught him the speech.
55|5| The sun and the moon with precisely calculated (courses).
55|6| The herb (or the star) and the tree both humble themselves (before Him).
55|7| And He raised the sky and set up the balance,
55|8| that you do not outdo the balance.
55|9| And perform the weighing with justice and do not make the scale light.
55|10| And He set up the earth for the human race,
55|11| in it there are fruits and palm trees having coverings,
55|12| and the seed having outer shell, and the fragrant herbs.
55|13| Then which of your Master’s favors do you deny?
55|14| He created the human being from dried clay like pottery clay.
55|15| And He created the Jinn from flame of a fire.
55|16| Then which of your Master’s favors do you deny?
55|17| Master of the two easts and Master of the two wests.
55|18| Then which of your Master’s favors do you deny?
55|19| He made the two seas flow freely to meet,
55|20| there is a barrier between them that they do not go beyond.
55|21| Then which of your Master’s favors do you deny?
55|22| Pearl and coral comes out of both of them.
55|23| Then which of your Master’s favors do you deny?
55|24| And the sailing ships raised in the sea like the mountains/road signs belong to Him.
55|25| Then which of your Master’s favors do you deny?
55|26| Everyone on it (the earth) is mortal,
55|27| while your Master's essence, having the majesty and the nobility remains (forever).
55|28| Then which of your Master’s favors do you deny?
55|29| Everyone in the skies and on the earth ask Him (for their needs). Every day He is in some affair.
55|30| Then which of your Master’s favors do you deny?
55|31| We are going to attend to you, the two important beings (humans and Jinn).
55|32| Then which of your Master’s favors do you deny?
55|33| You, group of Jinn and humans, if you can cross the boundaries of the skies and the earth then cross. You cannot cross except with an authorization.
55|34| Then which of your Master’s favors do you deny?
55|35| A flame of fire and melted copper will be sent upon both of you, and you cannot help/defend yourselves.
55|36| Then which of your Master’s favors do you deny?
55|37| And when the sky splits and it becomes red like the red rawhide (or red hot oil).
55|38| Then which of your Master’s favors do you deny?
55|39| On that day no human being or Jinn is asked about his sin.
55|40| Then which of your Master’s favors do you deny?
55|41| The guilty ones are recognized by their appearance, then they are taken by (the hair lock of) the forehead and the feet.
55|42| Then which of your Master’s favors do you deny?
55|43| This is hell that the guilty ones deny it.
55|44| They go around between it and between hot boiling water.
55|45| Then which of your Master’s favors do you deny?
55|46| And there are two gardens for anyone who fears his Master’s position.
55|47| Then which of your Master’s favors do you deny?
55|48| Two (gardens) having a variety (of trees).
55|49| Then which of your Master’s favors do you deny?
55|50| There are two springs flowing in both of them.
55|51| Then which of your Master’s favors do you deny?
55|52| There are pairs of every fruits in both of them.
55|53| Then which of your Master’s favors do you deny?
55|54| Leaning on cushions/beds inside of which is from heavy silk, and fruits of the two gardens are within reach.
55|55| Then which of your Master’s favors do you deny?
55|56| And there are girls with restrained glances in them whom no human being or Jinn had sex with them before them.
55|57| Then which of your Master’s favors do you deny?
55|58| They are like the ruby and the coral.
55|59| Then which of your Master’s favors do you deny?
55|60| Is reward of the goodness anything except goodness?
55|61| Then which of your Master’s favors do you deny?
55|62| And beside those two are two (other) gardens.
55|63| Then which of your Master’s favors do you deny?
55|64| Both dark green (because of lush vegetation).
55|65| Then which of your Master’s favors do you deny?
55|66| There are two springs gushing out in both of them.
55|67| Then which of your Master’s favors do you deny?
55|68| There are fruits and date and pomegranate in both of them.
55|69| Then which of your Master’s favors do you deny?
55|70| There are good and beautiful females in both of them.
55|71| Then which of your Master’s favors do you deny?
55|72| Appealing girls restricted in the pavilions.
55|73| Then which of your Master’s favors do you deny?
55|74| No human being or Jinn had sex with them before them.
55|75| Then which of your Master’s favors do you deny?
55|76| Leaning on green pillows and fine colorful carpets.
55|77| Then which of your Master’s favors do you deny?
55|78| Blessed is the name of your Master, having the majesty and the nobility.
56|1| When the event happens,
56|2| and its happening is not false,
56|3| it is lowering and elevating (humiliating and honoring).
56|4| When the earth is violently shaken,
56|5| and the mountains are totally disintegrated
56|6| and become scattered dust.
56|7| And you will be three types.
56|8| The associates of happiness (the fortunate people). Who are the fortunate people?
56|9| The associates of misery (the unfortunate people). Who are the unfortunate people?
56|10| And the pioneers (in devotion) are the pioneers (in the hereafter).
56|11| They are the close ones (to God),
56|12| in gardens of delight.
56|13| A large number of the earlier ones
56|14| and a few from the later ones.
56|15| On sofas lavishly decorated (with jewels and gold),
56|16| reclining on them, facing each other.
56|17| Immortal youths circulate among them,
56|18| with drinking glasses and jugs and cups of spring water.
56|19| They do not get headache and they do not get exhausted (and drunk) from it.
56|20| And from whatever fruits they choose,
56|21| and from whatever meat of birds they desire,
56|22| and appealing girls with beautiful eyes
56|23| like the hidden pearl (inside the shell),
56|24| as a reward for what they used to do.
56|25| They do not hear useless or sinful (talk) in it,
56|26| except a saying of peace (and well-being), peace (and well-being).
56|27| And the associates of the right hand (the fortunate), who are the fortunate? 
56|28| Among thorn free Lote (Sidra) tree,
56|29| and banana trees piled up (with fruits),
56|30| and extended shade,
56|31| and flowing water,
56|32| and plenty of fruits,
56|33| not ending and not forbidden.
56|34| And dignified spouses
56|35| whom We created them perfectly,
56|36| and We made them virgins,
56|37| devoted (and loving), of equal age
56|38| for associates of the right hand (the fortunate),
56|39| a large number of the earlier ones
56|40| and a large number of the later ones.
56|41| And associates of the left hand (the unfortunate), who are the unfortunate?
56|42| In scorching wind and boiling water,
56|43| and shade of thick (black) smoke,
56|44| not cool and not nice.
56|45| Indeed they were rich (and wealthy) before this,
56|46| and they insisted on the great sin,
56|47| and they used to say: would we be raised when we die and become dust and bones?
56|48| Or our forefathers?
56|49| Say: indeed the earlier ones and the later ones
56|50| are certainly collected at an appointment of a known day.
56|51| Then indeed you, the misguided deniers,
56|52| are certainly eaters of Zaqqum tree,
56|53| and filling the stomachs from it,
56|54| then drinking boiling water over it,
56|55| and drinking as thirsty camels drink.
56|56| This is their entertainment on the judgment day.
56|57| We created you, so why do you not acknowledge? 
56|58| What do you think of what you ejaculate?
56|59| Do you create it or are We the creators?
56|60| We mandated the death among you, and We will not be surpassed
56|61| in replacing (you with) the likes of you and producing you in (a form) that you do not know. 
56|62| You have certainly known about the first creation, so why do you not take notice?
56|63| What do you think of what you plant?
56|64| Do you grow it, or are We the growers?
56|65| If We want, We make it into broken pieces, and leave you wondering 
56|66| (saying): we certainly suffered losses,
56|67| no, but we are deprived. 
56|68| What do you think of the water that you drink?
56|69| Did you send it down from the cloud, or are We the senders?
56|70| If We want, We make it bitter (and salty), so why are you not thankful?
56|71| What do you think of the fire that you light?
56|72| Did you make its tree, or are We the makers?
56|73| We made it a reminder and a provision for those living/traveling in the desert.
56|74| So glorify the name of your great Master.
56|75| So I swear by positions of the stars,
56|76| and it is a great oath if you knew,
56|77| indeed this is a noble Quran
56|78| in a concealed book,
56|79| none touch it except the purified ones,
56|80| a sending down from the Master of Human kind.
56|81| Do you take this saying lightly,
56|82| and you make it your livelihood to deny it?
56|83| So why not when it (life) reaches the throat
56|84| and you are watching at that moment,
56|85| while We are closer to him than you but you do not see,
56|86| then if you are not obligated, why don't
56|87| you return it (the soul to the body), if you are truthful.
56|88| But if he is one of the close ones (to God),
56|89| then ease and comfort and gardens of delight (are for him).
56|90| And if he is among associates of the right hand (the fortunate),
56|91| then peace (and well-being) for you among associates of the right hand.
56|92| And if he is among the misguided deniers
56|93| then entertainment of boiling water,
56|94| and entering (and burning in) hellfire (is for him).
56|95| And this is indeed the sure truth.
56|96| So glorify the name of your great Master.
57|1| Everything in the skies and the earth glorifies God, and He is the powerful, the wise.
57|2| Rule of the skies and the earth belongs to Him, He gives life and causes death, and He is capable of everything.
57|3| He is the first and the last, and the obvious and the obscure, and He knows everything.
57|4| He is the One who created the skies and the earth in six stages and then He settled on the throne. He knows whatever goes into the earth and whatever comes out of it, and whatever comes down from the sky and whatever that goes up to it, and He is with you wherever you are, and God sees whatever you do.
57|5| Rule of the skies and the earth belongs to Him, and the affairs are returned to God.
57|6| He makes the night pass through the day and makes the day pass through the night. And He knows what is inside the chests (your intentions).
57|7| Believe in God and His messenger and spend (in God's way) from what He made you successors in it. There is a great reward for those of you who believed and spent (in God's way).
57|8| What is with you that you don’t believe in God while the messenger calls you to believe in your Master? And He has certainly taken your commitment if you are believer.
57|9| He is the One who sends down clear signs to His servant in order to bring you out of the darkness into the light. And God is indeed gentle and merciful to you.
57|10| And what is with you that you do not spend in God’s way, while the inheritance of the skies and the earth belongs to God? Those of you who spent and fought before the victory are not equal (with those who did that later). They have greater rank than those who spent and fought afterward, while God promised the goodness to all (of them). And God is well informed of what you do.
57|11| And who is he that lends God a good loan (or who is he that offers God a good deed) so that He multiplies it for him, and there is a noble (and generous) reward for him?
57|12| A day when you see the believing men and the believing women rushing with their lights ahead of them and to the right of them (they will be told): today your good news is gardens that rivers flow through them, remaining in there forever. That is the great victory.
57|13| A day when the hypocrite men and the hypocrite women say to those who believed: look at us that we may get some of your light. It is said: go back to your past and look for a light. And a wall having a gate is put up between them, its interior has mercy in it while its exterior has the punishment facing it.
57|14| They (the disbelievers) call on them (the believers): were we not with you? they say: yes, but you tempted yourselves and you waited and you doubted, and wishful thinking deceived you until God’s command came and the deceiver (Satan) deceived you about God.
57|15| So today no ransom is taken from you and from those who disbelieved, your housing is the fire, it is your sponsor and it is a bad destination.
57|16| Is it not about time for those who believed to humble their hearts for God’s remembrance and what came down from the truth, and do not be like those who were given the book in the past, and then after some time passed for them their hearts hardened and many of them were disobedient?
57|17| Know that God brings the earth back to life after its death. We certainly made the signs clear for you, so that you may understand.
57|18| The charitable men and the charitable women and those who lend God a good loan (or offer God a good deed), it (their reward) is multiplied for them and a noble (and generous) reward is for them.
57|19| And those who believed in God and His messenger, they are the truthful and witnesses before their Master, they have their reward and their light. And those who disbelieved and denied Our signs, they are inhabitants of the hellfire.
57|20| Know that this world’s life is only play and amusement, and decoration and show off among yourselves, and wanting more in the wealth and the children. It is like the example of a rain that its plant growth impresses the farmers, then it dries up and you see it turn yellow and then becomes broken pieces. And in the hereafter there is severe punishment (for the disbelievers) and forgiveness and pleasure of God (for the believers). And this world’s life is only means of the deception.
57|21| Race to forgiveness of your Master, and a garden whose width is as wide as the sky and the earth, and is prepared for those who believed in God and His messengers. That is God’s grace that He gives it to anyone He wants. And God has enormous grace.
57|22| No tragedy happens on the earth or within yourselves unless it is in a book before We create it (according to God's laws). This is easy for God.
57|23| So that you do not be sad over what slips away from you (or what you lose) and not to be overjoyed about what He gives you. And God does not like any selfish show off,
57|24| those who are stingy and order people to the stinginess. And anyone who turns back, God is indeed the rich (without any need) and the praiseworthy.
57|25| We have certainly sent Our messengers with clear proofs, and sent down the book and the balance (of right and wrong) with them so that people carry out justice. And We sent down the iron in which there is a great badness and benefits for the people, and for God to know anyone who helps Him and His messenger in the secret. God is indeed strong and powerful. 
57|26| And We have certainly sent Noah and Abraham and We put the prophethood and the book among their descendants, so some of them were guided, and most of them were disobedient.
57|27| Then We followed them up with Our messengers, and We sent Jesus son of Mary and We gave him the Gospel, and put gentleness and mercy in the heart of those who followed him. But they made up being monks, We did not mandate it to them, but (We mandated) looking for God's pleasure, but they did not observe it as it was supposed to be observed. Then we gave those among them who believed their reward, while most of them are disobedient.
57|28| You who believe, be cautious of God and believe in His messenger, that He gives you a double portion of His mercy and makes a light for you to walk with it and forgives you. He is forgiving and merciful.
57|29| So that people of the book know that they do not have a bit of power over God’s grace, and that the grace is in God’s hand, giving it to anyone He wants. God has enormous grace.
58|1| God has heard word of the one who argues with you about her husband and complains to God. God heard your conversation, indeed God hears all and sees all.
58|2| Those of you who divorce their wives by declaring them as their mothers, they are not their mothers. No one is their mothers except those who gave them birth, and they certainly say a nasty word and a lie. And God certainly pardons and forgives.
58|3| And those who divorce their wives by declaring them as their mother, then they go back on what they said, should free a slave before touching each other. This is what you are advised to it. And God is well informed of what you do.
58|4| And if someone does not find (a slave) then fasting for two consecutive months before touching each other. And anyone who cannot (fast), then feeding sixty needy (ones). This is for you to believe in God and His messenger, and this is the limits set by God, and for the disbelievers there is a painful punishment.
58|5| Indeed those who oppose God and His messenger are subdued as those before them were subdued. And We have sent down clear signs, and for the disbelievers is a humiliating punishment.
58|6| A day that God raises them all, then He informs them of what they did, as God counted it while they forgot it. And God witnesses everything.
58|7| Did you not see that God knows whatever is in the skies and whatever is on the earth? There is not any whispering of three unless He is the fourth of them, and not of any five unless He is the sixth of them, and no less or no more than this unless He is with them, wherever they are. Then on the resurrection day He informs them of what they did. Indeed God knows everything.
58|8| Did you not see those who were prohibited from whispering, then they returned to what they were prohibited from it, while whispering about sin and enmity and disobedience of the messenger? And when they come to you, they greet you in such a way that God has not greeted you with it, and they say among themselves: why does not God punish us for what we say? Hell is enough for them, they enter (and burn in) it, and it is a bad destination.
58|9| You who believe, when you whisper to each other, do not whisper about sin and enmity and disobedience of the messenger, but whisper about goodness and self control, and be cautious of God, the One you are gathered to Him.
58|10| The whisper is only from Satan to make those who believed sad, while it does not harm them a bit unless with God's permission. And the believers should put their trust in God.
58|11| You who believe, when you are told to make room in the assemblies, then make room so that God makes room for you, and when it is said to get up, then get up. God raises ranks of those among you who believed and those who were given the knowledge. And God is well informed of what you do.
58|12| You who believe, when you whisper to the messenger, then give to charity before your whispering. This is better and purer for you. And if you did not find (it affordable), then indeed God is forgiving and merciful.
58|13| Were you afraid of giving to charity before your whispering? So when you did not do it and God turned to you (and forgave you), then perform the mandatory prayer and give to the mandatory charity and obey God and His messenger. God is well informed of what you do.
58|14| Did you not see those who turn (in friendship) to people whom God's anger is upon them? They are not from you and (you are) not from them, and they swear falsely while they know.
58|15| God prepared a severe punishment for them, for what they were doing is indeed bad.
58|16| They took their oath as a shield to obstruct (people) from God's way, so they have a humiliating punishment.
58|17| Their possessions and children are of no use against God at all. They are inhabitants of the fire, remaining in there forever.
58|18| On a day that God raises them all, then they swear for Him as they swear for you, and they think that they are on to something. Know that indeed they are liars.
58|19| Satan overcame them and made them forget God's remembrance, they are Satan's party. Know that indeed Satan's party, they are the losers.
58|20| Indeed those who oppose God and His messenger, they are among the lowest ones.
58|21| God prescribed: I and My messengers shall be victorious. God is indeed strong and powerful.
58|22| You do not find any group who believe in God and the last day that they love those who oppose God and His messenger, even if they are their fathers or their sons or their brothers or their family (and tribe members). He wrote the belief in their hearts and He assisted them with a spirit from Him, and He admits them to gardens which rivers flow through them, remaining in there forever. God is pleased with them and they are pleased with Him, they are God's party. Know that God's party, they are indeed the successful ones.
59|1| Whatever is in the skies and whatever is on the earth glorify God, and He is the powerful, the wise.
59|2| He is the One who drove out those who disbelieved among the people of the book from their homes for the first forced emigration. You did not think that they would leave. And they thought that their fortresses would protect them against God, but God came to them from where they did not expect, and He threw horror in their hearts. They destroyed their homes with their own hands and the believers' hands. So you who have insight, learn a lesson. 
59|3| And if God had not prescribed the evacuation for them, He would have certainly punished them in this world, and they have punishment of the fire in the hereafter.
59|4| That is because they opposed God and His messenger, and whoever opposes God, then God is indeed severe in the punishment.
59|5| Any palm tree that you cut down or you left it standing on its roots, it is by God's permission so that He humiliates the disobedient.
59|6| And whatever God gave to His messenger as spoil from them, you did not bother (riding) any horse or camel for it, but God makes His messengers dominate over whomever He wants. And God is capable of everything.
59|7| And whatever God gave to His messenger as spoil from people of the towns is for God and for the messenger and for the relatives (and close ones) and the orphans and the needy and the traveler (in need) so that it does not circulate between the rich among you. And whatever the messenger gave you then take it, and whatever he held you back from it then stay away from it, and be cautious of God. God is indeed severe in the punishment.
59|8| And (part of it is) for the poor immigrants, those who were driven out of their homes and their possessions and they look for God’s bounty and His pleasure and they help God and His messenger. They are the truthful ones.
59|9| And (part of it is for) those who settled down in the houses (in Medina) and in the faith before them, and they like anyone who emigrated to them, and they do not find any need in their minds for what they were given, and they prefer them over themselves even though poverty is among them. And anyone who restrains his own stinginess (and greed), then they are the successful ones.
59|10| And those who came after them say: our Master, forgive us and our brothers who came to faith before us, and do not put any resentment in our hearts toward those who believed, Our Master, you are gentle and merciful.
59|11| Did you not see those hypocrites who say to their brothers who disbelieved among people of the book: if you are driven out we shall leave with you, and we would never obey anyone about you, and we shall help you if you are fought. God testifies that they are certainly liars.
59|12| If they are driven out they would not leave with them, and if they are fought they will not help them, and if they (want to) help them, they shall turn their backs (and run away), then they are not helped.
59|13| You are certainly more frightening than God in their minds. That is because they are a group who do not understand.
59|14| They do not fight you altogether unless in well protected towns or from behind walls. Their hostility among them is severe. You think they are all together (and united) while their hearts are divided. That is because they are a group who do not understand.
59|15| Same as those before them in the near past, they tasted the bad result of their affair, and they have a painful punishment.
59|16| Same as Satan when he says to the human being: disbelieve. Then when he disbelieves, he (Satan) says: I am free of you (and have nothing to do with you), I fear God, Master of humankind.
59|17| The end of both of them is in the fire, remaining in there forever, and that is the penalty of the wrongdoers.
59|18| You who believe, be cautious of God, and everyone should watch what he sends ahead for tomorrow, and be cautious of God. God is well informed of what you do.
59|19| And do not be like those who forgot God, so He made them forget themselves. They are the disobedient ones.
59|20| Inhabitants of the fire and inhabitants of the garden are not equal. Inhabitants of the garden, they are the winners.
59|21| If We had sent down this Quran to a mountain, you would have certainly seen it humbly breaking up from fear of God. And that is among the examples that We give it for the people, so that they may think.
59|22| He is God, the One that there is no god except Him, knower of the unseen and the visible, He is the beneficent, the merciful.
59|23| He is God, the One that there is no god except Him, the ruler, the holy, the (source of) peace, the (source of) security, the guardian, the powerful, the enforcer, the supreme. God is flawless of what they associate (with Him).
59|24| He is God, the creator, the inventor, the designer. All the good names (and attributes) belong to Him. Whatever is in the skies and on the earth glorify Him, and He is the powerful, the wise.
60|1| You who believe, do not take My enemy and your enemy as your friends, offering them friendship. They have disbelieved in what came to you in truth, driving the messenger and yourselves out because you believe in God your Master. If you go out to try hard in My way and look for My pleasure, why do you secretly offer them the friendship, while I know what you hide and what you disclose. And whoever among you does it, he has lost the even way.
60|2| If they overcome you, they become your enemies and they extend their hands and their tongues towards you with bad (intentions), and they wish that you disbelieve.
60|3| Your blood relatives (and close relatives) and your children will never benefit you on the resurrection day as He separates you, and God sees whatever you do.
60|4| There has been a good example for you in Abraham and those with him when they said to their people: we are free of (and have nothing to do with) you and whatever you serve other than God, we disbelieve in you, and an unending enmity and hatred started between us and you until you believe in God alone. Except Abraham's word to his father: I shall ask forgiveness for you, although I don’t have power of anything for you from God. Our Master, we trust in You and we turn to You (in repentance) and the final return is to You.
60|5| Our Master, do not make us a test for those who disbelieved, and our Master forgive us, indeed You are the powerful, the wise.
60|6| Certainly there has been a good example in them for you, for anyone who hopes for God and the last day. And anyone who turns away, then (know that) God is the rich (and without needs), the praiseworthy.
60|7| Perhaps God makes a friendship between you and those of them whom you were enemies, God is capable and God is forgiving and merciful.
60|8| God does not prohibit you from being kind and fair toward those who did not fight you about the religion and did not drive you out of your homes. Indeed God likes those who are just.
60|9| God only prohibits you from making friends with those who fought you about the religion and drove you out of your homes and supported (others) in driving you out. And anyone who makes friend with them, then they are the wrongdoers.
60|10| You who believe, when the believing women come to you as emigrants, then examine them, even though God knows their belief better. So if you find them as believing women, then do not return them to the disbelievers, they are not lawful for them (the disbelievers) and they (the disbelievers) are not lawful for them, and give them (the disbelievers) what they spent (for these women). And there is no blame on you if you marry them when you give them their compensations (marriage portions). And do not hold on to the (marriage) ties of disbelieving women, and ask for what you spent and they should ask for what they spent. This is God's command, He judges between you. God is knowledgeable and wise.
60|11| And if any of your wives goes away to the disbelievers (and they didn't pay you for what you spent), so when your turn comes, then give those (men) whose wives went away equal to what they spent. And be cautious of God, the One whom you believe in Him.
60|12| Prophet, when the believing women come to you pledging to you that they will not associate anything with God, and they will not steal, and they will not commit adultery (and fornication), and they will not kill their children, and they will not bring false accusation that they made up between their hands and their feet (by falsely claiming that their husband or someone else is the father of their child), and they will not disobey you in what is right, then accept their pledge and ask God for their forgiveness. God is indeed forgiving and merciful.
60|13| You who believe, do not make friends with people whom God’s anger is upon them, for they have lost hope of the hereafter as the disbelievers lost hope of (return of) inhabitants of the graves.
61|1| Whatever is in the skies and whatever is on the earth glorify God, and He is the powerful, the wise.
61|2| You who believe, why do you say what you do not do?
61|3| It is most hateful before God that you say what you do not do.
61|4| God likes those who fight in His way in rows as if they were a solid structure.
61|5| And when Moses said to his people: my people, why do you harass me while you have known that I am God's messenger to you? So when they deviated, God made their hearts deviate. And God does not guide the disobedient people.
61|6| And when Jesus son of Mary said: children of Israel, indeed I am God's Messenger to you confirming what is before me in the Torah, and giving good news of a messenger coming after me, whose name (or whose attribute) is Ahmad (or praised one). Then when he brought them the clear proofs, they said: this is an obvious magic.
61|7| Who is more wrong than someone who makes up lie (and attribute it) to God while he is called to the submission? God does not guide the wrongdoing people.
61|8| They want to put out God's light with (words of) their mouths, while God completes His light even though the disbelievers dislike it.
61|9| He is the One who sent His messenger with the guidance and the right way of life in order to inform him about all of the religion (God's recommended way of life), even though the polytheists dislike it.
61|10| You who believe, should I advise you of a deal that saves you from a painful punishment?
61|11| Believe in God and His messenger, and try hard in God's way with your possessions and lives. That is better for you if you knew.
61|12| He forgives your sins, and admits you into gardens which rivers flow through them and to good houses in eternal gardens. That is the great victory.
61|13| And other (thing that) you love it, help from God and a forthcoming victory. And give good news to the believers.
61|14| You who believe, be God's helpers, as Jesus son of Mary told his apostles: who are my helpers toward God? The apostles said: we are God's helper. So a group of children of Israel believed and a group disbelieved. Then We helped those who believed against their enemies, and they became victorious.
62|1| Whatever in the skies and whatever on the earth glorify God, the ruler, the holy, the powerful, the wise.
62|2| He is the One who raised among the illiterate a messenger from themselves to read to them His verses and to purify (and absolve) them and to teach them the book and the wisdom while they were indeed in obvious error in the past.
62|3| And others among them who have not joined them yet. And He is the powerful, the wise.
62|4| That is God's grace, He gives it to anyone He wants, and God has enormous grace.
62|5| Example of those who were charged with the Torah and they did not carry it out is like the example of the donkey carrying books. The example of the people who denied God's signs is bad. And God does not guide the wrongdoing people.
62|6| Say: you who are Jewish, if you claim that you are God's friend (and His chosen ones) and not other people, then wish for the death (to go to paradise sooner) if you are truthful.
62|7| And they will never wish it because of what they sent ahead, and God knows the wrongdoers well.
62|8| Say: indeed the death that you run away from it catches up with you then you are returned to knower of the unseen and the visible, then He informs you of what you were doing.
62|9| You who believe, when you are called for the mandatory prayer of the Friday, then hurry up to God's remembrance, stopping the trade. That is better for you if only you knew.
62|10| Then when the mandatory prayer is finished, disperse in the land and look for God's bounty, and remember God often, so that you may be successful.
62|11| And when they see a business or an amusement, they go away to it and leave you standing. Say: what is with God is better than the amusement and the business, and God is the best of the providers.
63|1| When the hypocrites come to you, they say: we testify that indeed you are God's messenger. While God knows that indeed you are His messenger, and God testifies that the hypocrites are certainly liars.
63|2| They took their oath as a shield, then obstructed (people) from God's way. Indeed what they were doing is bad.
63|3| That is because they believed, then disbelieved, so their hearts were sealed so that they do not understand.
63|4| And when you see them, their bodies impress you, and if they speak you listen to their speech, as if they are lumbers leaned (against a wall), they think that every noise is against them. They are the enemy, so beware of them. May God destroy them, how are they deviated?
63|5| And when they are told: come, God's messenger asks forgiveness for you. They turn their heads and you see them turn away in arrogance.
63|6| It is the same for them whether you ask forgiveness for them or you do not ask forgiveness for them. God will never forgive them. Indeed God does not guide the disobedient people.
63|7| They are those who say: do not spend on those who are with God's messenger until they break up. The treasures of the skies and the earth belong to God, but the hypocrites do not understand.
63|8| They say: if we return to Medina, the more powerful shall drive out the weaker from there. The power (and honor) belongs to God and His messenger and the believers, but the hypocrites do not know.
63|9| You who believe, your possessions and your children should not distract you from God's remembrance. And anyone who does that, then they are the losers.
63|10| And spend (in God's way) from what We provided you before death comes to one of you and he says: my Master, why did You not postpone me (my death) for a short period, so that I give to charity and be of the righteous?
63|11| And God will never postpone (the death of) anyone when his time comes. God is well informed of what you do.
64|1| Whatever in the skies and whatever on the earth glorify God. The rule belongs to Him, and all praise belongs to Him, and He is capable of everything.
64|2| He is the One who created you, then some of you are disbelievers and some of you are believers. God sees whatever you do.
64|3| He created the skies and the earth with the truth, and He shaped you, and shaped you well, and the final return is to Him.
64|4| He knows whatever in the skies and on the earth, and He knows what you hide and what you disclose. God knows inside the chests.
64|5| Did not news of those who disbelieved in the past come to you? They tasted the bad result of their affair, and they have a painful punishment.
64|6| That is because their messenger brought them the clear proofs, then they said: does a human being guide us? So they disbelieved and turned away, while God does not need them, and God is rich (without needs) and praiseworthy. 
64|7| Those who disbelieved claimed that they will never be raised. Say: yes, by my Master,  you shall be raised, then you shall be informed of what you did, and that is easy for God.
64|8| So, believe in God and His messenger and the light which We sent down, and God is well informed of what you do.
64|9| A day when He gathers you for the day of gathering, that is the day of mutual loss and gain. And anyone who believes in God and does good works, He removes his sins from him and admits him to gardens which rivers flow through them, remaining in there forever and ever. That is the great victory.
64|10| And those who disbelieved and denied Our signs, they are inhabitants of the fire, remaining in there forever, and it is a bad destination.
64|11| No tragedy happens except with God's permission (according to His laws). And anyone who believes in God, He guides his heart. And God knows everything.
64|12| And obey God and obey the messenger, and if you turn away, then Our messenger's responsibility is only the clear preaching.
64|13| God, there is no god except Him, so the believers should put their trust in God.
64|14| You who believe, indeed some of your wives and your children are your enemies, so beware of them. And if you excuse and overlook and forgive, then indeed God is forgiving and merciful.
64|15| Your possessions and your children are only a test, and the big reward is with God.
64|16| So be cautious of God as much as you can and listen and obey and spend (in God's way), it is better for yourselves, and anyone who is protected from his own stinginess (and greed), then they are the successful ones.
64|17| If you lend God a good loan (or offer God a good deed), He multiplies it for you and forgives you. God is appreciative and patient.
64|18| Knower of the unseen and the visible, the powerful, the wise.
65|1| Prophet, when you divorce the women, then divorce them after their waiting period (three monthly periods) and keep count of the waiting period and be cautious of God your Master. (During that period) do not drive them out of their houses and they should not leave unless they commit an obvious indecency. This is limits set by God. And anyone who exceeds limits set by God then he has wronged himself. You do not know, for God may bring about an affair after that (to cause reconciliation).
65|2| And when they reach their appointed time, then keep them nicely or part with them nicely, and take two just persons from among yourselves as witness, and perform the testimony for God. This is what anyone who believes in God and the last day is advised to it. And anyone who is cautious of God, He makes a way out for him.
65|3| And He provides him from where he would not think. And whoever puts his trust in God then He is enough for him. Indeed God achieves His purpose. God has set a (proper) measure for everything.
65|4| And if you have doubt about those women of yours who are hopeless of menstruation then their waiting period is three months, as well as those who do not menstruate. And those who carry (and are pregnant), their appointed time is until they deliver their load (and give birth). And anyone who is cautious of God, He makes his affair easy for him.
65|5| This is God's command which He sent it down to you.  And anyone who is cautious of God, He removes his sins from him and He makes his reward great.
65|6| Let them live where you live, according to your means, and do not harm them in order to pressure them (to leave), and if they are carrying then spend on them until they deliver their load (and give birth). And if they nurse (your child) for you, then give them their wages and consult between yourselves nicely, and if you find it difficult then another (woman) may nurse (the child) for him.
65|7| A wealthy man should spend according to his wealth and anyone whose provisions are restricted for him then he should spend according to what God gave him. God does not task anyone except according to what He gave it. God in going to brings about ease after difficulty.
65|8| And how many a town defied its Master's commandment and His messengers, then We called them into account, a severe accounting, and We punished them, an awful punishment.
65|9| So it tasted the bad result of its affair and the end of its affair was loss.
65|10| God prepared a severe punishment for them. So, you people of understanding (reasonable people) who believed, be cautious of God. God has sent down a reminder to you.
65|11| A messenger who reads God's clear signs to you in order to bring out those who believed and did good works from the darkness into the light. And anyone who believes and does good works, He admits him to gardens which rivers flow through them, remaining in there forever and ever. God has made good provision for him.
65|12| God is the One who created seven skies, and like them of the earth, the command comes down between them so that you know that God is capable of everything and that God's knowledge surrounds everything.
66|1| Prophet, why do you prohibit what God made lawful for you, looking for your wives' pleasure? God is forgiving and merciful.
66|2| God has mandated for you breakup of your oaths (when they are in conflict with God's commandments). God is your protector, and He is the knowledgeable, the wise.
66|3| And when the prophet confidentially told a saying to one of his wives, then when she told (the other) about it, God informed him of it, making known some of it and avoided some. So when he told her about it, she said: who told you about this? He said: the knowledgeable, the well informed told me.
66|4| So if you two repent to God, then your hearts have inclined (to God's command), and if you back each other up against him, then God is indeed his protector as well as Gabriel and the righteous believers, furthermore the angels are (also his) supporter.
66|5| If he divorces you, perhaps His Master gives him better wives than you in exchange, submitted, believer, obedient, repentant, devoted servants, fasting, previously married and virgin women.
66|6| You who believe, protect yourselves and your families from a fire that its fuel is people and stones, over which are angels harsh and severe who do not disobey God in what He orders them and they do what they are ordered.
66|7| You who disbelieved, do not apologize today, you are only penalized for what you used to do.
66|8| You who believe, repent to God a sincere repentance, perhaps your Master removes your sins from you and admits you to gardens which rivers flow through them on a day that God does not humiliate the prophet and those who believed with him. Their light rushing ahead of them and to the right of them, and they say: our Master complete our light for us and forgive us, You are capable of everything.
66|9| Prophet, try hard against the disbelievers and the hypocrites and be firm against them. Their housing is hell, and it is a bad destination.
66|10| God gave an example of those who disbelieved, wife of Noah and wife of Lot, they were under (marriage to) two servants from Our righteous servants, then they both betrayed them, so they were of no use to them against God whatsoever, and were told: enter the fire with those who enter.
66|11| And God gave an example of those who believed, wife of Pharaoh, when she said: my Master, build me a house with you in the garden and save me from Pharaoh and his work and save me from the wrongdoing people.
66|12| And Mary, daughter of Imran who guarded her private part, then We blew from Our breath/spirit into it and she confirmed her Master's words and His books, and she was of the obedient ones.
67|1| Blessed is the One that the kingdom is in His hands, and He is capable of everything.
67|2| The One who created the death and the life to test which one of you does better work. And He is the powerful, the forgiving.
67|3| The One who created seven skies one above the other.  You do not see any inconsistency in the creations of the beneficent. So return the eye (and look again), do you see any cracks?
67|4| Then return the eye (and look again and) again, the eye returns to you ashamed and tired.
67|5| And We have certainly beautified the world's sky with lamps (stars), and We made them meteorites for (throwing at) the devils, and We prepared the punishment of burning fire for them.
67|6| And for those who disbelieved in their Master is punishment of hell, and it is a bad destination.
67|7| When they are thrown in it, they hear an awful roar from it while it boils.
67|8| It nearly blows up from the rage. Every time a bunch (of disbelievers) is thrown in it, its keepers ask them: did not a warner come to you?
67|9| They say: yes, a warner has come to us, but we denied and we said: God did not send down anything, you are only in a great error.
67|10| And they (also) say: if we had listened or had understood, we would not be among inhabitants of the burning fire.
67|11| So they confess to their sin, and down with the inhabitants of the burning fire.
67|12| Those who are afraid of their Master in secret, there is forgiveness and a great reward for them.
67|13| Whether you hide your word or you disclose it, He knows what is inside the chests.
67|14| Does He not know what He created? He is the nice, the well informed.
67|15| He is the One who made the earth tame for you, so walk in its tracts and eat of His provision. The resurrection is to Him.
67|16| Are you safe from the One in the sky that He does not make you sink in the earth when it suddenly shakes?
67|17| Or are you safe from the One in the sky that He does not send a sandstorm upon you? Then you are going to know how My warning is.
67|18| And those before them have certainly denied, so how was My rejection (and punishment)?
67|19| Or did they not look at the birds above them spreading (their) wings and folding them? What holds them except the beneficent? He sees everything.
67|20| Or who is this, the one who is an army for you helping you, other than the beneficent? The disbelievers are only in deception.
67|21| Or who is this, the one who provides for you if He withholds His provision? No, but they insist on rebellion and hatred.
67|22| Is someone who walks with his face downward better guided or someone who walks properly on a straight path?
67|23| Say: He is the One who created you and made the hearing and the sight and the heart for you, but you thank a little.
67|24| say: He is the One who scattered you on the earth, and you will be gathered to Him.
67|25| And they say: when is this promise, if you are truthful?
67|26| Say: the knowledge of it is only with God, and I am only to warn clearly.
67|27| Then when they see it near, faces of those who disbelieved turns gloomy, and it is said: this is that which you used to called for.
67|28| Say: what do you think if God destroys me and those with me or He has mercy on us, then who protects the disbelievers from a painful punishment?
67|29| Say: He is the beneficent, we believed in Him and we trust in Him, and you are going to know who is in an obvious error.
67|30| Say: what do you think if your water (sinks deep and) becomes dried up, then who brings you (fresh) running water?
68|1| Nun (the letter N), by the pen and what they write,
68|2| you are not a madman by your Master's grace.
68|3| And indeed an unending reward is for you.
68|4| And you are indeed of a great character (and morality).
68|5| So you are going to see and they will see,
68|6| which of you is the crazy one?
68|7| Indeed your Master knows best who is lost from His way, and He knows best who the guided ones are.
68|8| So do not obey the deniers.
68|9| They wish that you be flexible, then they would be flexible.
68|10| So do not obey any insignificant oath taker,
68|11| slandering, going around (spreading) malicious lies,
68|12| preventing the good, exceeding the limits, sinful,
68|13| ill-mannered (and despicable), and after all this mean (and notorious),
68|14| even if he is wealthy and has many children.
68|15| When Our verses are read to him, he says: stories of the earlier ones.
68|16| We are going to brand him on the nose.
68|17| Indeed We test them as We tested the owners of the garden when they swore that they shall pick it in the morning,
68|18| with no exceptions.
68|19| Then a disaster, from your Master, came to it while they were sleep,
68|20| so it became as like a totally picked field.
68|21| Then they called one another in the morning
68|22| (saying): go to your crop early if you are pickers
68|23| so they went on,  and they were talking softly (saying):
68|24| no poor shall enter it over you today.
68|25| And they went out early determined and capable.
68|26| Then when they saw it they said: we are lost,
68|27| no, but we are deprived.
68|28| The fairest of them said: did I not tell you, why do you not glorify (God)?
68|29| They said: our Master is flawless, indeed we were wrongdoers.
68|30| So they turned on each other blaming one another.
68|31| They said: woe to us, indeed we were rebellious.
68|32| Perhaps our Master gives us better than that in exchange, indeed we are fond of our Master.
68|33| That is how the punishment is, and the punishment of the hereafter is certainly greater, if they knew.
68|34| Indeed there are gardens of delight for those who control themselves with their Master.
68|35| Should We place the submitted ones the same as the guilty ones?
68|36| What is with you, how do you judge (like this)?
68|37| Do you have a book that you study from it,
68|38| and indeed whatever you choose is in it for you?!
68|39| Or do you have any vows (binding) on Us, reaching to the resurrection day, that whatever you judge is yours?
68|40| Ask them which one of them guarantees this?
68|41| Or do they have associates? Then let them bring their associates if they are truthful.
68|42| On a day when leg is bared (and the deeds are exposed) and they are called to the prostration, but they cannot.
68|43| Lowering their eyes, humiliation overcomes them, and they had been called to show humbleness while they were sound and healthy.
68|44| So leave Me (alone) with anyone who denies this saying, We are going to gradually lure them to destruction from where they do not know.
68|45| And I give them time, as My plan is solid.
68|46| Or do you ask them for a wage, and they are weighed down by the debt?
68|47| Or is the unseen with them, so they write it?
68|48| So be patient for judgment of your Master and do not be like companion of the fish (Jonah) when he called out while he was irritated.
68|49| If it was not for a favor from his Master that had reached him, he would have been thrown to the desert shore while he was condemned.
68|50| But his Master chose him and made him of the righteous.
68|51| And those who disbelieved almost make you slip with their eyes when they hear the reminder, and they say: he is certainly mad.
68|52| And it is only a reminder for humankind.
69|1| The inevitable disaster.
69|2| What is the inevitable disaster?
69|3| And do you know what the inevitable disaster is?
69|4| Thamud and Aad denied the pounding catastrophe.
69|5| So as for Thamud, they were destroyed by the rebellion (or the thunderbolt).
69|6| And as for Aad, they were destroyed by a violent ice cold wind
69|7| which He subjected them to seven night and eight days of it consecutively, then you see the people fallen down in it as if they were trunks of hollow (and dried up) palm tree.
69|8| So do you see any of them left?
69|9| And Pharaoh and those before him and the turned over cities (Sodom and Gomorrah) came with sinning. 
69|10| Then they disobeyed their Master's messenger, so He took them (into punishment), an increasing punishment.
69|11| Indeed when the water rose up, We carried you on the sailing ship (the Ark).
69|12| So that We make it a reminder for you, and attentive ear to remember it.
69|13| So when the trumpet is blown, a single blow
69|14| and the earth and the mountains are lifted and crushed in a single blow.
69|15| Then on that day the event happens,
69|16| and the sky splits, then on that day it (the sky) is weak,
69|17| and the angels are at its sides, and eight (angels) carry your Master’s throne above them. 
69|18| On that day you are presented (before God) and none of your secrets remains hidden.
69|19| So, as for anyone who is given his book (of records) to his right hand, he says: here, read my book,
69|20| indeed I thought that I come across my account.
69|21| Then he will be in a pleasant life,
69|22| in an excellent garden,
69|23| its bunches of fruits are nearby (within easy reach).
69|24| (They are told): eat and drink joyfully for what you sent in advance in the days gone by.
69|25| But anyone who is given his book to his left hand, he says: I wish I was not given my book,
69|26| and I did not know what is my account,
69|27| I wish it was the end,
69|28| my wealth was of no use to me,
69|29| my power departed from me.
69|30| (It will be said): take him and shackle him
69|31| then make him enter (and burn in) the hellfire
69|32| then put him in a chain that its length is seventy cubits,
69|33| for indeed he would not believe in the great God,
69|34| and he would not encourage feeding the poor.
69|35| So there is no close friend for him here today,
69|36| and no food except pus,
69|37| that no one eats it except the sinners.
69|38| So I swear by what you see
69|39| and what you do not see
69|40| that it (Quran) is certainly a noble messenger’s word,
69|41| and it is not word of a poet. A few of you believe (or you believe a little).
69|42| And it is not word of a fortune-teller (or a priest). You take a little notice.
69|43| A sending down from the Master of Human kind.
69|44| And if he had made up some saying (and attributed them) to Us,
69|45| We would have certainly taken him by the right hand
69|46| then We would have cut off his main artery
69|47| and none of you could have kept it away from him.
69|48| And certainly it (Quran) is certainly a reminder for those who control themselves.
69|49| And We certainly know that some of you are deniers.
69|50| And it is certainly (cause of) a regret for the disbelievers.
69|51| And it is certainly the sure truth.
69|52| So glorify the name of your great Master.
70|1| A questioner asked about a punishment bound to happen.
70|2| None can prevent it for the disbelievers.
70|3| (It is) from God, the owner of the places of ascent.
70|4| The angels and the spirit ascend to Him in a day that its measure is fifty thousand years. 
70|5| So be patient, a nice patience.
70|6| Indeed they see it far
70|7| while We see it near.
70|8| A day that the sky is like the melted copper,
70|9| and the mountains are like the colored wool,
70|10| and a friend does not ask about a friend
70|11| (although) they are made to see them. The guilty wish to redeems himself from punishment of that day by (offering) his children
70|12| and his spouse and his brother
70|13| and his family who sheltered him
70|14| and everyone on the earth, so that it saves him.
70|15| No way. Indeed it is flame (of hell)
70|16| stripping off the scalp (by burning it),
70|17| calling anyone who turned his back and turned away
70|18| and collected and withheld (his wealth).
70|19| Indeed the human being is created greedy (and anxious).
70|20| Impatient (and anxious) when the badness touches him,
70|21| and miserly (and stingy) when the goodness touches him,
70|22| except the performers of mandatory prayers,
70|23| those who perform their mandatory prayer all the time
70|24| and those who have a known entitlement in their wealth
70|25| for the beggar and the disadvantaged,
70|26| and those who acknowledge the judgment day
70|27| and those who are afraid of their Master's punishment
70|28| as indeed no one is safe from their Master's punishment,
70|29| and those who guard their private parts
70|30| except from their spouses or what their right hands own as indeed they are blameless,
70|31| and anyone who looks for (anything) beyond this then they are of those exceeding the limits,
70|32| and those who observe their trusts and their promise
70|33| and those who are upstanding in their testimony
70|34| and those who guard their mandatory prayer.
70|35| They are the honored ones in gardens.
70|36| So what is with those who disbelieved, rushing (and staring) toward you
70|37| from the right and from the left in groups?
70|38| Does every one of them expect to enter garden of delight?
70|39| No way. Indeed We created them from what they know.
70|40| So I swear by the Master of the easts and the wests that We are certainly able
70|41| to substitute better than them, and We are not surpassed.
70|42| So leave them talk uselessly and play until they meet their day which they are promised.
70|43| A day that they come out of the graves in a hurry as if they are rushing to an idol (or to a goal).
70|44| Lowering their eyes, humiliation overcomes them, that is the day that they were being promised.
71|1| Indeed We sent Noah to his people (telling him): warn your people before a painful punishment comes to them.
71|2| He said: my people, I am a clear warner for you,
71|3| (warning you) that you should serve God and be cautious of Him and obey me.
71|4| He forgives you of your sins and He postpones you for a limited period. Indeed when God's appointed time comes, it is not postponed if you knew.
71|5| He said: my Master, indeed I invited my people night and day,
71|6| but my invitation only increased (their) running away,
71|7| and indeed every time I invited them so that You forgive them, they put their fingers in their ears and covered themselves with their clothes and insisted and were extremely arrogant.
71|8| So I invited them openly,
71|9| then indeed I made it public for them, and confided in them secretly,
71|10| then I said: ask forgiveness from your Master, indeed He is very forgiving,
71|11| He sends plenty of rain on you from the sky,
71|12| and He helps you with wealth and children, and He makes gardens for you and He makes rivers for you.
71|13| What is with you that you do not expect any magnificence for God?
71|14| While He has created you in phases.
71|15| Did you not see how God created seven skies one above the other?
71|16| And He made the moon in them as a light, and made the sun as a lamp.
71|17| And He made you grow from the earth (like) a plant
71|18| then He returns you into it and brings you out (in another) bringing out.
71|19| And God made the earth a widespread mat for you,
71|20| so that you move around in it on wide roadways.
71|21| Noah said: my Master, indeed they disobeyed me and followed someone whose wealth and children did not add anything to him except loss.
71|22| And they plotted a great plot.
71|23| And they said: do not leave your gods, and do not leave Wadd or Suwa or Yaghus and Ya'uq and Nasr.
71|24| And (Noah said): they have misguided many (people), so do not increase the wrongdoers except in error.
71|25| They were drowned because of their sins, then they were made to enter a fire, and they did not find any helpers for themselves other than God.
71|26| And Noah said: my Master, do not leave any of the disbelievers living on the land,
71|27| indeed if You leave them, they misguide Your servants, and they would only give birth to disbelieving immoral.
71|28| My Master, forgive me and my parents, and anyone who enters my house (being a) believer, and the believing men and the believing women, and do not increase the wrongdoer except in destruction.
72|1| Say: it was revealed to me that a group of the Jinn listened, then they said: indeed we heard an amazing Quran,
72|2| it guides to the right way, so we believed in it, and we will never associate anyone with our Master,
72|3| and that our Master’s majesty is great, and He did not take a spouse or a child,
72|4| and that the fools among us used to say outrageous (lies) about God,
72|5| and that we assumed that humans and Jinn never lie about God.
72|6| And there were men among humans who were looking for protection of the Jinn's men, so they increased them in foolishness (and injustice).
72|7| And that they assumed as you assumed, that God never raises anyone.
72|8| And that we touched the sky, then we found it filled with tough guards and shooting flames.
72|9| And that we used to sit in its seats for listening, but anyone who listens now finds a shooting flame waiting for him.
72|10| And we do not know if badness is wanted for anyone on the earth or their Master wants a right way for them.
72|11| And that some of us are the righteous and some of us are otherwise, we are (following) different ways.
72|12| And that we know that we will never incapacitate God on the earth, and we will never incapacitate Him by running away.
72|13| And that when we heard the guidance, we believed in it. Anyone who believes in his Master, then he should not be afraid of a reduced reward or any injustice.
72|14| And that some of us are the submitted ones, and some of us are the unjust, so whoever submits (to God) then they pursue a right way.
72|15| And as for the unjust, they are fuel for hell.
72|16| And if they keep on the (right) way, then We give them plenty of water to drink (and plenty of wealth and provision),
72|17| so that We test them in it. And anyone who stays away from his Master's remembrance, He puts him in a terrible punishment.
72|18| And that the places of worship belongs to God, so do not call on anyone with God.
72|19| And that when God's servant stood up calling on Him, they almost mobbed him.
72|20| Say: I only call on my Master and I do not associate anyone with Him.
72|21| Say: I do not have power of any harm or any benefit for you.
72|22| Say: Indeed no one will ever protect me from God, and I will never find any shelter other than Him.
72|23| (I have not responsibility) except preaching from God and His message. And anyone who disobeys God and His messenger, then indeed fire of hell is for him, remaining in there forever.
72|24| Until when they see what they are promised, then they are going to know who is weaker in helper and fewer in number.
72|25| Say: I do not know whether what you are promised is near or if my Master has set a far out time for it. 
72|26| Knower of the unseen, and He does not inform anyone of His unseen
72|27| except any messenger whom He approves, then He sends observers in front of him and behind him,
72|28| so that He knows that they have preached their Master’s message, and He surrounds (and has full knowledge of) whatever is with them and He keeps count of everything.
73|1| You who wrap yourself,
73|2| get up at night, except a little,
73|3| half of it or a little less of it
73|4| or add (a little) to it, and recite the Quran distinctly (and thoughtfully).
73|5| Indeed We are going to throw a heavy word on you.
73|6| Indeed rising up at night is more effective and more appropriate for word (of prayer).
73|7| Indeed you have lengthy occupations during the day.
73|8| And remember the name of you Master, and devote your life to Him devotedly.
73|9| Master of the east and the west, there is no god except Him, so take Him as an advocate.
73|10| And be patient about what they say and break up with them, a nice separation.
73|11| And leave Me and the deniers who have the good life, and give them a little time.
73|12| Indeed there is shackles and hellfire with Us,
73|13| and food that chokes and a painful punishment (for them),
73|14| on a day that the earth and the mountains shake and the mountains become a pile of flowing sands.
73|15| Indeed We sent a messenger to you as a witness over you as We sent a messenger to Pharaoh.
73|16| Then Pharaoh disobeyed the messenger, so We took him, a disastrous taking.
73|17| So if you disbelieve then how do you protect (yourselves) on a day that makes the children white haired (and grow old), if you disbelieved?
73|18| (A day that) the sky is torn apart in it. God's promise shall be done.
73|19| Indeed this (Quran) is a reminder, so anyone who wants, takes a way to his Master (with it). 
73|20| Indeed your Master knows that you and a group of those with you get up nearly two third of the night or half of it or one third of it. God determines (length of) the night and the day, and He knows that you never calculate it, so He turned to you (in mercy), therefore read as much as you can from Quran. He knows that some of you are going to get sick and others move around on the earth looking for His bounty and others fight in God's way, so read as much as you can from it, and perform the mandatory prayer and give to mandatory charity and lend God a good loan (or offer God a good deed). And whatever good you send ahead for yourselves, you find it as a better and greater reward with God. And ask forgiveness of God, as God is indeed forgiving and merciful.
74|1| You who cover yourself,
74|2| get up and warn
74|3| and  magnify your Master
74|4| and cleanse your clothes
74|5| and keep away from the filth
74|6| and do not do favor to ask for more
74|7| and be patient for (the sake of) your Master.
74|8| So when the trumpet is blown
74|9| then that day is a difficult day,
74|10| not easy upon the disbelievers.
74|11| Leave Me alone with whom I created
74|12| and I gave him plenty of wealth
74|13| and sons (who are) present
74|14| and made (everything) easy for him, so easy,
74|15| yet he desires that I increase (it for him).
74|16| No way. He is indeed stubborn against Our signs.
74|17| I am going to make him suffer a terrible punishment. 
74|18| Indeed he thought and calculated.
74|19| So death to him, how did he calculate?
74|20| Then (again), death to him, how did he calculate?
74|21| Then he looked,
74|22| then he frowned and looked angry,
74|23| then he turned back and showed arrogance.
74|24| Then he said: this is only a passed along magic,
74|25| this is nothing but word of a human being.
74|26| I am going to enter (and burn) him in hell.
74|27| And do you know what hell is.
74|28| It does not spare and it does not leave,
74|29| burning the human being (skin and flesh). 
74|30| (Guarding) over it are nineteen (angels)
74|31| and We only made the angels as guardians of the fire and We made their numbers (nineteen) only as a test for those who disbelieved, so that those who were given the book would be certain and to increase the belief of those who believed, and those who were given the book and the believers would not doubt, and so that those who have a disease in their hearts and the disbelievers say: what did God intend with this example. That is how God misguides anyone He wants and guides anyone He wants. And none knows God's soldiers except Him. And this is only a reminder for the human being.
74|32| No way, by the moon
74|33| and the night when it retreats
74|34| and the morning when it lightens,
74|35| indeed it (hell) is one of the greatest (signs),
74|36| a warning for the human being,
74|37| for anyone of you who wants to be ahead or to be behind.
74|38| Every person is bonded by what he did,
74|39| except associates of the right (the fortunate)
74|40| in gardens, asking
74|41| from the guilty ones:
74|42| what did enter you in hell? 
74|43| They say: we were not the performers of  mandatory prayers,
74|44| and we were not feeding the poor,
74|45| and we used to enter into useless conversation with those conversing uselessly,
74|46| and we used to deny the judgment day
74|47| until the certainty (of death) came to us.
74|48| So mediation of the mediators does not benefit them.
74|49| So what is with them that they turn away from the reminder (Quran),
74|50| as if they are scared donkeys
74|51| running away from a lion?
74|52| No, but every one of them wants to be given open papers (from God).
74|53| Not at all, but they are not afraid of the hereafter.
74|54| Not at all, indeed it is a reminder,
74|55| so anyone who wants takes notice of it.
74|56| And they do not take notice unless God wants, as He is entitled to be cautioned of, and is entitled to forgive.
75|1| I swear by the resurrection day,
75|2| and I swear by the blaming soul, 
75|3| does the human being think that We will never put his bones together?
75|4| Yes, We are able to restore his fingertips (finger prints).
75|5| But the human being wants to live sinfully in his time to come.
75|6| He asks: when is the resurrection day?
75|7| When the eye is baffled
75|8| and the moon is darkened
75|9| and the sun and the moon are joined together.
75|10| On that day the human being says: where is the escape?
75|11| No way, there is no shelter.
75|12| On that day the place of settlement is to your Master.
75|13| On that day the human being is informed of what he sent ahead and he put off.
75|14| But the human being has understanding about himself,
75|15| even if he presents his excuses.
75|16| Do not move your tongue with it to be in a hurry for it (to remember it).
75|17| Indeed its collection and its reading is Our responsibility.
75|18| So when We read it, then you follow its reading.
75|19| Then indeed its explanation is Our responsibility.
75|20| No way, but you like the transient (this world’s life),
75|21| and you leave the hereafter.
75|22| On that day some faces glow (from happiness)
75|23| looking at their Master.
75|24| And on that day some faces are gloomy (from sadness)
75|25| thinking that a back breaking punishment will be done to them.
75|26| No way, when it (life) reaches to the collarbones (and the throat),
75|27| and it is said: who is a healer?
75|28| And he thinks that it is the (time of) separation
75|29| and the leg is twisted around the leg,
75|30| on that day the course is to you Master.
75|31| He did not accept the truth and he did not pray,
75|32| but he denied and he turned away,
75|33| then he went to his family walking proudly.
75|34| Woe to you and woe.
75|35| Then woe to you and woe.
75|36| Does the human being think that he is left aimlessly?
75|37| Was he not a fertilized egg from ejaculated semen,
75|38| then it became a (dangling, clinging, and leach like) blood clot, then He created and shaped (it),
75|39| then He made two kinds of it, the male and the female?
75|40| Is not such (a creator) able to give life to the dead?
76|1| Did not a period of time come upon the human being that he was nothing to be mentioned?
76|2| Indeed We created the human being from a mixture of fertilized egg (Zygote) to test him, and We made hearing and sight for him.
76|3| Indeed We guided him to the way, whether he is grateful or whether he is ungrateful.
76|4| We prepared chains and shackles and burning fire for the disbelievers.
76|5| Indeed the good ones drink from a cup that its mixture is camphor.
76|6| A spring that God's servants drink from it, they make it flow out, flowing out (as they please).
76|7| They fulfill the pledge and they are afraid of a day that its badness is wide spread,
76|8| and they feed the food to poor and orphans and captives for His love,
76|9| (saying:) we feed you only for God's sake, we don't want any reward or thanks from you,
76|10| we are afraid of our Master in a harsh and distressful day.
76|11| So God protected them from badness of that day and gave them vitality and happiness.
76|12| And their reward for what they endured is garden and silk.
76|13| Leaning on sofas in it, they do not see (burning) sun and bitter (freezing) cold in it.
76|14| And its shades are close over them and its fruits are lowered, hanging low.
76|15| And silver bowls and drinking glasses made of crystals are circulated among them,
76|16| crystals like silver, they determine their measure (and size).
76|17| And in there, they are given drink from a cup that its mixture is ginger,
76|18| from a spring in there called Salsabil.
76|19| And immortal youth circulate among them, that when you see them you think they are scattered pearls.
76|20| And when you see it, then you see delight and a great kingdom.
76|21| There are clothes of fine green silk and brocade on them, and they are decorated with silver bracelets, and their Master gives them a pure drink to drink.
76|22| Indeed this is a reward for you, and your effort is appreciated.
76|23| Indeed We sent this Quran down to you gradually.
76|24| So persevere (and be patient) for your Master's command, and do not obey any sinful or ungrateful (disbeliever) among them.
76|25| And remember your Master’s name morning and afternoon.
76|26| And during part of the night show your humbleness for Him, and glorify Him long during a night.
76|27| Indeed these love the transient (this world’s life), and they leave a cumbersome day behind.
76|28| We created them and We strengthened their form, and when We want We replace them with like them as a substitute.
76|29| Indeed this (Quran) is a reminder, so anyone who wants takes a way to his Master (with it).
76|30| And you do not want except if God wants. Indeed God is knowledgeable and wise.
76|31| He admits anyone He wants to His mercy, and He prepared a painful punishment for the wrongdoers.
77|1| By those sent in succession
77|2| then by the hurricane, gusting
77|3| and by the spreaders, spreading
77|4| then by the separators, separating
77|5| then by those communicating a reminder
77|6| as an excuse or as a warning
77|7| that indeed what you are promised shall occur. 
77|8| So when the stars are wiped out
77|9| and when the sky is split open
77|10| and when the mountains are powdered
77|11| and when the messengers' time is set.
77|12| For what day is the appointment set?
77|13| For the day of separation/decision.
77|14| And do you know what the day of separation/decision is?
77|15| Woe to the deniers on that day.
77|16| Did We not destroy the earlier ones?
77|17| Then We make the later ones follow them (in destruction).
77|18| That is how We deal with the guilty ones.
77|19| Woe to the deniers on that day. 
77|20| Did We not create you from despicable water?
77|21| Then We placed it in a safe quarter (the womb)
77|22| for a known period?
77|23| So We are able, and We are very capable.
77|24| Woe to the deniers on that day.
77|25| Did We not make the earth a holder
77|26| (for) living and dead.
77|27| And We placed towering mountains in it, and We gave you sweet fresh water to drink.
77|28| Woe to the deniers on that day.
77|29| (They will be told): proceed to what you were denying it,
77|30| proceed to a three pronged shadow (of smoke)
77|31| that is not a shade and is of no use against the flame,
77|32| which indeed it shoots up sparks like towers
77|33| as if they were yellow camels.
77|34| Woe to the deniers on that day.
77|35| This is a day that they do not speak
77|36| and it is not permitted for them to apologize.
77|37| Woe to the deniers on that day.
77|38| This is the day of separation/decision, We assemble you and the earlier ones.
77|39| So if you have a plot (trick), then plot it.
77|40| Woe to the deniers on that day.
77|41| Indeed those who control themselves are in shades and springs,
77|42| and fruits of whatever they desire.
77|43| Eat and drink joyfully for what you used to do.
77|44| Indeed that is how We reward the good doers.
77|45| Woe to the deniers on that day.
77|46| Eat and enjoy a little, you are indeed the guilty ones.
77|47| Woe to the deniers on that day.
77|48| And when they are told to bow down, they do not bow down.
77|49| Woe to the deniers on that day.
77|50| So in what saying do they believe after it (Quran)?
78|1| What do they ask each other about?
78|2| About the great news.
78|3| The one that they disagree about it.
78|4| No way, they are going to know.
78|5| Then, no way, they are going to know.
78|6| Did We not make the earth a bed (to rest on),
78|7| and the mountains as pins?
78|8| And We created you in pairs.
78|9| And We made your sleep as a rest.
78|10| And We made the night as a cover.
78|11| And We made the day as a livelihood (to earn a living).
78|12| And We built seven stable (skies) above you.
78|13| And We made (sun) a glowing lamp.
78|14| And We sent down plenty of rain from the dense clouds
78|15| that We bring out with it grain and plant 
78|16| and dense (and luxurious) gardens.
78|17| Indeed the day of separation/decision is an appointed time.
78|18| A day when the trumpet is blown and you come in bunches.
78|19| And the sky is opened and becomes gates,
78|20| and the mountains are moved and become a mirage.
78|21| Indeed hell is an ambush,
78|22| as a place of return for the rebellious ones,
78|23| staying in it for a long time.
78|24| They do not taste anything cool or any drink in it,
78|25| except boiling water and pus.
78|26| An appropriate punishment.
78|27| They were not expecting an accounting,
78|28| and they strongly denied Our signs
78|29| while We keep track of everything in a book.
78|30| So taste (the punishment), for We never add anything to you except punishment.
78|31| Indeed victory is for those who control themselves.
78|32| Fenced gardens and vineyards,
78|33| and fully developed maidens of the same age,
78|34| and overflowing cups.
78|35| They do not hear any useless talk or any lies in there.
78|36| A reward from your Master, a calculated reward, 
78|37| (a reward from the) Master of the skies and the earth and whatever is between them, the beneficent. They do not have any authority from Him to talk.
78|38| A day when the spirit and the angels stand in a row, they do not speak except anyone whom the beneficent permits him and he says what is right.
78|39| This is the day of the truth. Therefore anyone who wants, he takes a way of return to his Master.
78|40| Indeed We warned you of a forthcoming punishment, a day when a person looks at what his hands sent ahead, and the disbeliever says: I wish I was dust.
79|1| By those who pull out intensely
79|2| and by those who let out gently
79|3| and by those who swim/float smoothly
79|4| and by those who move ahead, outpacing
79|5| and by those who manage an affair,
79|6| on a day that the earthquake shakes (the earth)
79|7| the subsequent one follows it,
79|8| on that day hearts tremble,
79|9| their eyes humbled (looking down),
79|10| they say: will we be restored to the original form,
79|11| even when we are decomposed bones?
79|12| They say: then that would be a losing return.
79|13| Then it is only a single scream
79|14| and they are immediately awake.
79|15| Did the story of Moses come to you?
79|16| When his Master called him in the holy valley of Tuwa:
79|17| go to Pharaoh for indeed he rebelled.
79|18| Then say: do you like to purify (and absolve) yourself,
79|19| and I guide you to your Master so you would fear (Him)?
79|20| Then he showed him the great miracle.
79|21| But he denied and disobeyed,
79|22| then he turned his back trying (against God).
79|23| Then he gathered (his people) and called out
79|24| and said: I am your master, the highest.
79|25| So God took him with exemplary punishment of the hereafter and this life.
79|26| Indeed there is a lesson in that for anyone who fears (God).
79|27| Are you harder to create or the sky that He built it?
79|28| He raised its roof and arranged it.
79|29| And He darkened its nights and brought out its daylight.
79|30| And after that He expanded the earth.
79|31| He brought out its water and its pasture from it,
79|32| and He set the mountains firm.
79|33| An enjoyment for you and your livestock.
79|34| So when the great disaster comes,
79|35| a day when the human being remembers what he tried
79|36| and the hellfire is exposed for anyone who sees.
79|37| So anyone who rebelled
79|38| and preferred this world's life
79|39| then indeed the hellfire is the housing (for him).
79|40| And as for someone who is afraid of his Master's position and prevents himself from the desires,
79|41| then indeed the garden is the housing (for him).
79|42| They ask you about the hour that when does it come in?
79|43| In what (basis) would you mention it (when you have no knowledge of it)?
79|44| Its ending is up to your Master. 
79|45| You are only a warner for anyone who fears it.
79|46| A day that they see it, it is as if they stayed an evening or its morning.
80|1| He frowned and turned away
80|2| because the blind man came to him.
80|3| And how would you know, he may purify himself
80|4| or take notice, so the reminder would benefit him?
80|5| But whoever supposes he has no need,
80|6| then you pay attention to him
80|7| while it is not your responsibility if he did not purify.
80|8| But whoever comes to you rushing
80|9| and he fears (God)
80|10| then you pay no attention to him!
80|11| No way, it (Quran) is a reminder,
80|12| and anyone who wants takes notice from it.
80|13| In honored scriptures
80|14| elevated and purified,
80|15| by the hands of ambassadors/scribes,
80|16| noble and good.
80|17| Damn the human being, how ungrateful he is.
80|18| What did He create him from?
80|19| He created him from a fertilized egg (Zygote), then proportioned him.
80|20| Then He made the way easy for him.
80|21| Then He made him die and had him buried.
80|22| Then He raises him when He wants.
80|23| No way, he did not fulfill what He ordered him.
80|24| So the human being should look at his food.
80|25| Indeed We poured the rain as shower,
80|26| then We split open the earth as cracks,
80|27| then We made grain grow in it,
80|28| and grapes and vegetable,
80|29| and olive and date,
80|30| and fenced gardens with lots of trees,
80|31| and fruit and grass,
80|32| an enjoyment for you and your livestock.
80|33| So when the deafening blast comes,
80|34| a day when the man runs away from his brother
80|35| and his mother and his father
80|36| and his spouse and his sons (children),
80|37| on that day every one of them has an issue occupying him.
80|38| On that day (some) faces are bright,
80|39| laughing and joyful.
80|40| And on that day (other) faces have dust on them,
80|41| darkness covers it,
80|42| they are the disbelievers, the immoral ones.
81|1| When the sun is rolled up 
81|2| and when the stars are dimmed 
81|3| and when the mountains are moved
81|4| and when the ten months pregnant camels are abandoned
81|5| and when the wild animals are gathered
81|6| and when the seas are set on fire
81|7| and when the souls are paired 
81|8| and when the girl buried alive is asked
81|9| for what sin she was killed
81|10| and when the pages (of deeds) are opened
81|11| and when the sky is removed
81|12| and when the hellfire is flared up
81|13| and when the garden is brought near,
81|14| a person knows what he brought along.
81|15| So I swear by the returning stars/planets,
81|16| running their course (and orbit) and hiding, 
81|17| and by the night when it turns dark
81|18| and by the morning when it breathes (and lights up),
81|19| indeed it (Quran) is word of a noble messenger,
81|20| powerful and distinguished with the owner of the throne,
81|21| he is obeyed and is honest.
81|22| And your companion is not a madman,
81|23| and he has certainly seen him on the clear horizon.
81|24| And he is not stingy with the unseen (that is revealed to him),
81|25| and it is not word of expelled Satan.
81|26| So where are you going?
81|27| It is not but a reminder for humankind,
81|28| for anyone of you who want to go straight.
81|29| And you do not want (anything) except that which God, Master of humankind wants.
82|1| When the sky is split
82|2| and when the stars are scattered
82|3| and when the seas are flooded (and overflow)
82|4| and when the graves are turned upside down,
82|5| a person knows what he sent ahead and put off.
82|6| Human being, what deceived you about your noble Master?
82|7| The One who created you, then He shaped you and balanced you. 
82|8| And He put you together in whatever form He wanted.
82|9| No way, but you deny the Judgment,
82|10| while indeed there are guardians over you,
82|11| nobles writing down,
82|12| who know whatever you do.
82|13| Indeed the good ones are in delight.
82|14| and indeed the immoral ones are in hellfire. 
82|15| They enter (and burn in) there on the judgment day,
82|16| and they are not absent from it (beyond its reach).
82|17| And do you know what the judgment day is?
82|18| And again, do you know what the judgment day is?
82|19| A day when a person does not have the least bit of power for another one, and on that day the command (and judgment) belongs to God.
83|1| Woe to those who give less than is due (the cheaters),
83|2| those who when they take a measure (or an amount) from people, they take it in full
83|3| and when they give an amount to them or they weigh for them, they give less.
83|4| Do they not think that indeed they will be raised
83|5| for a great day?
83|6| A day when people stand before the Master of Human kind.
83|7| No way, definitely the record of the immoral ones is in Sijjin.
83|8| And do you know what Sijjin is?
83|9| It is a written book.
83|10| Woe to the deniers on that day,
83|11| those who deny the judgment day.
83|12| And no one denies it except every sinner exceeding the limits.
83|13| When Our verses are read to him, he says: stories of the earlier ones.
83|14| No way, but what they used to do covered their hearts with rust.
83|15| No way, indeed on that day they are excluded from their Master.
83|16| Then indeed they shall enter (and burn in) the hellfire.
83|17| Then it is said: this is what you used to deny it.
83|18| No way, indeed the record of the good ones is certainly in Illiyin.
83|19| And do you know what Illiyin is?
83|20| A written book,
83|21| the close ones (to God) testify to it.
83|22| Indeed the good ones shall be in delight.
83|23| They are on the sofas looking.
83|24| You recognize glow of the delight in their faces.
83|25| They are given sealed nectar to drink.
83|26| Its seal is musk. And the contenders should compete for that.
83|27| And its mixture is from Tasneem,
83|28| a spring that the close ones (to God) drink from it.
83|29| Indeed those who were guilty used to laugh at those who believed,
83|30| and when they passed by them, they would wink at each other (ridiculing them)
83|31| and when they returned to their people they would return joyfully
83|32| and when they saw them, they would say:  these are certainly lost ones.
83|33| Although they were not sent as guardians over them.
83|34| So today those who believed laugh at the disbelievers,
83|35| they are on sofas looking.
83|36| Were the disbelievers rewarded for (anything other than) what they used to do?
84|1| When the sky splits
84|2| and it listens to its Master and it is required (to listen),
84|3| and when the earth is stretched
84|4| and throws out what is inside of it and becomes empty
84|5| and it listens to its Master and it is required (to listen).
84|6| Human being, indeed you are a hard worker toward your Master, working hard, and you meet Him.
84|7| As for anyone who is given his book to his right hand
84|8| then he is called to account, an easy account
84|9| and he returns happily to his family.
84|10| But anyone who is given his book from behind his back, 
84|11| Then he will call for destruction (and his death)
84|12| while he enters (and burns in) the burning fire.
84|13| Indeed he was happy among his family.
84|14| Indeed he thought that he would never return.
84|15| Yes, his Master was indeed watching him.
84|16| So I swear by the sunset glow
84|17| and the night and what it collects
84|18| and the moon when it is full
84|19| that you shall move on from state after state.
84|20| So what is with them that they do not believe,
84|21| and when the Quran is read to them, they do not show humbleness?
84|22| No, but those who disbelieved deny,
84|23| and God knows better what they hold (inside them).
84|24| So give them the news of a painful punishment,
84|25| except those who believed and did good works, as they have an unending reward.
85|1| By the sky having the constellations
85|2| and by the promised day
85|3| and by a witness and a witnessed.
85|4| Damn the directors of the fire pit,
85|5| the fire having (plenty of) the fuel,
85|6| when they sat around  it,
85|7| and they were witnesses over what they did to the believers.
85|8| And they only took revenge from them for believing in God the powerful, the praiseworthy.
85|9| The One that the rule of the skies and the earth belongs to Him, and God is a witness over everything.
85|10| Indeed those who persecuted (and tortured) the believing men and the believing women and did not repent, punishment of hell is for them and the burning punishment is for them.
85|11| Indeed those who believed and did good works, for them are gardens which rivers flow through them. That is the great victory.
85|12| Indeed your Master’s assault is severe.
85|13| Indeed He initiates and repeats (the creation),
85|14| and He is the forgiving, the most friendly,
85|15| owner of the glorious throne,
85|16| doer of what He wants.
85|17| Did the story of the armies come to you,
85|18| Pharaoh and the Thamud?
85|19| But those who disbelieved are in a denial.
85|20| And God is surrounding over and above them.
85|21| This is a glorious Quran
85|22| in a guarded (and protected) tablet.
86|1| By the sky and the night-comer (the evening star).
86|2| And do you know what the evening star is?
86|3| It is the sharp bright star.
86|4| Indeed every person has a guardian (watching) over him.
86|5| So the human being should look at what he is created from?
86|6| He is created from an ejected fluid,
86|7| coming out from between the backbone and the ribs.
86|8| Indeed He is capable of his return,
86|9| a day that the secrets are disclosed
86|10| then he has no power and no helper.
86|11| And by the sky that has the returning (rain clouds)
86|12| and by the earth having the crack (for sprouting),
86|13| indeed it (Quran) is a decisive word,
86|14| and it is not a joke.
86|15| Indeed they plot a plot
86|16| and I plan a plan.
86|17| So give the disbelievers time, give them time without rushing.
87|1| Glorify the name of your Master, the highest.
87|2| The One who created, then shaped
87|3| and the One who decreed and guided
87|4| and the One who brought out the pastures
87|5| then He made it dried up and black.
87|6| We are going to read (Quran) to you, and you will not forget
87|7| except what God wants. Indeed He knows the evident and what is hidden.
87|8| And We make you ready for the easier way.
87|9| So remind if the reminder benefits.
87|10| Then anyone who fears, is going to take notice,
87|11| while the most miserable ones avoid it,
87|12| the one who enters (and burns in) the great fire,
87|13| he does not die and he does not live in there.
87|14| Everyone has succeeded who purified (himself),
87|15| and remembered the name of his Master, and prayed.
87|16| No, but you prefer this world's life,
87|17| while the hereafter is better and more lasting.
87|18| Indeed this is in the earlier scriptures,
87|19| scriptures of Abraham and Moses.
88|1| Did the story of the overwhelming come to you?
88|2| On that day (some) faces are humble,
88|3| working hard, exhausted,
88|4| entering (and burning in) a scorching fire,
88|5| they are made to drink from a boiling spring.
88|6| There is no food for them except from a thorny plant,
88|7| that does not nourish and it does not satisfy hunger.
88|8| On that day (other) faces are delightful,
88|9| pleased with their effort
88|10| in an excellent garden,
88|11| they do not hear any useless talk in it,
88|12| a running spring in it,
88|13| raised sofas in it,
88|14| and drinking glasses set in place,
88|15| and pillows arranged in rows,
88|16| and spread out rugs.
88|17| Do they not look at the camel, how it is created?
88|18| And at the sky, how it is raised?
88|19| And at the mountain, how it is set up?
88|20| And at the earth, how it is spread out?
88|21| So remind (them), for you are only to remind.
88|22| You are not an overseer for them.
88|23| But anyone who turns away and disbelieves,
88|24| then God punishes him with the great punishment.
88|25| Indeed their return is to Us,
88|26| then indeed their accounting is on Us.
89|1| By the dawn
89|2| and by the ten nights
89|3| and by the even and the odd
89|4| and by the night when it goes away.
89|5| Is there an oath in that for one who has understanding?
89|6| Did you not see what your Master did with Aad
89|7| (people of) Iram (a city) with the pillars
89|8| the like of which was not created in the lands,
89|9| and Thamud those who carved out the rocks in the valley,
89|10| and Pharaoh having the stakes (pyramids)?
89|11| Those who rebelled in the lands
89|12| and increased the corruption in it,
89|13| so your Master unleashed the whip of punishment on them.
89|14| Indeed your Master is on the watch.
89|15| As for the human being, when his Master tests him and honors him and favors him, then he says: my Master honored me.
89|16| But when his Master tests him and decreases his provisions for him, then he says: my Master dishonored me.
89|17| No way, but you do not respect the orphan,
89|18| and you do not encourage one another about feeding the poor,
89|19| and you eat up the inheritance, eating up altogether,
89|20| and you love the wealth, a great deal of love.
89|21| No way, when the earth is pounded, crushed and leveled,
89|22| and you Master comes, and the angels (come) row by row,
89|23| and on that day hell is brought, on that day the human being takes notice, but what (use) does the notice have for him?
89|24| He says: I wish that I had sent ahead (something) for my (new) life.
89|25| So on that day no one punishes as He punishes,
89|26| and no one ties up as He ties up.
89|27| You the reassured soul,
89|28| return to your Master, pleased (with Him) and pleasing (to Him),
89|29| so you enter among My servants
89|30| and you enter My garden.
90|1| I swear by this land
90|2| and you are a resident of this land
90|3| and by the father and what he fathered
90|4| that We have certainly created the human being in distress.
90|5| Does he think that no one will ever have power over him?
90|6| He says: I wasted a lot of wealth.
90|7| Does he think that no one saw him?
90|8| Did we not make two eyes for him
90|9| and a tongue and two lips
90|10| and We guided him to the two ways?
90|11| But he did not take/attempt the winding mountain road.
90|12| And do you know what the winding mountain road is?
90|13| (It is) freeing a slave,
90|14| or in a day of famine, feeding
90|15| an orphan being related
90|16| or a poor person in ruins (and penniless),
90|17| then being of those who believed and recommend one another to the perseverance (and patience) and recommend one another to kindness.
90|18| They are associates of the right hand (the fortunate).
90|19| And those who disbelieved in Our signs, they are associates of the left hand (the unfortunate),
90|20| and a fire is closed over upon them.
91|1| By the sun and its glow,
91|2| and by the moon when it follows it,
91|3| and by the day when it shows it,
91|4| and by the night when it covers it,
91|5| and by the sky and what built it,
91|6| and the earth and what extended it,
91|7| and by the soul and what shaped it
91|8| and inspired it to its immoralities and its self control,
91|9| (that) anyone who purifies it, has succeeded
91|10| and anyone who corrupts it, has failed.
91|11| Thamud denied with their rebellion.
91|12| When the most nasty of them rose up,
91|13| then God's messenger said to them: (that is) God's female camel and her share of drink.
91|14| Then they denied him and killed her, then their Master fully punished them for their sins and leveled them (to the ground)
91|15| and He was not afraid of its outcome.
92|1| By the night when it covers
92|2| and by the day when it shows
92|3| and by what created the male and the female,
92|4| indeed your efforts are different.
92|5| As for anyone who gives and controls himself
92|6| and confirms the goodness,
92|7| then We are going to get him ready for the easy way.
92|8| And as for anyone who is stingy and supposes he has no need
92|9| and denies the goodness
92|10| then We are going to get him ready for the difficult way, 
92|11| and his wealth will be of no use when he falls (dead).
92|12| Indeed the guidance is Our responsibility.
92|13| And the hereafter and the first (this world) belong to Us.
92|14| So I warn you of a flaming fire,
92|15| no one enters (and burns in) it except the most unfortunate,
92|16| the one who denied and turned away.
92|17| And the more cautious (of God) are going to be kept away from it,
92|18| The one who gives his wealth to be purified.
92|19| And no one has any favor with Him to be rewarded (for it)
92|20| except (anyone who) looks for the attention (and pleasure) of his Master, the highest,
92|21| and he is going to be pleased.
93|1| By the daylight
93|2| and by the night when it quiets,
93|3| (that) your Master did not abandon you and He is not upset.
93|4| And the hereafter is certainly better for you than the first (this life).
93|5| And your Master will certainly give you (enough) so you are pleased.
93|6| Did He not find you an orphan and sheltered you
93|7| and found you a lost one and guided you
93|8| and found you in need and made you needless?
93|9| As for the orphan, do not mistreat them.
93|10| And as for the one who asks (the beggar), do not drive them away.
93|11| And as for the favor of your Master, speak of it.
94|1| Did we not expand your chest for you,
94|2| and  We rid you of your burden,
94|3| that (almost) broke your back,
94|4| and We elevated your reputation for you?
94|5| So with the difficulty (and hardship) there is ease.
94|6| Indeed with the difficulty there is ease.
94|7| So when you are done (with your duties), then work hard (for other duties).
94|8| And be eager for (and be fond of) your Master.
95|1| By the fig and the olive
95|2| and by mount Sinai
95|3| and by this safe land
95|4| (that) We have certainly created the human being in the best form,
95|5| then We returned him to the lowest of low
95|6| except those who believed and did good works, so there is an unending reward for them.
95|7| So what makes you deny the way of life (or the judgment day) after this?
95|8| Is not God the wisest of the judges?
96|1| Read in the name of your Master, the One who created,
96|2| created the human being from a (dangling, clinging, and leach like) blood clot.
96|3| Read and (know that) your Master is the most noble,
96|4| the One who taught by the pen.
96|5| He taught the human being what he did not know. 
96|6| No way, the human being shall certainly rebel
96|7| if he sees himself as having no need.
96|8| Indeed the return is to your Master.
96|9| Did you see the one who forbids
96|10| a servant when he performs mandatory prayer?
96|11| Did you see if he is on the guidance
96|12| or he orders to self control (against unlawful desires and sins)?
96|13| Did you see if he denied and turned away?
96|14| Did he not know that God sees (everything)?
96|15| No way, if he does not stop (this behavior) We shall grab him by the forelock,
96|16| a sinful lying forelock.
96|17| Then he should call on his peers,
96|18| (and) We are going to call on the guards of hell.
96|19| No way, do not obey him, and show humbleness and get close (to God).
97|1| Indeed We sent it (Quran) down in the night of destiny (or the night of power).
97|2| And do you know what the night of destiny is?
97|3| The night of destiny is better than a thousand months.
97|4| The angels and the spirit came down in it, by their Master's permission, (with mandates) for every matter.
97|5| It is peace (and well-being) until the rising of the dawn.
98|1| Those who disbelieved among people of the book and the polytheists were not to disengage (from their ideas) until the clear proof came to them,
98|2| a messenger from God reading purified scriptures,
98|3| with true (and lasting) writings in it.
98|4| And those who were given the book did not become divided until after the clear proof had come to them.
98|5| And they were only ordered to serve God, being sincere to Him in the way of life (religion) as a monotheist, and perform the mandatory prayers and give the mandatory charity. And that is the lasting religion.
98|6| Indeed those who disbelieved among people of the book and the polytheists will be in fire of hell, remaining in there forever. They are worst of the creatures.
98|7| Those who believed and did good works, they are best of the creatures.
98|8| Their reward with their Master is eternal gardens which rivers flow through them, remaining in there forever and ever. God is pleased with them and they are pleased with Him. That is for anyone who fears his Master.
99|1| When the earth is shaken by its earthquake,
99|2| and the earth unloads its heavy loads,
99|3| and the human being says: what is the matter with it?
99|4| On that day it speaks out its stories,
99|5| because your Master revealed to it.
99|6| On that day people come out in separate groups to be shown their works.
99|7| And anyone who does a tiny bit of good sees it,
99|8| and anyone who does a tiny bit of bad sees it.
100|1| By the horses making charge, snorting,
100|2| and the producers of sparks, striking (their horseshoe)
100|3| and the attackers in the morning
100|4| that raise cloud of dust with it, 
100|5| and penetrate to the middle of it (the battle) together,
100|6| indeed the human being is ungrateful to his Master,
100|7| and he is certainly a witness to that,
100|8| and indeed his love for the good things (and wealth) is extreme.
100|9| Does he not know that, when what is in the graves is turned upside down
100|10| and what is in the chests is exposed,
100|11| indeed their Master is well aware of them on that day?
101|1| The pounding disaster.
101|2| What is the pounding disaster?
101|3| And do you know what the pounding disaster is?
101|4| A day when the people become like scattered butterflies
101|5| and the mountains become like fluffed up colored wool.
101|6| As for anyone whose balance (of good deeds) is heavy,
101|7| then he is in a pleasant life.
101|8| And as for  anyone whose balance (of good deeds) is light,
101|9| then his residence is a bottomless pit.
101|10| And you don't even know what it is?
101|11| (It is) a scorching fire.
102|1| The competition for having more distracted you,
102|2| to a point that you visited the graves.
102|3| No way, you will know.
102|4| And once more, no way, you will know.
102|5| No way, if you knew the sure knowledge (you would know that), 
102|6| you shall see the hellfire,
102|7| then you shall see it with the sure eye.
102|8| Then, on that day, you shall be questioned about the pleasures (you had in life).
103|1| By the time (the ages),
103|2| indeed the human being is in loss
103|3| except those who believe and do good works and recommend one another to the truth and recommend one another to the patience (and perseverance).
104|1| Woe to every slanderer and fault-finder.
104|2| The one who piles up wealth and keeps count of it,
104|3| thinking that his wealth (and possession) makes him immortal.
104|4| No way, he shall be thrown into the crushing fire.
104|5| And do you know what the crushing fire is?
104|6| (It is) burning fire of God,
104|7| which rises over (and overtakes) the hearts,
104|8| indeed it closes over them
104|9| in extending columns..
105|1| Did you not see what your Master did to companions of the elephant?
105|2| Did He not make their plot go wrong,
105|3| and sent flocks of bird on them,
105|4| throwing stones of baked clay at them,
105|5| then He made them like chewed up straw?
106|1| For keeping/protection of the Quraish,
106|2| their keeping/protection for the winter and the summer journey,
106|3| so they should serve the Master of this house,
106|4| the One who fed them in hunger and made them safe from fear.
107|1| Did you see the one who denies the religion (or the judgment day)?
107|2| That is the one who pushes the orphan away,
107|3| and does not encourage feeding the poor.
107|4| So woe to those who perform mandatory prayer,
107|5| those who are forgetful of their mandatory prayer,
107|6| those who make a show (and pretend)
107|7| and withhold the small kindnesses.
108|1| Indeed We gave you plenty.
108|2| So perform mandatory prayer and sacrifice for your Master.
108|3| Indeed your hater, he is cut off (and is childless).
109|1| Say: you the disbelievers,
109|2| I do not serve what you serve,
109|3| and you are not servants of what I serve,
109|4| and I am not a servant of what you serve,
109|5| and you are not servants of what I serve,
109|6| your way of life (religion) for you and my way of life for me.
110|1| When God's help and the victory comes,
110|2| and you see the people entering into God's way of life in bunches,
110|3| glorify you Master with His praise and ask His forgiveness. Indeed He is acceptor of repentance.
111|1| May Abu Lahab's both hands perish (or may Abu Lahab's power perish), and it perished.
111|2| His wealth and what he earned was of no use to him.
111|3| He is going to enter (and burn in) a flaming fire,
111|4| and (so is) his wife, carrier of the firewood,
111|5| around her neck is a rope from palm fiber.
112|1| Say: He is the One God,
112|2| God is the eternal and the needless and the needed.
112|3| He did not reproduce, and He was not born.
112|4| and there is no one equal (or comparable) to Him.
113|1| Say: I look for protection of the Master of the morning twilight
113|2| from the harm of whatever He created
113|3| and from the harm of darkness when it comes
113|4| and from the harm of the blowers into the knots (who practices witchcraft)
113|5| and from the harm of an envious when he envies.
114|1| Say: I look for protection of the Master of the people,
114|2| king of the people,
114|3| god of the people,
114|4| from the harm of  the withdrawing tempter (who withdraws at the mention of God),
114|5| the one who tempts in the people's hearts,
114|6| (whether) from the Jinn or the people.

{
    "author": "Ali Bakhtiari Nejad",
    "language": "English"
}