1|1| In the Name of God, The Merciful, The Compassionate. 
1|2| The Praise belongs to God, Lord of the worlds, 
1|3| The Merciful, The Compassionate, 
1|4| One Who is Sovereign of the Day of Judgment. 
1|5| Thee alone we worship and to Thee alone we pray for help. 
1|6| Guide us on the straight path, 
1|7| the path of those to whom Thou wert gracious, not the ones against whom Thou art angry, nor the ones who go astray. 
2|1| Alif L[m M\m. 
2|2| That is the Book—there is no doubt ^in it^, a guidance for the ones who are Godfearing: 
2|3| Those who believe in the unseen and perform the formal prayer and they spend from what We have provided them
2|4| and perform the formal prayer, and they spend out of what We provided them, and those who believe in what was caused to descend to thee, and what was caused to descend before thee, and they are certain of the world to come. 
2|5| Those are on a guidance from their Lord and those, they are the ones who prosper. 
2|6| Truly, as for those who were ungrateful, it is the same to them whether thou hadst warned them or thou hast warned them not. They believe not. 
2|7| God sealed over their hearts and over their inner hearing and a blindfold over their inner sight. And there is a tremendous punishment for them. 
2|8| And among humanity are some who say: We believed in God and in the Last Day, and yet they are not ones who believe. 
2|9| They seek to trick God and those who believed while they deceive none but themselves, but they are not aware. 
2|10| In their hearts is a sickness. Then, God increased them in sickness, and for them is a painful punishment because they had been lying against themselves. 
2|11| And when it was said to them not to make corruption in and on the earth, they said: Truly, we are only ones who make things right. 
2|12| No doubt they, they are the ones who make corruption except they are not aware. 
2|13| And when it was said to them: Believe as humanity believed, they said: Will we believe as the fools believed? No! Truly, they, they are the fools, except they know not. 
2|14| And when they met those who believed, they said: We believed. And when they went privately to their satans, they said: Truly, we are with you. We were only ones who ridicule. 
2|15| God ridicules them and causes them to increase in their defiance, to wander unwilling to see. 
2|16| Those are those who bought fallacy for guidance, so their trade was not bettered nor had they been ones who are truly guided. 
2|17| Their parable is like a parable of those who started a fire. Then, when it illuminated what was around it, God took away their light and left them in shadows where they perceive not. 
2|18| Unwilling to hear, unwilling to speak, unwilling to see, then, they will not return to the way. 
2|19| Or as a cloudburst from heaven in which there are shadows and thunder and lightning. They lay their fingertips in their ears from the thunderbolt, being fearful of death. And God is One Who Encloses the ones who are ungrateful. 
2|20| The lightning almost snatches their sight. When it illuminated for them, they walked in the light. And when it grew dark against them, they stood still. And if God willed, He would have taken away their having the ability to hear and their sight. Truly, God is Powerful over everything. 
2|21| O humanity! Worship your Lord Who created you and those who were before you so that perhaps you will be Godfearing. 
2|22| It is He Who assigned the earth for you as a place of restfulness and the heaven as a canopy. And He caused water to descend from heaven and from it drove out fruit of trees as provision for you. Then, assign not rivals to God while you, you know. 
2|23| And if you had been in doubt about what We sent down to Our servant, then approach with a Chapter of the Quran —the like of it— and call to your witnesses other than God if you had been ones who are sincere. 
2|24| And if you accomplish it not —and you will never accomplish it— then be Godfearing of the fire whose fuel is humanity and rocks, prepared for the ones who are ungrateful. 
2|25| And give good tidings to those who believed and did as the ones in accord with morality, that for them will be Gardens beneath which rivers run. Whenever they were provided from there of its fruit as provision they would say: This is what we were provided before. And they will be brought it —ones that resemble one another— and in it for them will be purified spouses. And they are ones who will dwell in them forever! 
2|26| Truly, God is not ashamed that He propound a parable, even of a gnat or whatever is above it. So as for those who believed, then, they know that it is The Truth from their Lord, but those who were ungrateful, then they will say: What did God mean by this parable? He causes many to go astray by it and He guides many by it. And He causes none to go astray by it, but the ones who disobey— 
2|27| those who break the compact of God after a solemn promise and sever what God commanded that it be joined and make corruption in and on the earth. Those, they are the ones who are losers! 
2|28| How is it you are ungrateful to God? You had been lifeless, then, He gave you life. again, He will cause you to die. Again, He will give you life. And, again, you are returned to Him. 
2|29| It is He Who created for you all that is in and on the earth. Again, He turned His attention to the heaven. Then, He shaped them into seven heavens. And He is Knowing of everything. 
2|30| And when thy Lord said to the angels: Truly, I am assigning on the earth a viceregent. They said: Wilt Thou be One Who Makes on it someone who makes corruption on it and sheds blood, while we glorify Thy praise and sanctify Thee? He said: Truly, I know what you know not! 
2|31| And He taught Adam the names, all of them. Again, He presented them to the angels and said: Communicate to Me the names of these if you had been ones who are sincere. 
2|32| They said: Glory be to Thee! We have no knowledge but what Thou hadst taught us. Truly, Thou, Thou alone art The Knowing, The Wise. 
2|33| He said: O Adam! Communicate to them their names. So then, when he communicated to them their names, He said: Did I not say to you: Truly, I know the unseen of the heavens and the earth, and I know what you show and what you had been keeping back. 
2|34| And mention when We said to the angels: Prostrate yourselves to Adam! They, then, prostrated themselves but Iblis. He refused and grew arrogant. He had been among the ones who are ungrateful. 
2|35| And We said: O Adam! Inhabit the Garden, thou and thy spouse: Eat freely from it both of you wherever you both willed, but come not near this, the tree or you both will be among the ones who are unjust. 
2|36| Then, Satan caused both of them to slide back from there and drove both of them out from that in which they both had been. And We said: Get down some of you as an enemy to some other. And for you on the earth, a time appointed and sustenance for a while. 
2|37| Adam, then, received words from his Lord for He turned to him in forgiveness. Truly, He, He is The Accepter of Repentance, The Compassionate. 
2|38| We said: Get down altogether from it. And whenever guidance approaches you from Me, then, whoever heeded My guidance, then, there will be neither fear in them nor will they feel remorse. 
2|39| But those who were ungrateful and denied Our signs, those will be the Companions of the Fire. They are ones who will dwell in it forever! 
2|40| O Children of Israel! Remember My divine blessing with which I was gracious to you and live up to the compact with Me. I will live up to the compact with you. And have reverence for Me alone. 
2|41| And believe in what I caused to descend, that which establishes as true what is with you. And be not the first one who is ungrateful for it. And exchange not My signs for a little price. And fear Me, God, alone. 
2|42| And confuse not The Truth with falsehood nor keep back The Truth while you know. 
2|43| And perform the formal prayer, and give the purifying alms, and bow down with the ones who bow down. 
2|44| You command humanity to virtuous conduct and forget yourselves while you relate the Book? Will you not, then, be reasonable? 
2|45| And pray for help with patience and formal prayer. And, truly, it is arduous, but for the ones who are humble, 
2|46| those who bear in mind that, truly, they, they will be ones who encounter their Lord and that to Him they will be ones who return. 
2|47| O Children of Israel! Remember My divine blessing with which I was gracious to you, and that I gave advantage to you over the worlds. 
2|48| And be Godfearing of a Day when no soul will give recompense for another soul at all, nor will intercession be accepted from it nor an equivalent be taken from it nor will they be helped. 
2|49| And mention when We delivered you from the people of Pharaoh who cause an affliction to befall you of a dire punishment. They slaughter your children and save alive your women. And in that there is a tremendous trial from your Lord. 
2|50| And mention when We separated the sea for you, and We rescued you, and We drowned the people of Pharaoh while you look on. 
2|51| And mention when We appointed for Moses forty nights. Again, you took the calf to yourselves after him and you were ones who are unjust. 
2|52| Again, We pardoned you after that, so that perhaps you will give thanks. 
2|53| And mention when We gave Moses the Book, and the Criterion between right and wrong, so that perhaps you will be truly guided. 
2|54| And mention when Moses said to his folk: O my folk! Truly, you did wrong to yourselves by your taking the calf to yourselves to worship, so repent to One Who is your Fashioner and kill yourselves. That would be better for you with One Who is your Fashioner. Then He will turn to you in forgiveness. Truly, He, He is The Accepter of Repentance, The Compassionate. 
2|55| And mention when you said: O Moses! We will never believe thee until we see God publicly. So the thunderbolt took you while you look on. 
2|56| Again, We will raise you up after your death so that perhaps you will give thanks. 
2|57| And We shaded over you cloud shadows. We caused to descend to you the manna and the quails. Eat of what is good that We provided you. And they did not wrong Us. Rather, they had been doing wrong to themselves. 
2|58| And mention when We said: Enter this town, then, eat freely from it whatever you willed, and enter the door as one who prostrates oneself and say: Unburden us of sin! We will forgive you your transgressions. And We will increase the ones who are doers of good. 
2|59| Then, those who did wrong substituted another saying —other than what was said to them— so We caused to descend on those who did wrong wrath from heaven, because they had been disobeying. 
2|60| And mention when Moses asked for water for his folk. Then, We said: Strike the rock with thy staff. Then, twelve springs ran out from it. Every clan knew their drinking place. Eat and drink from the provision of God, and do no mischief in and on the earth as ones who make corruption. 
2|61| And mention when you said: O Moses! We will never endure patiently with one kind of food, so call to thy Lord for us to drive out for us of what the earth is bringing forth of its green herbs and its cucumbers and its garlic and its lentils and its onions. Moses said: Would you have in exchange what is lesser for what is higher? Get down to a settled country. Then, truly for you is what you asked for. And stamped on them were abasement and wretchedness. And they drew the burden of anger from God. That was because they had been ungrateful for the signs of God, and kill the Prophets without right. That, because they rebelled, and they had been exceeding the limits. 
2|62| Truly, those who believed, and those who became Jews, and the Christians and the Sabeans, whoever believed in God and the Last Day and did as one in accord with morality, then, for them, their compensation is with their Lord. And there will be neither fear in them nor will they feel remorse. 
2|63| And when We took your solemn promise, and We exalted the mount above you: Take what We gave you with firmness, and remember what is in it, so that perhaps you will be Godfearing. 
2|64| Again, after that you turned away, and if it were not for the grace of God on you, and His mercy certainly, you would have been among the ones who are losers. 
2|65| And, certainly, you knew those who exceeded the limits among you on the Sabbath, to whom We said: Be you apes, ones who are driven away. 
2|66| Then, We made this an exemplary punishment for the former of them, and of succeeding generations, and an admonishment for the ones who are Godfearing. 
2|67| And mention when Moses said to his folk: Truly, God commands that you sacrifice a cow. They said: Hast thou taken us to thyself in mockery? He said: I take refuge with God that I be among the ones who are ignorant! 
2|68| They said: Call to thy Lord for us to make manifest to us what she is! Moses said: Truly, He says: She should be a cow that is neither old nor virgin —middle-aged between them— so accomplish what you are commanded. 
2|69| They said: Call to thy Lord for us to make manifest to us what hue she is. He said: Truly, He says: She is a saffron-colored cow —one that is bright in hue— that makes the ones who look on her joyous. 
2|70| They said: Call to thy Lord for us to make manifest to us what she is. Truly, cows resembled one another to us, and, truly, if God willed we would be ones who are truly guided. 
2|71| He said: Truly, He says she is a cow neither broken to plow the earth, nor to draw water for cultivation, that which is to be handed over without blemish on her. They said: Now thou hadst brought about The Truth. So they sacrificed her, and they almost accomplish it not. 
2|72| And mention when you killed a soul, then, you put up an argument over it. And God was One Who Drives Out what you had been keeping back. 
2|73| So We said: Turn him away with some of it! Thus, God gives life to the dead, and He causes you to see His signs, so that perhaps you will be reasonable. 
2|74| Again, after that, your hearts became hard, so that they were as rocks or harder in hardness. And, truly, from the rocks there are some that the rivers gush forth from it. And, truly, there are some that split open so water goes forth from it. And, truly, some that from it get down from dreading God. And God is not One Who is Heedless of what you do. 
2|75| Are you desirous that they believe in you? Surely, a group of people among them had been hearing the assertion of God. Yet again, they tamper with it after they were reasonable, and they know? 
2|76| And when they met those who believed, they said: We believed. And when they went privately—some of them with some others—they said: Will you divulge to them what God opened to you, so that they argue with you about it before your Lord? Will you not, then, be reasonable? 
2|77| Know they not that God knows what they keep secret, and what they speak openly. 
2|78| And among them are the unlettered who know nothing of the Book but fantasy. And, truly, they but surmise. 
2|79| And woe to those who write down the Book with their own hands. Again, they say: This is from God. Certainly, they exchange it for a little price. Then, woe to them for what their hands wrote down. And woe to them for what they earn! 
2|80| And they said: The fire will never touch us, but for numbered days. Say: Took you to yourselves a compact from God? If so, God never breaks His compact; or say you about God what you know not? 
2|81| Yea! Whoever earned an evil deed and is enclosed by his transgression, then those will be the Companions of the Fire. They are ones who will dwell in it forever! 
2|82| And those who believed and did as the ones in accord with morality, those will be the Companions of the Garden. They, ones who will dwell in it forever! 
2|83| And mention when We took a solemn promise from the Children of Israel not to worship other than God, and goodness to the ones who are your parents and to the possessors of kinship and the orphans and the needy. And speak with kindness to humanity. And perform the formal prayer, and give the purifying alms. Again, you turned away but a few among you. You are ones who turn aside. 
2|84| And mention when We took your solemn promise: You will not shed your blood, nor drive yourselves out from your abodes. Again, you were in accord and you, you bear witness. 
2|85| Again, you are these—killing yourselves, and driving out a group of people among you from their abodes, to support one another against them in sin and deep seated dislike. And if they approach you as prisoners of war, you redeem them, although expelling them is that which is forbidden to you. Then, believe you in some of the Book, and are ungrateful for some? Then, what will be the recompense of whoever commits that among you, but degradation in this present life? And on the Day of Resurrection, they will be returned to the hardest punishment. And God is not One Who is Heedless of what you do. 
2|86| Those are those who bought this present life for the world to come, so the punishment on them will not be lightened, nor will they be helped. 
2|87| And, certainly, We gave Moses the Book and We sent Messengers following after him. And We gave Jesus son of Mary the clear portents, and confirmed him with the hallowed Spirit. Is it that whenever a Messenger drew near you with what you yourselves yearn not for, you grew arrogant, and you denied a group of people, and you kill a group of people? 
2|88| And they said: Our hearts are encased! Nay! God cursed them for their ingratitude, so little is what they believe! 
2|89| Mention when a Book from God drew near them, that which establishes as true what was with them—and before that they had been asking for victory over those who were ungrateful—so when drew near them what they recognized, they were ungrateful for it. Then, the curse of God is on the ones who are ungrateful! 
2|90| Miserable was that for which they sold out themselves for it, that they are ungrateful for what God caused to descend, resenting that God sends down of His grace on whom He wills of His servants. They drew the burden of anger on anger. And for the ones who are ungrateful, there is a despised punishment. 
2|91| And when it was said to them to believe in what God caused to descend, they said: We believe in what was caused to descend to us. And they are ungrateful for what is beyond it, while it is The Truth, that which establishes as true what is with them. Say: Why, then, kill you the Prophets of God before if you had been ones who believe? 
2|92| And, certainly, Moses drew near you with the clear portents. Again, you took the calf to yourselves after him. And you are ones who are unjust. 
2|93| And mention when We took your solemn promise, and We exalted the mount above you: Take what We gave you with firmness and hear. They said: We heard and we rebelled, and they were steeped with love for the calf in their hearts because of their ingratitude. Say: Miserable was what commands you to it of your belief if you had been ones who believe. 
2|94| Say: If the Last Abode for you had been with God —that which is exclusively for you— excluding others of humanity— then, covet death if you had been ones who are sincere. 
2|95| And they never covet it ever because of what their hands put forward, and God is Knowing of the ones who are unjust. 
2|96| And, certainly, thou wilt find them to be eager among humanity for this life, even of those who ascribed partners with God. Each one of them wishes that he be given a long life of a thousand years, yet he still would not be one who is drawn away from the punishment, even if he be given a long life, and God is Seeing of what they do. 
2|97| Say: Whoever had been an enemy of Gabriel knows, then, truly, it was sent down through him to thy heart with the permission of God, that which establishes as true what was before it, and as a guidance and good tidings for the ones who believe. 
2|98| Whoever had been an enemy of God and His angels, and His Messengers and Gabriel and Michael, then, truly, God is an enemy of the ones who are ungrateful. 
2|99| And, certainly, We caused to descend to thee signs, clear portents. And none are ungrateful for them, but the ones who disobey. 
2|100| Is it not that whenever they made a contract—a compact— a group of people among them repudiated it? Nay! Most of them believe not. 
2|101| And when a Messenger drew near them from God—one who establishes as true what was with them— a group of people repudiated among those who were given the Book, the Book of God—behind their backs as if they had not been knowing that it was God’s Book. 
2|102| And they followed what the satans recount during the dominion of Solomon. And Solomon was not ungrateful, except the satans were ungrateful. They teach humanity sorcery, and what was caused to descend to the two angels at Babylon—Harut and Marut. But neither of these two teach anyone unless they say: We are only a test, so be not ungrateful. And they learn from these two that by it they separate and divide between a man and his spouse. And they were not ones who injured anyone with it, but by the permission of God. And they learn what hurts them and profits them not. And, certainly, they knew that whoever bought it, for him in the world to come was not any apportionment. And miserable was that for which they sold themselves. Would that they had been knowing! 
2|103| And if they believed and were Godfearing, certainly, their place of spiritual reward from God was better. Would that they had been knowing! 
2|104| O those who believed! Say not: Look at us, but say: Wait for us patiently and hear. And for the ones who are ungrateful, there is a painful punishment. 
2|105| Neither wish those who were ungrateful from among the People of the Book, nor the ones who are polytheists that any good be sent down to you from your Lord. And God singles out for His mercy whom He wills. And God is Possessor of the Sublime Grace. 
2|106| For whatever sign We nullify or cause it to be forgotten, We bring better than it, or similar to it. Hast thou not known that God is Powerful over everything? 
2|107| Hast thou not known that God, to Him is the dominion of the heavens and the earth, and not for you other than God is there either a protector or a helper? 
2|108| Or want you that you ask your Messenger as Moses was asked before? And whoever takes disbelief in exchange for belief, then, surely, he went astray from the right way. 
2|109| Many of the People of the Book wished that after your belief they return you to being one who is ungrateful out of jealousy within themselves even after The Truth became clear to them. So pardon and overlook them until God brings His command. Truly, God is Powerful over everything. 
2|110| And perform the formal prayer and give the purifying alms. And whatever good you put forward for yourselves, you will find it with God. Truly, God is Seeing of what you do. 
2|111| And they said: None will enter the Garden, but ones who had been Jews or Christians. That is their own fantasies. Say: Prepare your proof if you had been ones who are sincere. 
2|112| Yea! Whoever submitted his face to God, and he is one who is a doer of good, then, for him his compensation is with his Lord. And there will be neither fear in them, nor will they feel remorse. 
2|113| And the Jews said: The Christians are not based on anything. And the Christians said: The Jews are not based on anything, although they both recount the Book. Thus, said those who know not a thing like their saying. So God will give judgment between them on the Day of Resurrection about what they had been at variance in it. 
2|114| And who does greater wrong than those who prevented access to the places of prostration to God so that His Name not be remembered in them, and endeavored for their devastation? It had not been for those to enter them, but as ones who are fearful. For them is degradation in the present, and for them is a tremendous punishment in the world to come. 
2|115| And to God belongs the East and the West. So wherever you turn to, then, again, there is the Countenance of God. Truly, God is One Who is Extensive, Knowing. 
2|116| And they said: God took to Himself a son. Glory be to Him! Nay! To Him belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth. All are ones who are morally obligated to Him, 
2|117| Beginner of the heavens and the earth and when He decreed a command, then, truly, He says to it: Be! Then, it is! 
2|118| And those who know not said: Why does God not speak to us or a sign approach us? Thus, said those who were before them like their saying.• Their hearts resembled one another. Surely, We made manifest the signs for a folk who are certain. 
2|119| Truly, We sent thee with The Truth as a bearer of good tidings and as a warner. And thou wilt not be asked about the Companions of Hellfire. 
2|120| The Jews will never be well-pleased with thee, nor the Christians until thou hast followed their creed. Say: Truly, guidance of God. It is the guidance. And if thou hadst followed their desires after what drew near thee of the knowledge, there is not for thee from God either a protector or a helper. 
2|121| Those to whom We gave the Book recount it with a true recounting. Those believe in it, and whoever is ungrateful for it, then, those, they are the ones who are losers. 
2|122| O Children of Israel! Remember My divine blessing with which I was gracious to you, and that I gave you an advantage over the worlds. 
2|123| And be Godfearing of a Day when no soul will give recompense for another soul at all, nor will the equivalent be accepted from it, nor will intercession profit it , nor will they be helped. 
2|124| And mention when his Lord tested Abraham with words; then, he fulfilled them. God said: Truly, I am One Who Makes thee a leader for humanity. He said: And of my offspring? He said: Attain not My compact the ones who are unjust. 
2|125| And mention when We made the House a place of spiritual reward for humanity and a place of sanctuary: And take the Station of Abraham to yourselves as a place of prayer. And We made a compact with Abraham, and Ishmael saying that: Purify My House for the ones who circumambulate it, and the ones who cleave to it, and the ones who bow down, and the ones who prostrate themselves. 
2|126| And mention when Abraham said: My Lord! Make this a safe land, and provide its people with fruits, whomever of them believed in God and the Last Day. God said: And whoever is ungrateful, I will give him enjoyment for a while. Again, I will compel him to the punishment of the fire. And miserable will be the Homecoming! 
2|127| And mention when Abraham elevates the foundations of the House with Ishmael saying: Our Lord! Receive it from us. Truly, Thou, Thou alone art The Hearing, The Knowing. 
2|128| Our Lord! And make us ones who submit to Thee, and, of our offspring, a community of ones who submit to Thee. And cause us to see our devotional acts, and turn to us in forgiveness. Truly, Thou, Thou alone art The Accepter of Repentance, The Compassionate. 
2|129| Our Lord! And raise Thou up, then, in the midst of them, a Messenger from among them who will recount to them Thy signs and teach them the Book, and wisdom and make them pure. Truly, Thou, Thou alone art The Almighty, The Wise. 
2|130| And who shrinks from the creed of Abraham, but he who fooled himself? And, certainly, We favored him in the present. And, truly, in the world to come he will be among the ones in accord with morality. 
2|131| When his Lord said to him: Submit! He said: I submitted to the Lord of the worlds. 
2|132| And Abraham charged his children to it, and Jacob: O my children! Truly, God favored the way of life for you. Then, be not overtaken by death but you be ones who submit to the One God. 
2|133| Or had you been witnesses when death attended Jacob when he said to his children: How will you worship after me? They said: We will worship thy God and the God of thy fathers—Abraham and Ishmael and Isaac—One God. And we are ones who submit to Him. 
2|134| That was, surely, a community that passed away. For them is what they earned, and for you is what you earned and you will not be asked about what they had been doing. 
2|135| And they said: Be you ones who are Jews or Christians, you will be truly guided. Say thou: Nay! We follow the creed of Abraham a monotheist. And he had not been of the ones who are polytheists. 
2|136| Say: We believed in God and what was caused to descend to us, and what was caused to descend to Abraham and Ishmael and Isaac and Jacob and the Tribes and whatever was given Moses and Jesus, and whatever was given to the Prophets from their Lord. We separate and divide not between anyone of them. And we are ones who submit to Him. 
2|137| So if they believed the like of what you believed in it, then, surely, they were truly guided. And if they turned away, then, they are not but in breach. So God suffices for you against them. And He is The Hearing, The Knowing. 
2|138| Life’s color is from God. And who is fairer at coloring than God? And we are ones who worship Him. 
2|139| Say: Argue you with us about God? And He is our Lord and your Lord. And to us are our actions, and to you are your actions. And we are to Him ones who are sincere and devoted. 
2|140| Or say you about Abraham and Ishmael and Isaac and Jacob and the Tribes had been ones who became Jews or were Christians? Say: Are you greater in knowledge or God? And who does greater wrong than he who had been keeping back testimony from God that is with him, and God is not One Who is Heedless of what you do. 
2|141| That is a community that surely passed away; for it is what it earned and for you is what you earned and you will not be asked about what they had been doing. 
2|142| The fools among humanity say: What turned them from their direction of formal prayer to which they had been towards? Say: To God belongs the East and the West. He guides whom He wills to a straight path. 
2|143| And, thus, We made you a middle community that you be witnesses to humanity, and that the Messenger be a witness to you. And We made not the direction of the formal prayer which thou hadst been towards but that We make evident whoever follows the Messenger from him who turns about on his two heels. And, truly, it had been grave, but for those whom God guided. And God had not been wasting your belief. Truly, God is Gentle toward humanity, Compassionate. 
2|144| Surely, We see the going to and fro of thy face toward heaven. Then, We will turn thee to a direction of formal prayer that thou wilt be well pleased with it. Then, turn thy face to the direction of the Masjid al-Haram. And wherever you had been, turn your faces to its direction. And, truly, those who were given the Book know that it is The Truth from their Lord, and God is not One Who is Heedless of what they do. 
2|145| And even if thou wert to bring to those who were given the Book every sign, they would not heed thy direction of formal prayer. Nor art thou one who heeds their direction of formal prayer. Nor are some of them ones who heed the direction of the other’s formal prayer. And if thou hadst followed their desires after the knowledge brought about to thee, then, truly, thou wouldst be among the ones who are unjust. 
2|146| Those to whom We gave the Book recognize it as they recognize their children, while, truly, a group of people among them keep back The Truth while they know 
2|147| it is The Truth from thy Lord. So be thou not among the ones who contest. 
2|148| And everyone has a direction to that which he turns. Be forward, then, in good deeds. Wherever you be, God will bring you altogether for the Judgment. Truly, God is Powerful over everything. 
2|149| And from wherever thou hadst gone forth, then, turn thy face in the direction of the Masjid al-Haram. And, truly, this is The Truth from thy Lord, and God is not One Who is Heedless of what you do. 
2|150| And from wherever thou hadst gone forth, then, turn thy face to the direction of the Masjid al-Haram. And wherever you had been, then, turn your faces to the direction of it so that there be no disputation from humanity against you, but from those of them who did wrong. Dread them not, then, but dread Me. And I fulfill My divine blessing on you—so that perhaps you will be truly guided— 
2|151| as We sent to you a Messenger from among you who recounts Our signs to you, and makes you pure, and teaches you the Book and wisdom, and teaches you what you be knowing not. 
2|152| So remember Me and I will remember you. And give thanks to Me, and be not ungrateful! 
2|153| O those who believed! Pray for help with patience and formal prayer. Truly, God is with the ones who remain steadfast. 
2|154| And say not about those who are slain in the way of God: They are lifeless. Nay! They are living, except you are not aware. 
2|155| We will, certainly, try you with something of fear and hunger and diminution of wealth and lives and fruits, and give good tidings to the ones who remain steadfast, 
2|156| those who, when an affliction lit on them, they said: Truly, we belong to God and, truly, we are ones who return to Him. 
2|157| Those, blessings will be sent on them from their Lord and mercy. And those, they are the ones who are truly guided. 
2|158| Truly, Safa and Marwa are among the Waymarks of God, so whoever made the pilgrimage to Makkah to the House or visited the Kabah, then, there is no blame on him that he circumambulates between the two. And whoever volunteered good, then, truly, God is One Who is Responsive, Knowing. 
2|159| Truly, those who keep back what We caused to descend of the clear portents and the guidance, after We made it manifest to humanity in the Book—those, God curses them and the ones who curse, curse them. 
2|160| But those who repented, and made things right, and made things manifest, then, those—I will turn to them in forgiveness. And I am The Accepter of Repentance, The Compassionate. 
2|161| Truly, those who were ungrateful, and they died and they were ones who are ungrateful, those, on them is a curse of God, and the angels and humanity, one and all. 
2|162| They are ones who will dwell in it forever. The punishment will not be lightened for them nor will they be given respite. 
2|163| And your God is One God. There is no god but He, The Merciful, The Compassionate. 
2|164| Truly, in the creation of the heavens and the earth and the alteration of the nighttime and the daytime and the boats that run on the sea with what profits humanity, and what God caused to descend from heaven of water, and gave life to the earth after its death, and disseminated on it all moving creatures, and diversified the winds and the clouds, ones caused to be subservient between heaven and earth, are the signs for a folk who are reasonable. 
2|165| Yet there are among humanity some who take to themselves rivals besides God. They love them like they should cherish God. And those who believed are stauncher in cherishing God. And if only those who did wrong would consider when they will see the punishment that all strength belongs to God, and that God is Severe in punishment. 
2|166| When they will clear themselves—those who were followed from those who followed them—and they will see the punishment, all cords will be cut asunder from them. 
2|167| Those who were followed said: If there be a return again for us, then, we would clear ourselves from them as they cleared themselves from us. Thus, God will cause them to see their actions with regret for them, and they will never be ones who go forth from the fire. 
2|168| O humanity! Eat of what is in and on the earth—lawful, wholesome—and follow not the steps of the Satan. Truly, he is a clear enemy to you. 
2|169| Truly, he commands you to evil and depravity, and that you say about God what you know not. 
2|170| And when it was said to them: Follow what God caused to descend. They said: Nay! We will follow whatever we discovered our fathers were following on it —even though their fathers had been not at all reasonable—nor are they truly guided. 
2|171| And the parable of those who were ungrateful is like the parable of those who shout to what hears not, but a crying out and pleading yet those to which they call out to are deaf, dumb and blind, so they are not reasonable. 
2|172| O those who believed! Eat of what is good that We provided you and give thanks to God if it had been He alone whom you worship. 
2|173| Truly, He forbade carrion for you and blood and the flesh of swine and what was hallowed to any other than God, but whoever was driven by necessity, without being one who is willfully disobedient, and not one who turns away, then, it is not a sin for him. Truly, God is Forgiving, Compassionate. 
2|174| Truly, those who keep back what God caused of the Book to descend, and exchange it for a little price, those, they consume not into their bellies but fire. God will not speak to them on the Day of Resurrection nor will He make them pure. And for them will be a painful punishment. 
2|175| Those are those who bought fallacy for guidance and punishment for forgiveness. So how they are ones who remain steadfast for the fire! 
2|176| That is because God sent down the Book with The Truth and, truly, those who were at variance regarding the Book are in a wide breach. 
2|177| It is not virtuous conduct that you turn your faces towards the East or the West. Rather, virtuous conduct consists of: Whoever believed in God and the Last Day and the angels and the Book and the Prophets. And whoever gave wealth out of cherishing Him to the possessors of kinship and to the orphans and to the needy and to the traveler of the way and to the one who begs and the freeing of a bondsperson, and whoever performed the formal prayer, and gave the purifying alms, and the ones who live up to their compact when they made a contract, and the ones who remain steadfast in desolation and tribulation and at the time of danger, those are those who were sincere and those, they are the ones who are Godfearing! 
2|178| O those who believed! Reciprocation was prescribed for you for the slain: the freeman for the freeman and the servant for the servant and the female for the female. But whoever was forgiven a thing by his brother, the pursuing be as one who is honorable, and the remuneration be with kindness. That is a lightening from your Lord, and a mercy. And he who exceeded the limits after that, then, for him is a painful punishment. 
2|179| And for you in reciprocation there is the saving of life, O those imbued with intuition, so that perhaps you will be Godfearing. 
2|180| It is prescribed for you when death attended anyone of you if one left goods, to bequeath to the ones who are your parents and the nearest kin as the one who is honorable, an obligation for the ones who are Godfearing. 
2|181| Then, whoever substituted it after he heard it, truly, the sin of it is only on those who substitute it. Truly, God is Hearing, Knowing. 
2|182| Then, whoever feared from one who makes a testament, a swerving from the right path or sin, and, then, made things right between them, there is no sin on him. Truly, God is Forgiving, Compassionate. 
2|183| O those who believed! Formal fasting was prescribed for you as it was prescribed for those who were before you so that perhaps you will be Godfearing. 
2|184| Fasting is prescribed for numbered days. Then, whoever among you had been sick or on a journey, then, a period of other days. And for those who cannot fast is a redemption of food for the needy. And whoever volunteered good, it is better for him. And that you formally fast is better for you if you had been knowing. 
2|185| The month of Ramadan is that in which the Quran was caused to descend—a guidance for humanity—and clear portents of the guidance, and the Criterion between right and wrong. So whoever of you bore witness to the month, then, formal fasting, and whoever had been sick or on a journey, then, a period of other days. God wants ease for you, and wants not hardship for you, so that you perfect the period and that you magnify God because He guided you so that perhaps you will give thanks. 
2|186| And when My servants asked thee about Me, then, truly, I am near. I answer the call of one who calls when he will call to Me. So let them respond to Me and let them believe in Me, so that perhaps they will be on the right way. 
2|187| It is permitted for you on the nights of formal fasting to have sexual intercourse with your wives. They (f) are a garment for you and you are a garment for them (f). God knew that you had been dishonest to yourselves so He turned to you in forgiveness and pardoned you. So now lie with them (f) and look for what God prescribed for you. And eat and drink until the white thread becomes clear to you from the black thread at dawn. Again, fulfill the formal fasting until night. And lie not with them (f) when you are ones who cleave to the places of prostration. These are the ordinances of God. Then, come not near them. Thus, God makes His signs manifest to humanity so that perhaps they will be Godfearing. 
2|188| And consume not your wealth between yourselves in falsehood, nor let it down in bribes to the ones who judge so that you consume a group of people’s wealth among humanity in sin while you know. 
2|189| They ask thee about the new moons. Say: They are appointed times for humanity, and the pilgrimage to Makkah. It is not virtuous conduct that you approach houses from the back. Rather, virtuous conduct was to be Godfearing, and approach houses from their front doors. And be Godfearing of God so that perhaps you will prosper. 
2|190| And fight in the Way of God those who fight you, but exceed not the limits. Truly, God loves not the ones who exceed the limits. 
2|191| And kill them wherever you came upon them, and drive them out from wherever they drove you out. And persecution is more grave than killing. And fight them not near the Masjid al-Haram unless they fight you in it. But if they fought you, then kill them. Thus, this is the recompense for the ones who are ungrateful. 
2|192| Then, if they refrained themselves, then, truly, God is Forgiving, Compassionate. 
2|193| And fight them until there be no persecution, and the way of life be for God. Then, if they refrained themselves, then, there is to be no deep seated dislike, but against the ones who are unjust. Fight aggression 
2|194| committed in the Sacred Month, in the Sacred Month and so reciprocation for all sacred things. So whoever exceeded the limits against you, exceed you the limits against him likewise as he exceeded the limits against you? Be Godfearing of God and know that God is with the ones who are Godfearing. 
2|195| And spend in the way of God, and cast not yourselves by your own hands into deprivation by fighting. ^And do good^. Truly, God loves the ones who are doers of good. 
2|196| And fulfill the pilgrimage to Makkah, and the visit for God. And if you were restrained, then, whatever was feasible of sacrificial gifts. And shave not your heads until the sacrificial gift reaches its place of sacrifice. Then, whoever had been sick among you, or has an injury of his head, then, a redemption of formal fasting, or charity or a ritual sacrifice. And when you were safe, then, whoever took joy in the visit and the pilgrimage to Makkah then whatever was feasible of a sacrificial gift. Then, whoever finds not the means, then, formal fasting for three days during the pilgrimage to Makkah and seven when you returned, that is ten completely. That would be for he whose people are not ones who are present at the Masjid al-Haram. And be Godfearing of God and know that God is Severe in repayment. 
2|197| The pilgrimage to Makkah is in known months. And whoever undertook the duty of pilgrimage to Makkah in them, then, there is no sexual intercourse nor disobedience nor dispute during the pilgrimage to Makkah. And whatever good you accomplish, God knows it. And take provision. Then, truly, the best ration is God-consciousness. So be Godfearing, O those imbued with intuition! 
2|198| There is no blame on you that you be looking for grace from your Lord. And when you pressed on from Arafat, then remember God at the Sacred Monument. And remember Him as He guided you, although you had been before this, certainly, of the ones who go astray. 
2|199| Again, press on from where humanity pressed on, and ask God for forgiveness. Truly, God is Forgiving, Compassionate. 
2|200| And when you satisfied your devotional acts, then, remember God like your remembrance of your fathers, or a stauncher remembrance. And among humanity are some who say: Our Lord! Give to us in the present! And for him, there is no apportionment in the world to come! 
2|201| And among them are some who say: Our Lord! Give us benevolence in the present and benevolence in the world to come and protect us from the punishment of the fire! 
2|202| Those, for them is a share of what they earned. And God is Swift at reckoning. 
2|203| And remember God during numbered days. So whoever hastened on in two days, then, there is no sin on him. And whoever remained behind, then, there is no sin on him. And for whoever was Godfearing, be Godfearing of God. And know that to Him you will be assembled. 
2|204| And among humanity is one whose sayings impress thee about this present life and he calls to God to witness what is in his heart while he is most stubborn in altercation. 
2|205| And when he turned away, he hastened about the earth so that he makes corruption in and on it, and he causes the cultivation and stock to perish, but God loves not corruption. 
2|206| And when it was said to him: Be Godfearing of God! Vainglory took him to sin. So hell is enough for him! And, certainly, it will be a miserable Final Place! 
2|207| And among humanity is he who sells himself looking for the goodwill of God, and God is Gentle with His servants. 
2|208| O those who believed! Enter into peacefulness collectively and follow not the steps of Satan. Truly, he is a clear enemy to you. 
2|209| But if you slipped after drew near you the clear portents, then, know that God is Almighty, Wise. 
2|210| So do they look on but that God approach them in the overshadowing of cloud shadows? And the angels? The command would be decided. And commands are returned to God. 
2|211| Ask the Children of Israel how many a sign, a clear portent, We gave them. And whoever substitutes the divine blessing of God after it drew near him, then, truly, God is Severe in repayment. 
2|212| Made to appear pleasing to those who were ungrateful I this present life, and they deride those who believed.• But those who were Godfearing will be above them on the Day of Resurrection. And God provides for whomever He wills without reckoning. 
2|213| Humanity had been of one community. Then, God raised up the Prophets, ones who give good tidings and ones who warn. And with them He caused the Book to descend with The Truth to give judgment among humanity about what they were at variance in it. None were at variance in it but those who were given it after the clear portents drew near them because of their insolence to one another. Then, God guided those who believed to The Truth—about what they were at variance in it— with His permission. And God guides whom He wills to a straight path. 
2|214| Or assumed you that you would enter the Garden while approaches you not the likeness of those who passed away before you? Desolation and tribulation afflicted them. And they are so convulsed that even the Messenger says, and those who believed with him: When will there be help from God? No doubt, truly, the help of God is Near. 
2|215| They ask thee what they should spend. Say: Whatever you spent for good is for the ones who are your parents and the nearest kin and the orphans and the needy and the traveler of the way. And whatever good you accomplish, then, truly, God is Knowing of it. 
2|216| Fighting was prescribed for you although it is disliked by you. And perhaps you dislike a thing and it is good for you. And perhaps you love a thing, and it is worse for you. And God knows and, truly, you know not. 
2|217| They ask thee about the Sacred Month and fighting in it. Say: Fighting in it is deplorable and barring from the way of God and ingratitude to Him. And to bar from the Masjid al-Haram, and expelling people from it are more deplorable with God. And persecution is more deplorable than killing. And they cease not to fight you until they repel you from your way of life, if they are able. And whoever of you goes back on his way of life, then, dies while he is one who is ungrateful, those, their actions were fruitless in the present and in the world to come. And those will be the Companions of the Fire. They are ones who will dwell in it forever. 
2|218| Truly, those who believed and those who emigrated and struggled in the way of God, those hope for the mercy of God. And God is Forgiving, Compassionate. 
2|219| They ask thee about intoxicants and gambling. Say: In both of them there is deplorable sin and profits for humanity. And their sin is more deplorable than what is profitable. And they ask thee how much they should spend. Say: The extra. Thus, God makes manifest His signs to you so that perhaps you will reflect 
2|220| on the present and the world to come. And they ask thee about orphans. Say: Making things right for them is better. And if you intermix with them, then they are your brothers/sisters. God knows the one who makes corruption from the one who makes things right. And if God willed, He would have overburdened you. Truly, God is Almighty, Wise. 
2|221| Marry not ones who are female polytheists until they believe. The one who is a believing, female bond servant is better than the one who is a female polytheist even if she impressed you and wed not the ones who are male polytheists until they believe. And one who is a believing, male bond servant is better than the one who is a male polytheist even if he impressed you. Those call you to the fire while God calls you to the Garden and to forgiveness with His permission. And He makes manifest His signs to humanity so that perhaps they will recollect. 
2|222| They ask thee about menstruation. Say: It is an impurity, so withdraw from your wives during menstruation. Come not near them (f) until they cleanse themselves. And then when they (f) cleansed themselves, approach them (f) as God commanded you. Truly, God loves the contrite and He loves the ones who cleanse themselves. 
2|223| Your wives are a place of cultivation for you, so approach your cultivation whenever you willed and put forward for yourselves. And be Godfearing of God. And know that you will be one who encounters Him. And give thou good tidings to the ones who believe. 
2|224| And make God not an obstacle with your sworn oaths to your being good, and being Godfearing, and making things right among humanity. And God is Hearing, Knowing. 
2|225| God will not take you to task for idle talk in your sworn oaths. Rather, He will take you to task for what your hearts earned. And God is Forgiving, Forbearing. 
2|226| For those who vow abstinence from their wives, await four months. Then, if they changed their minds, then, truly, God is Forgiving, Compassionate. 
2|227| And if they resolved on setting them (f) free, then, truly, God is Hearing, Knowing. 
2|228| And the women who are to be divorced will await by themselves three menstrual periods. And it is not lawful for them (f) that they (f) keep back what God created in their (f) wombs, if they (f) had been believing in God, and the Last Day. Their husbands have better right to come back during that period if they (m) wanted to make things right. For the rights of them (f) in regard to their husbands is the like of rights of their (f) husbands in regard to them (f), as one who is honorable. And men have a degree over them (f). And God is Almighty, Wise. 
2|229| Setting free is said two times: Then, hold fast to them (f) as one who is honorable or setting them (f) free with kindness. And it is not lawful for you that you take anything of what you gave them (f) unless they both fear that they both will not perform the ordinances of God. And if you feared that they both will not perform the ordinances of God, then, there is no blame on either of them in what she offered as redemption for that. These are the ordinances of God, so exceed not the limits. And whoever violates the ordinances of God, then, those, they are the ones who are unjust. 
2|230| And if he divorced her finally, then, she is not lawful to him after that until she marries a spouse other than him. Then, if that husband divorced her irrevocably, there is no blame on either of them if they return to one another if both of them thought that they will perform within the ordinances of God, and these are the ordinances of God. He makes them manifest for a folk who know. 
2|231| And when you divorced wives, and they (f) reached their (f) term, then, hold them (f) back as one who is honorable or set them (f) free as one who is honorable. But hold them (f) not back by injuring them so that you commit aggression. And whoever commits that, then, surely, he did wrong himself. And take not to yourselves the signs of God in mockery. Remember the divine blessing of God on you, and what He caused to descend to you from the Book and wisdom. He admonishes you with it. And be Godfearing of God and know that God is Knowing of everything. 
2|232| And when you revocably divorced wives, and they reached their (f) term, then, place not difficulties for them (f) that they (f) re-marry their former spouses when they agreed among themselves as one who is honorable. This is admonished for him —whoever had been among you who believes in God and the Last Day— that is pure and purer for you. And God knows and you know not. 
2|233| And the ones who are mothers will breast feed their (f) children for two years completely for whoever wanted to fulfill breast feeding. And on one to whom a child is born is their (f) provision and their clothing (f) as one who is honorable. No soul is placed with a burden, but to its capacity. Neither the one who is a mother be pressed for her child, nor the one to whom a child is born for his child. And on one who inherits is the like of that. While if they both wanted weaning by them agreeing together and after consultation, then, there is no blame on either of them. And if you wanted to seek wet-nursing for your children, then, there is no blame on you when you handed over what you gave as one who is honorable. And be Godfearing of God. And know that God is Seeing of what you do. 
2|234| And those of you whom death will call to itself, forsaking spouses, they (f) will await by themselves (f) four months and ten days. And when they (f) reached their term, then, there is no blame on you in what they (f) accomplished for themselves (f), as one who is honorable. God is Aware of what you do. 
2|235| And there is no blame on you in what you offered with it of a proposal to women, or for what you hid in yourselves. God knew that you will remember them (f), except appoint not with them (f) secretly, unless you say a saying as one who is honorable. And resolve not on the knot of marriage until she reaches her prescribed term. And know that God knows what is within yourselves. So be fearful of Him. And know that God is Forgiving, Forbearing. 
2|236| There is no blame on you if you divorced wives whom you touch not, nor undertake a duty to them (f) of a dowry portion. And make provision for them (f). For the one who is wealthy—according to his means—and for the one who is needy —according to his means—with a sustenance, one that is honorable, an obligation on the ones who are doers of good. 
2|237| And if you divorced them (f) before you touch them (f), and you undertook the duty of a dowry portion for them (f), then, half of what you undertook as a duty unless they (f) pardon it or they (m) pardon it in whose hand is the marriage knot. And that they (m) pardon is nearer to God-consciousness. Forget not grace among you. Truly, God is Seeing of what you do. 
2|238| Be watchful of the formal prayers and the middle formal prayer. Stand up as ones who are morally obligated to God. 
2|239| And if you feared, then, pray on foot or as one who is mounted. And when you were safe, then, remember God, for He taught you what you be not knowing. 
2|240| And those whom death will call to itself forsaking spouses, will bequeath for their spouses sustenance for a year without expelling them (f). But if they (f) went forth themselves (f), then, there is no blame on you in what they (f) accomplished for themselves (f) as one who is honorable. And God is Almighty, Wise. 
2|241| And for ones who are divorced females, sustenance, as one who is honorable. This is an obligation on the ones who are Godfearing. 
2|242| Thus, God makes manifest His signs to you so that perhaps you will be reasonable. 
2|243| Hast thou not considered those who went forth from their abodes while they were in the thousands being fearful of death? And God said to them: Die! Again, He gave them life. Truly, God is Possessor of Grace for humanity except most of humanity gives not thanks. 
2|244| So fight in the Way of God, and know that God is Hearing, Knowing. 
2|245| Who is he who will lend God a fairer loan that He will multiply it for him manifold times? And God seizes and extends and you are returned to Him. 
2|246| Hast thou not considered the Council of the Children of Israel after Moses when they said to a Prophet of theirs: Raise up a king for us, and we will fight in the way of God. He said: Perhaps if fighting was prescribed for you, you would not fight. They said: Why should we not fight in the way of God when we were driven out of our abodes with our children. Then, when fighting was prescribed for them, they turned away, but for a few of them. And God is Knowing of the ones who are unjust. 
2|247| And their Prophet said to them: Truly, God raised up for you Saul, a king. They said: How would it be for him to have dominion over us when we have better right to dominion than he, as he is not given plenty of wealth? He said: Truly, God favored him over you, and increased him greatly in the knowledge and the physique. And God gives His dominion to whom He wills. And God is One Who is Extensive, Knowing. 
2|248| And their Prophet said to them: Truly, a sign of his dominion is that there would approach you the Ark of the Covenant. In it is tranquility from your Lord, and abiding wisdom of what the people of Moses left, and the people of Aaron. And the angels will carry it. Truly, in that is a sign for you if you had been ones who believe. 
2|249| So when Saul set forward with his army he said: Truly, God is One Who Tests you with a river. So whoever would drink of it, he is not of me, and whoever tastes it not, truly, he is of me, but he who scoops up with a scooping of his hand. So they drank of it, but a few of them. Then, when he crossed it, he and those who believed with him, they said: There is no energy for us today against Goliath and his armies. Said those who think they truly would be ones who encounter God: How often a faction of a few vanquished a faction of many with the permission of God! And God is with the ones who remain steadfast. 
2|250| And so when they departed against Goliath and his armies they said: Our Lord! Pour out patience on us, and make our feet firm, and help us against the folk— the ones who are ungrateful. 
2|251| So they put them to flight with the permission of God. And David killed Goliath. And God gave him the dominion and wisdom, and taught him of what He wills. And if not for God driving humanity back—some by some others—the earth would have, certainly, gone to ruin, except God is Possessor of Grace to the worlds. 
2|252| These are the signs of God. We recount to thee The Truth. And, truly, thou art among the ones who are sent. 
2|253| These are the Messengers. We gave advantage, some of them over some others.• Of them are those to whom God spoke and some of them He exalted in degree. And We gave Jesus son of Mary the clear portents and confirmed him with the hallowed Spirit. And if God willed, those who were after them have fought one another after the clear portents drew near them, except they were at variance. And some of them believed, while some of them were ones who are ungrateful. And if God willed, they would not have fought one another, except God accomplishes what He wants. 
2|254| O those who believed! Spend of what We provided you, before a Day approaches when there is neither trading in it nor friendship nor intercession. And the ones who are ungrateful, they are the ones who are unjust. 
2|255| God! There is no god but He, The Living, The Eternal. Neither slumber takes Him nor sleep. To Him belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in and on the earth. Who will intercede with Him but with His permission? He knows what is in front of them and what is behind them. And they will not comprehend anything of His knowledge, but what He willed. His Seat encompassed the heavens and the earth, and He is not hampered by their safe-keeping. And He is The Lofty, The Sublime. 
2|256| There is no compulsion in the way of life. Surely, right judgment became clear from error. So whoever disbelieves in false deities and believes in God, then, surely, he held fast to the most firm handhold. It is not breakable. And God is Hearing, Knowing. 
2|257| God is The Protector of those who believed. He brings them out from the shadows into the light. And those who were ungrateful, their protectors are false deities. They bring them out from the light into the shadows. Those will be the Companions of the Fire. They are ones who will dwell in it forever. 
2|258| Hast thou not considered him who argued with Abraham about his Lord because God gave him dominion? Mention when Abraham said: My Lord is He Who gives life and causes to die. He said: I give life and cause to die. Abraham said: Truly, God brings the sun from the East, so bring thou the sun from the West! Then, he who was ungrateful was dumfounded. And God guides not the unjust folk. 
2|259| Or like the one who passed by a town and it was one that has fallen down into ruins. He said: How will God give life to this after its death? So God caused him to die for a hundred years. Again, He raised him up. He said: How long hadst thou lingered in expectation? He said: I lingered in expectation for a day or some part of a day. He said: Nay. Thou hadst lingered in expectation a hundred years. Then look on thy food and thy drink. They are not spoiled. And look on thy donkey. We made thee a sign for humanity. And look on the bones, how We set them up. Again, We will clothe them with flesh. So when it became clear to him, he said: I know that God is Powerful over everything. 
2|260| And mention when Abraham said: My Lord! Cause me to see how Thou wilt give life to the dead. He said: Wilt thou not believe? He said: Yea, but so my heart be at rest. He said: Again, take four birds, and twist them to thyself. Again, lay a part of them on every mountain. Again, call to them. They will approach thee coming eagerly. And know thou that God is Almighty, Wise. 
2|261| A parable of those who spend their wealth in the way of God is like a parable of a grain. It puts forth seven ears of wheat. In every ear of wheat, a hundred grains. And God multiplies for whom He wills. And God is One Who is Extensive, Knowing. 
2|262| Those who spend their wealth in the way of God and, again, pursue not what they spent with reproachful reminders nor injury, the compensation for them is with their Lord. And there will be neither fear in them nor will they feel remorse. 
2|263| An honorable saying and forgiveness are better than charity succeeded by injury. And God is Sufficient, Forbearing. 
2|264| O those who believed! Render not untrue your charities with reproachful reminders nor injury like he who spends of his wealth to show off to humanity, and believes not in God and the Last Day. His parable is like the parable of a smooth rock. Over it is earth dust. A heavy downpour lit on it, and left it bare. They have no power over anything of what they earned and God guides not the ungrateful folk. 
2|265| And the parable of those who spend their wealth looking for the goodwill of God and for confirming their souls is like the parable of a garden on a hillside. A heavy downpour lit on it. Then, it gave its harvest double. And even if lights not on it a heavy downpour, then a dew. And God is Seeing of what you do. 
2|266| Would anyone of you wish that he have a garden of date palm trees and grapevines beneath which rivers run with all kinds of fruits in it for him? Then, old age lit on him, and he had weak offspring. Then, a whirlwind lit on it in which there is a fire. Then, it was consumed. Thus, God makes manifest His signs for you so that perhaps you will reflect. 
2|267| O those who believed! Spend of what is good that you earned, and from what We brought out for you from the earth. And aim not at getting the bad of it to spend while you would not be ones who take it, but you would close an eye to it. And know that God is Sufficient, Worthy of Praise. 
2|268| Satan threatens you with poverty and commands you to depravity; whereas God promises you His forgiveness from Himself and His grace. And God is One Who is Extensive, Knowing. 
2|269| He gives wisdom to whom He wills. And whomever is given wisdom, then, surely, was given much good and none recollects no doubt but those imbued with intuition. 
2|270| And whatever of contributions you spent or vows that you vowed, then, truly, God knows it. And for the ones who are unjust there is no helper. 
2|271| If you show your charity, then, how bountiful it is while if you conceal it and give it to the poor, that would be better for you. This absolves you of some of your evil deeds. And God is Aware of what you do. 
2|272| Their guidance is not on thee. But God guides whomever He wills. And whatever of good you spend, it is for yourselves. And spend not but looking for the Countenance of God. And whatever of good you spend, your account will be paid to you in full and you will not be wronged. 
2|273| Spend for the poor, those who were restrained in the way of God and are not able to travel on the earth. The one who is ignorant assumes them to be rich because of their having reserve. Thou wilt recognize them by their mark. They ask not persistently of humanity. And whatever of good you spend, then, truly, God is Knowing of that. 
2|274| Those who spend their wealth by nighttime and daytime, secretly or in public, then, for them, their compensation is with their Lord. And there will be neither fear in them nor will they feel remorse. 
2|275| Those who consume usury will not arise, but like he who arises whom Satan prostrated by touch. That is because they said: Trading is only like usury and yet God permitted trading and forbade usury. So whoever drew near an admonishment from his Lord and refrained himself, for him is what was past. And his command is with God. While whoever reverted, then, those will be the Companions of the Fire. They, ones who will dwell in it forever! 
2|276| God eliminates usury, and He causes charity to increase. And God loves not any sinful ingrate. 
2|277| Truly, those who believed and did as the ones in accord with morality and performed the formal prayer and gave the purifying alms, for them, their compensation is with their Lord. And there will be neither fear in them nor will they feel remorse. 
2|278| O those who believed! Be Godfearing of God. And forsake what remained of usury, if you had been ones who believe. 
2|279| But if you accomplish it not, then, give ear to war from God and His Messenger. And if you repented, you will have your principal capital, doing no wrong to others nor will you be wronged. 
2|280| If a debtor had been possessing adversity, a respite until a time of ease and prosperity. And it is better for you that you be charitable, if you had been knowing. 
2|281| And be Godfearing of a Day on which you are returned to God. Again, every soul will be paid its account in full for what it earned, and they will not be wronged. 
2|282| O those who believed! When you contracted a debt for a term—that which is determined—then, write it down. Let one who is a scribe write it down between you justly. One who is a scribe should not refuse to write it down as God taught him. So let him write down and let the debtor dictate. Let him be Godfearing of God, his Lord, and diminish not anything out of it. But if the debtor had been mentally deficient, or weak, or not able to dictate himself, then, let his protector dictate justly. And call two witnesses to bear witness from among your men. Or if there are not two men, then a man and two women, with whom you are well-pleased as witnesses, so that if one of them (f) goes astray, then, the other one of the two will remind her. And the witnesses will not refuse when they were called. And grow not weary that you write it down, be it small or great, with its term. That is more equitable with God and more upright for testimony, and likelier not to be in doubt unless it be a trade, that which is transferred at the time—to give and take among yourselves. Then, there is no blame on you if you not write it down. And call witnesses when you have a transaction. Let neither one who is a scribe nor witness be pressed. And if you accomplish that, then, it is, truly, disobedience on your part. So be Godfearing of God. And God teaches you. And God is Knowing of everything. 
2|283| And if you had been on a journey and find no one who is a scribe, then, a guarantee of that which is held in hand. But if any of you entrusted to another, then, let who was trusted give back his trust and let him be Godfearing of God, his Lord, and keep not back testimony. And he who keeps back, he, then, truly, his heart is one that is perverted. And God is Knowing of what you do. 
2|284| To God belongs what is in the heavens and in and on the earth. Whether you show what is within yourselves, or conceal it, God will make a reckoning with you for it. And He will forgive whom He wills. And He will punish whom He wills. And God is Powerful over everything. 
2|285| The Messenger believed in what was caused to descend to him from his Lord as do the ones who believe. All believed in God and His angels and His Books and His Messengers saying: We separate and divide not among anyone of His Messengers. And they said: We heard and we obeyed, so grant Thy forgiveness, Our Lord! And to Thee is the Homecoming. 
2|286| God places not a burden on a soul beyond its capacity. For it is what it earned and against it is what it deserved. Our Lord! Take us not to task if we forgot or made a mistake. Our Lord! Burden us not with a severe test like that which Thou hadst burdened those who were before us. Our Lord! Load us not such that we have no energy for it and pardon us and forgive us and have mercy on us. Thou art our Defender so help us against the folk, the ones who are ungrateful. 
3|1| Alif L[m M\m. 
3|2| God! There is no god but He, The Living, The Eternal. 
3|3| He sent down to thee the Book with The Truth, that which establishes as true what was before it. And He caused to descend the Torah and the Gospel 
3|4| before this as a guidance for humanity. And He caused to descend the Criterion between right and wrong. Truly, those who were ungrateful for the signs of God, for them is a severe punishment. And God is Almighty, Possessor of Requital. 
3|5| Truly, God, nothing is hidden from Him in or on the earth nor in heaven. 
3|6| It is He Who forms you in the wombs how He wills. There is no god but He, Almighty, Wise. 
3|7| It is He who caused the Book to descend to thee. In it are signs, ones that are definitive. They are the essence of the Book and others, ones that are unspecific. Then, those whose hearts are swerving, they follow what was unspecific in it, looking for dissent and looking for an interpretation, but none knows its interpretation but God. And the ones who are firmly rooted in knowledge say: We believed in it as all is from our Lord. And none recollects, but those imbued with intuition. 
3|8| Our Lord! Cause our hearts not to swerve after Thou hadst guided us. And bestow on us mercy from that which proceeds from Thy Presence. Truly, Thou, Thou alone art The Giver. 
3|9| Our Lord! Truly, Thou art One Who Gathers humanity on a Day in which there is no doubt in it. Truly, God breaks not His solemn declaration. 
3|10| Truly, those who were ungrateful, it will not avail them—neither their wealth nor their children—against God at all. And those, they will be fuel for the fire, 
3|11| in like manner of the people of Pharaoh and those who were before them. They denied Our signs so God took them because of their impiety. And God is Severe in repayment. 
3|12| Say to those who were ungrateful: You will be vanquished and you will be assembled into hell. It will be a miserable Final Place. 
3|13| Surely, there had been a sign for you in the two factions who met one another—one faction fights in the way of God and the other as ones who are ungrateful, whom they see twice the like of visibly in their eyes. And God confirms with His help whom He wills. Truly, in this is a lesson for those imbued with insight. 
3|14| Made to appear pleasing to humanity was the cherishing of lust: From women and children and that which is heaped up heaps of gold and silver and horses, ones that are distinguished, and flocks and cultivation, that is the enjoyment of this present life, while God, with Him is the goodness of the Destination. 
3|15| Say: Shall I tell you of better than that? For those who were Godfearing, with their Lord are Gardens beneath which rivers run. They are ones who will dwell in them forever with purified spouses and contentment from God. And God is Seeing His servants, 
3|16| those who say: Our Lord! Truly, we believed, so forgive us our impieties and protect us from the punishment of the fire: 
3|17| They are the ones who remain steadfast and the ones who are sincere and the ones who are morally obligated and the ones who spend in the way of God and the ones who ask for forgiveness at the breaking of day. 
3|18| God bore witness that there is no god but He, as do the angels and those imbued with the knowledge, the ones who uphold equity. There is no god but He, The Almighty, The Wise. 
3|19| Truly the way of life with God is submission to the One God. And at variance were those who were given the Book after what drew near them of the knowledge out of insolence among themselves. And whoever is ungrateful for the signs of God, then, truly, God is Swift in reckoning. 
3|20| So if they argued with thee, then say: I submitted my face to God as have those who followed me. And say to those who were given the Book and to the unlettered: Have you submitted to God? If they submitted to God, then, surely, they were truly guided. And if they turned away, then, on thee is only delivering the message. And God is Seeing of His servants. 
3|21| Truly, those who are ungrateful for the signs of God and kill the Prophets without right and kill those who command to equity from among humanity, then, give thou to them the good tidings of a painful punishment. 
3|22| Those, those are they whose actions were fruitless in the present and the world to come. And for them there is no one who helps. 
3|23| Hast thou not considered those who were given a share of the Book? They are called to the Book of God to give judgment between them. Again, a group of people among them turn away and they, they are ones who turn aside. 
3|24| That is because they said: The fire will not touch us but for numbered days. And they were deluded in their way of life by what they had been devising. 
3|25| How then will it be when We gathered them on a Day, there is no doubt in it? The account of every soul will be paid in full for what it earned and they, they will not be wronged? 
3|26| Say: O God! The One Who is Sovereign of Dominion, Thou hast given dominion to whom Thou hast willed, and Thou hast torn away dominion from whom Thou hast willed. Thou hast rendered powerful whom Thou hast willed, and Thou hast abased whom Thou hast willed. In Thy hand is the good. Truly, Thou art Powerful over everything. 
3|27| Thou hast caused the nighttime to be interposed into the daytime. And Thou hast caused the daytime to be interposed into the nighttime. And Thou hast brought out the living from the dead. And Thou hast brought out the dead from the living. Thou hast provided to whomever Thou hast willed without stinting. 
3|28| Let not the ones who believe take to themselves the ones who are ungrateful for protectors instead of the ones who believe. And whoever accomplishes that is not with God in anything, unless it is because you are Godfearing that you are being cautious towards them. And God cautions you of Himself. And to God is the Homecoming. 
3|29| Say: Whether you conceal what is in your breasts or show it, God knows it and He knows whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in and on the earth. And God is Powerful over everything. 
3|30| A Day when every soul will find that which is brought forward of good and what it did of evil. It will wish that there be between this and between that a long space of time. God cautions you of Himself. And God is Gentle to the servants. 
3|31| Say: If you had been loving God, then, follow me. And God will love you and forgive you your impieties. God is Forgiving, Compassionate. 
3|32| Say: Obey God and the Messenger. Then, if they turned away, then, truly, God loves not the ones who are ungrateful. 
3|33| Truly, God favored Adam and Noah and the people of Abraham and the people of Imran above all the worlds, 
3|34| some of one another’s offspring. And God is The Hearing, The Knowing. 
3|35| Mention when the woman of Imran said: My Lord! I vowed to Thee what is in my womb—that which is dedicated—so receive Thou this from me. Truly, Thou, Thou alone art The Hearing, The Knowing. 
3|36| Then, when she brought forth she said: My Lord! Truly, I brought her forth, a female. And God is greater in knowledge of what she brought forth. And the male is not like the female. And, truly, I named her Mary. And, truly, I commend her to Thy protection and her offspring from the accursed Satan. 
3|37| So her Lord received her with the very best acceptance. And her bringing forth caused the very best to develop in her. And Zechariah took charge of her. Whenever Zechariah entered upon her in her sanctuary, he found her with provision. He said: O Mary! From where is this for thee (f)? She said: This is from God. Truly, God provides to whom He wills without reckoning. 
3|38| There Zechariah called to his Lord. He said: My Lord! Bestow on me good offspring from Thy Presence. Truly, Thou art hearing the supplication. 
3|39| Then, the angels proclaimed to him while he was one who stands to invoke blessings in the sanctuary that God gives thee good tidings of Yahya—one who establishes the Word of God as true—a chief and concealer of secrets and a Prophet among the ones in accord with morality. 
3|40| He said: My Lord! How is it I will have a boy while, surely, I reached old age and my woman is a barren woman. He said: Thus, God accomplishes what He wills. 
3|41| He said: My Lord! Assign a sign for me. He said: Thy sign is that thou wilt not speak to humanity for three days but by gesture and remember thy Lord frequently, and glorify in the evening and early morning. 
3|42| And mention when the angels said: O Mary! Truly, God favored thee (f), and purified thee (f), and favored thee (f) above women of the world. 
3|43| O Mary! Be thou morally obligated to thy Lord and prostrate thyself (f) and bow down (f) with the ones who bow down. 
3|44| That is tidings from the unseen We reveal to thee. And thou hadst not been present with them when they cast their pens as to which of them would take control of Mary, nor hadst thou been present with them when they strive against one another. 
3|45| Mention when the angels said: O Mary! Truly, God gives thee (f) good tidings of a Word from Him. His name is the Messiah—Jesus son of Mary—well-esteemed in the present and the world to come and among the ones who are brought near. 
3|46| And he will speak to humanity from the cradle and in manhood and be among the ones in accord with morality. 
3|47| She said: My Lord! How is it I will be with child when no mortal touches me? He said: Thus, God creates whatever He wills. When He decreed a command, then, He only says to it: Be! Then, it is! 
3|48| And He teaches him the Book and wisdom and the Torah and the Gospel 
3|49| to be a Messenger to the Children of Israel saying: Surely I drew near you with a sign from your Lord that I will create for you out of clay a likeness of a bird. Then, I breathe into it and it will become a bird with the permission of God. And I cure one who is blind from birth and the leper and give life to dead mortals with the permission of God. And I tell you what you eat and what you store up in your houses. Truly, in that is a sign for you if you had been ones who believe. 
3|50| And I come with that which establishes as true what was before me of the Torah, and permit you some of what was forbidden to you. And I drew near you with a sign from your Lord. So be Godfearing of God and obey Me. 
3|51| Truly, God is my Lord and your Lord so worship Him. This is a straight path. 
3|52| And when Jesus became conscious of their ingratitude, he said: Who are my helpers for God? The disciples said: We will be helpers for God. We believed in God and bear thee witness that we are ones who submit to God. 
3|53| Our Lord! We believed in what Thou hadst caused to descend. And we followed the Messenger so write us down with the ones who bear witness. 
3|54| And they planned and God planned. And God is Best of the ones who plan. 
3|55| Mention when God said: O Jesus! I will be One Who Gathers thee and One Who Elevates thee to Myself and One Who Purifies thee from those who were ungrateful, and One Who Makes those who followed thee above those who were ungrateful until the Day of Resurrection. Again, you will return to Me. Then, I will give judgment between you about what you had been at variance in it. 
3|56| So as for those who were ungrateful, then, I will punish them with a severe punishment in the present and the world to come. And for them there is no one who helps. 
3|57| And to those who believed and did as the ones in accord with morality, We will pay them their account with full compensation. And God loves not the ones who are unjust. 
3|58| These We recount to thee are of the signs and the wise remembrance. 
3|59| Truly the parable of Jesus with God is like the parable of Adam. He created him from earth dust. Again, He said to him: Be! Then, he is! 
3|60| The Truth is from thy Lord, so be not of the ones who contest. 
3|61| Then, to whoever argued with thee about it after what drew near thee of the knowledge, say: Approach now! Let us call to our children and your children and our women and your women and ourselves and yourselves. Again we will humbly supplicate, and we lay the curse of God on the ones who lie. 
3|62| This is, truly, a narrative of The Truth. And there is no god but God. And, truly, God, He is The Almighty, The Wise. 
3|63| Then, truly, if they turned away, then, truly, God is Knowing of the ones who make corruption. 
3|64| Say: O People of the Book! Approach now to a word common between us and between you that we worship none but God and ascribe nothing as partners with Him, that none of us take others to ourselves as lords besides God. And if they turned away, then, say: Bear witness that we are ones who submit to God. 
3|65| O People of the Book! Why argue with one another about Abraham while neither was the Torah caused to descend nor the Gospel until after him. Will you not, then, be reasonable? 
3|66| Lo, behold! You are these who argued with one another about what you have some knowledge. Why, then, argue with one another about what is with you when you have no knowledge? And God knows and you know not. 
3|67| Abraham had been neither a Jew nor a Christian, but he had been a monotheist, one who submits to God. He had not been among the ones who were polytheists. 
3|68| Truly, of humanity closest to Abraham are those who followed him and this Prophet and those who believed. And God is Protector of the ones who believe. 
3|69| A section of the People of the Book wished that they cause you to go astray. And they cause none to go astray, but themselves, and they are not aware. 
3|70| O People of the Book! Why be ungrateful for the signs of God while you bear witness? 
3|71| O People of the Book! Why confuse you The Truth with falsehood, and keep back The Truth while you know? 
3|72| And a section of the People of the Book said: Believe in what was caused to descend to those who believed at the beginning of the daytime. Disbelieve at the last of the day so that perhaps they will return to disbelief. 
3|73| And believe none, but one who heeded your way of life. Say: Truly guidance is The Guidance from God and believe not that anyone be given the like of what you were given, so that he argue with you before your Lord. Say: Truly, the grace is in the hand of God. He gives it to whomever He wills. And God is One Who is Extensive, Knowing. 
3|74| He singles out for His mercy whom He wills. And God is Possessor of Sublime Grace. 
3|75| And among the People of the Book is he who, if thou hast entrusted him with a hundredweight, he would give it back to thee. And among them is he who, if thou hast entrusted him with a dinar, he would not give it back to thee unless thou hadst continued as one who stands over him. That is because they said: There is no way of moral duty on us as to the unlettered. And they are lying against God while they, they know. 
3|76| Yea! Whoever lived up to his compact and was Godfearing, then, truly, God loves the ones who are Godfearing. 
3|77| Truly, those who exchange the compact of God and their sworn oaths for a little price, those, there is no apportionment for them in the world to come. And God will neither speak to them, nor look on them on the Day of Resurrection nor will He make them pure. And for them is a painful punishment. 
3|78| And, truly, among them is a group of people who distort their tongues with the Book so that you assume it is from the Book, although it is not from the Book. And they say: It is from God, although it is not from God. And they say a lie against God while they know. 
3|79| It had not been for a mortal that God should give him the Book and critical judgment and the prophethood and, again, he say to humanity: Be you servants of me instead of God! Rather, he would say: Be you masters, because you had been teaching the Book and because you had been studying it. 
3|80| Nor would He command you to take to yourselves the angels and the Prophets as lords. Would He command you to ingratitude after you are ones who submit to God? 
3|81| And mention when God took a solemn promise from the Prophets: Whatever I gave you of the Book and wisdom, again, if a Messenger drew near you with that which establishes as true what is with you, you will believe in him and you will help him. He said: Are you in accord? And will you take on My severe test? They said: We are in accord. He said: Then, bear witness and I am with you among the ones who bear witness. 
3|82| Then, whoever turned away after this, then, those, they are the ones who disobey. 
3|83| Desire they other than the way of life of God while to Him submitted whatever is in the heavens and the earth willingly or unwillingly and they are returned to Him? 
3|84| Say: We believed in God and what was caused to descend to us and what was caused to descend to Abraham and Ishmael and Isaac and Jacob and the Tribes and what was given to Moses and Jesus and the Prophets from their Lord. We separate and divide not between anyone of them and we are ones who submit to Him. 
3|85| And whoever be looking for a way of life other than submission to God, it will never be accepted from him. And he, in the world to come, will be among the ones who are losers. 
3|86| How will God guide a folk who disbelieved after their belief? And they bore witness to The Truth of the Messenger after the clear portents drew near them. And God guides not the unjust folk. 
3|87| Those, their recompense is that the curse of God is on them and of the angels and of humanity, one and all, 
3|88| ones who will dwell with it forever. Neither will the punishment be lightened from them, nor will they be given respite. 
3|89| But those who repented after that and made things right, then, truly, God is Forgiving, Compassionate. 
3|90| Truly, those who disbelieved after their belief, again, added to their disbelief. Their remorse will never be accepted. Those, they are the ones who go astray. 
3|91| Truly, those who were ungrateful and died when they were ones who are ungrateful, it will not be accepted from anyone of them the earth full of gold, even if he offered it as ransom. Those, for them, is a painful punishment, and for them there is no one who helps. 
3|92| You will never attain virtuous conduct until you spend of what you love. And whatever thing you spend, truly, God is Knowing of it. 
3|93| All food had been allowed to the Children of Israel, but what Israel, Jacob, forbade to himself before the Torah is sent down. Say: Then, approach with the Torah and recount it if you had been ones who are sincere. 
3|94| Then, whoever devised lies against God after that then, those, they are the ones who are unjust. 
3|95| Say: God was Sincere, so follow the creed of Abraham—a monotheist—and he had not been among the ones who are polytheists. 
3|96| Truly, the first House set in place for humanity was that which is at Bekka, that which is blessed, and a guidance for the worlds. 
3|97| In it are clear portents, signs, the Station of Abraham. And whoever entered it had been one who is safe. And to God is a duty on humanity of pilgrimage to the House in Makkah for whoever was able to travel the way to it. And whoever was ungrateful, then truly God is Independent of the worlds. 
3|98| Say: O People of the Book! Why be ungrateful for the signs of God? And God is Witness over what you do. 
3|99| Say: O People of the Book! Why bar you from the way of God he who believed, desiring crookedness when you are witnesses? God is not One Who is Heedless of what you do. 
3|100| O those who believed! If you obey a group of people of those who were given the Book, they will repel you after your belief turning you into ones who are ungrateful. 
3|101| And how would you be ungrateful when the signs of God are recounted to you, and His Messenger is among you? And whoever cleaves firmly to God was, then, surely guided to a straight path. 
3|102| O those who believed! Be Godfearing of God as it is His right that He be feared. And die not but that you be ones who submit to the One God. 
3|103| And cleave firmly to the rope of God altogether and be not split up. And remember the divine blessing of God on you when you had been enemies. Then, He brought your hearts together. You became brothers/sisters by His divine blessing. You had been on the brink of an abyss of the fire and He saved you from it. Thus, God makes manifest to you His signs so that perhaps you will be truly guided. 
3|104| And let there be a community from among you who calls to good and commands to that which is honorable and prohibits that which is unlawful. And those, they are the ones who prosper. 
3|105| And be not like those who split up and were at variance after the clear portents drew near them. And those, for them is a tremendous punishment 
3|106| on a Day when faces will brighten and faces will cloud over. As for those whose faces cloud over: Disbelieve you after your belief? Then experience the punishment for what you had been ungrateful. 
3|107| And as for those whose faces brightened, they are in the mercy of God. They, ones who will dwell in it forever. 
3|108| These are the signs of God. We recount them to thee in Truth. And God wants not injustice in the worlds. 
3|109| And to God belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in and on the earth. To God all commands are returned. 
3|110| You had been the best community that was brought out for humanity. You command to that which is honorable and prohibit that which is unlawful and believe in God. And if the People of the Book believed, it would have been better for them. Some of them are the ones who believe, but most of them are the ones who disobey. 
3|111| They will never injure you but are an annoyance. And if they fight you, they will turn their backs on you. Again, they will not be helped. 
3|112| Abasement was stamped on them wherever they were come upon—but those with a rope to God and a rope to humanity—and they drew the burden of anger from God and wretchedness was stamped on them. That is because they had been ungrateful for the signs of God and kill the Prophets without right. That is because they rebelled and had been exceeding the limits. 
3|113| They are not all the same. Among the People of the Book is a community of ones who are upstanding. They recount the signs of God in the night watch of the night and they, they prostrate themselves. 
3|114| They believe in God and the Last Day and they command that which is honorable and prohibit that which is unlawful and they compete with one another in good deeds. Those are among the ones in accord with morality. 
3|115| And whatever of good they accomplish will never go unappreciated. And God is Knowing of the ones who are Godfearing. 
3|116| Truly, those who were ungrateful never will avail them their wealth nor their children against God at all. And those will be the Companions of the Fire. They are ones who will dwell in it forever. 
3|117| The parable of what they spend in this present life is like the parable of a freezing wind in it that lit on the cultivation of the folk who did wrong themselves and caused it to perish. And God did not wrong them, but they do wrong themselves. 
3|118| O those who believed! Take not to yourselves as close friends other than yourselves. They stop at nothing to ruin you. They wished that misfortune would fall on you. Surely, their hatred showed itself from their mouths and what their breasts conceal is greater. Surely, We made manifest to you the signs if you had been reasonable. 
3|119| Lo, behold! You are those imbued with love for them, but they love you not. And you believed in the Book, all of it. And when they met you, they said: We believe. But when they went privately, they bit the tips of their fingers at you in rage. Say: Die in your rage. Truly God is Knowing of what is within the breasts. 
3|120| If benevolence touches you, it raises anger in them, but if an evil deed lights on you, they are glad about it. But if you endure patiently and are Godfearing, their cunning will not injure you at all. Truly, God is One Who Encloses what they do. 
3|121| And when thou hadst set forth in the early morning from thy family to place the ones who believe at their positions for fighting, God is Hearing, Knowing. 
3|122| Mention when two sections are about to lose heart among you although God was their Protector. And let the ones who believe put their trust in God. 
3|123| And, certainly, God helped you at Badr while you were humiliated in spirit. So be Godfearing of God so that perhaps you will give thanks. 
3|124| Mention when thou hast said to the ones who believe: Suffices you not that your Lord will reinforce you with three thousand among the angels? Ones who are caused to descend, 
3|125| yea! if you endure patiently and are Godfearing? And if they approach you instantly here, your Lord will reinforce you with five thousand angels—ones who are sweeping on. 
3|126| And God made it but as good tidings to you so that with it your hearts will be at rest. And there is no help, but from God, The Almighty, The Wise, 
3|127| for He will sever a selection of those who were ungrateful or suppress them so they turn about as ones who are frustrated. 
3|128| It is none of thy affair at all if He turns to them in forgiveness or He punishes them, for, truly, they are ones who are unjust. 
3|129| And to God belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in and on the earth. He forgives whom He wills and punishes whom He wills. And God is Forgiving, Compassionate. 
3|130| O those who believed! Consume not usury—that which is doubled and redoubled—and be Godfearing of God so that perhaps you will prosper. 
3|131| And be Godfearing of the fire that was prepared for the ones who are ungrateful. 
3|132| And obey God and the Messenger so that perhaps you will find mercy. 
3|133| And compete with one another for forgiveness from your Lord and for a Garden whose depth is as the heavens and the earth that was prepared for the ones who are Godfearing, 
3|134| those who spend in gladness and tribulation and the ones who choke their rage and the ones who pardon humanity. And God loves the ones who are doers of good. 
3|135| And those who, when they committed an indecency or did wrong to themselves, they remembered God. Then, they asked for forgiveness for their impieties. And who forgives impieties but God? And persist not in what impiety they committed while they know. 
3|136| Those, their recompense is forgiveness from their Lord and Gardens beneath which rivers run, ones who will dwell in them forever. And how bountiful is the compensation for the ones who work! 
3|137| Customs passed away before you. So journey through the earth; then, look on how had been the Ultimate End of the ones who deny. 
3|138| This is a clear explanation for humanity, a guidance and an admonishment for the ones who are Godfearing. 
3|139| And be not feeble nor feel remorse. And you will be among the lofty, if you had been ones who believe. 
3|140| If a wound afflicts you, surely, a wound afflicted the folk similar to that. And these are the days We rotate among humanity so that God knows those who believed and takes witnesses to Himself from among you—and God loves not the ones who are unjust— 
3|141| and so that God may prove those who believed and eliminate the ones who are ungrateful. 
3|142| Or assumed you that you would enter the Garden while God knows not those who struggled among you and knows the ones who remain steadfast? 
3|143| And, certainly, you had been coveting death before you were to meet it. Then, surely, you saw and look on it. 
3|144| And Muhammad is only a Messenger. Surely, Messengers passed away before him. Then, if he died or be slain, will you turn about on your heels? And he who turns about on his heels will not injure God at all. And God will give recompense to the ones who are thankful. 
3|145| It had not been for any soul to die, but with the permission of God. Prescribed is that which is appointed. And whoever wants a reward for good deeds in the present, We will give him that. And whoever wants a reward for good deeds in the world to come We will give him that. And We will give recompense to the ones who are thankful. 
3|146| And how many a Prophet whom, along with him, many thousands fought, but none lost confidence with what lit on them in the way of God, nor were they weakened nor were they to give in. And God loves the ones who remain steadfast. 
3|147| And their saying had been only that they said: Our Lord! Forgive us our impieties and our excessiveness in our affairs. And make our feet firm and help us against the folk, the ones who are ungrateful. 
3|148| So God gave them a reward for good deeds in the present and the goodness of reward for good deeds in the world to come. And God loves the ones who are doers of good. 
3|149| O those who believed! If you obey those who were ungrateful, they will repel you back on your heels and you will turn about—ones who are losers. 
3|150| Nay! God is your Defender and He is Best of the ones who help. 
3|151| We will cast into the hearts of those who were ungrateful, alarm, because they ascribed partners with God. And He sends not down for it authority. And their place of shelter will be the fire. And miserable will be the place of lodging of the ones who are unjust. 
3|152| And, certainly, God was sincere to you in His promise when you blasted the enemy with His permission until you lost heart and you contended with one another about the command and you rebelled after He caused you to see what you longed for in the spoils of war. Among you are some who want the present and among you are some who want the world to come. Again, He turned you away from them that He test you and, certainly, He pardoned you. And God is Possessor of Grace for the ones who believe. 
3|153| When you mount up, not attentive to anyone and the Messenger calls you from your rear, then, He repaid you, lament for lament, so that you neither feel remorse for what slipped away from you, nor for what lit on you. And God is Aware of what you do. 
3|154| Again, He caused to descend safety for you after lament. Sleepiness overcomes a section of you while a section caused themselves grief thinking of God without right, a thought out of the Age of Ignorance. They say: Have we any part in the command? Say: Truly, the command is entirely from God. They conceal within themselves what they show not to thee. They say: If there had been for us any part in the command, we would not be killed here. Say: Even if you had been in your houses, those would have departed—whom it was prescribed they be slain—for the Final Place of sleeping, so that God tests what is in your breasts and He proves what is in your hearts. And God is Knowing of what is in the breasts. 
3|155| Truly, those of you who turned away on a day two multitudes met one another, only Satan caused them to slip back for some of what they earned. And, certainly, God pardoned them. Truly God is Forgiving, Forbearing. 
3|156| O those who believed! Be not like those who were ungrateful and said about their brothers when they traveled through the earth or had been ones who are combatants: If they had been with us, neither would they have died, nor would they have been slain, so that God makes this a cause of regret in their hearts. And God gives life and causes to die. And God is Seeing of what you do. 
3|157| And if you were slain in the way of God or died, certainly, forgiveness and mercy from God are better than what they gather in the present. 
3|158| And if you died or were slain, it is, certainly, to God you will be assembled. 
3|159| And it is by the mercy of God thou wert gentle with them. And if thou hadst been hard, harsh of heart, they would have broken away from around thee. So pardon them and ask for forgiveness for them. And take counsel with them in the affair. But when thou art resolved, then, put thy trust in God. Truly, God loves the ones who put their trust in Him. 
3|160| If God helps you, then none will be one who is a victor over you. And if He withdraws His help from you, then, who is there who helps you after Him? And in God put their trust the ones who believe. 
3|161| It had not been for a Prophet that he defraud. And whoever defrauds, what he defrauded will approach him on the Day of Resurrection. Again, the account will be paid in full of every soul for what he earned and they will not be wronged. 
3|162| So, then, is he who followed the contentment of God like he who drew the burden of the displeasure of God and whose place of shelter will be hell? And miserable will be the Homecoming! 
3|163| They have degrees with God. And God is Seeing of what they do. 
3|164| Certainly, God showed grace to the ones who believe when he raised up among them a Messenger from themselves who recounts His signs to them and makes them pure and teaches them the Book and wisdom. And, truly, before that they had been, certainly, clearly wandering astray. 
3|165| And why, when an affliction lit on you, surely, you lit two times its like on them. Say: Where is this from? Say: It is from yourselves. Truly, God is Powerful over everything. 
3|166| And what lit on you on a day when the two multitudes met one another was with the permission of God that He would know the ones who believe 
3|167| and He would know those who were hypocrites. It was said to them: Approach now! Fight in the way of God or drive back. They said: If we would have known there would be fighting, we would, certainly, have followed you. They were nearer to disbelief on that day than to belief. They say with their mouths what is not in their hearts. And God is greater in knowledge of what they keep back. 
3|168| Those who said to their brothers while they sat back: If they obeyed us, they would not have been slain. Say: Then, drive off death from yourselves, if you had been ones who are sincere. 
3|169| And assume not those who were slain in the way of God to be lifeless. Nay! They are living with their Lord. They are provided for, 
3|170| glad for what God gave them of His grace. And rejoice at the good tidings for those who have not yet joined them from behind them. There will be neither fear in them, nor will they feel remorse. 
3|171| They rejoice at the good tidings of the divine blessing from God and His grace and that God will not waste the compensation of the ones who believe, 
3|172| those who responded to God and the Messenger after wounds lit on them. For those of them who did good among them and were Godfearing, there is a sublime compensation. 
3|173| Those to whom humanity said: Truly, humanity has gathered against you, so dread them, but it increased them in belief and they said: God is enough for us. And how excellent is He, The Trustee. 
3|174| So they turned about with divine blessing from God and grace and evil afflicts them not and they followed the contentment of God and God is Possessor of Sublime Grace. 
3|175| It is only Satan who frightens you with his protectors. So fear them not, but fear Me if you had been ones who believe. 
3|176| And let not those who compete with one another in ingratitude dishearten thee. Truly, they will never injure God at all. God wants to assign no allotment for them in the world to come and for them is a tremendous punishment. 
3|177| Truly, those who bought ingratitude at the price of belief will never injure God at all. And for them will be a painful punishment. 
3|178| And those who were ungrateful should not assume that the indulgence We grant to them is better for them. We only grant indulgence to them so that they add sin! And for them is a despised punishment. 
3|179| God had not been forsaking the ones who believe to what you are in until He differentiates the bad from what is good. And God will not inform about the unseen, but God elects from His Messengers whom He wills. So believe in God and His Messengers. And if you believe and are Godfearing, then, for you there is a sublime compensation. 
3|180| And assume not those who are misers that what God gave them of His grace is better for them. Nay! It is worse for them. To be hung around their necks will be what they were misers with on the Day of Resurrection. And to God belongs the heritage of the heavens and the earth. And God is Aware of what you do. 
3|181| Certainly, God heard the saying of those who said: Truly, God is poor and we are rich.• We will write down what they said and their killing of the Prophets without right. And We will say: Experience the punishment of the burning! 
3|182| That is for what your hands put forward and that God is not unjust to His servants. 
3|183| To those who said: Truly, God made a compact with us that we believe not in a Messenger until He approaches with a sacrifice to be consumed by the fire, say: Surely, Messengers brought about to you before me the clear portents and even of what you spoke. Then, why have you killed them if you had been ones who are sincere? 
3|184| Then if they denied thee, surely, Messengers before thee were denied who drew near with the clear portents and the Psalms and the illuminating Book. 
3|185| Every soul is one that experiences death. Your account will be paid with full compensation on the Day of Resurrection. Then, whoever was drawn away from the fire and was caused to enter the Garden, surely, won a triumph. And what is this present life but the delusion of enjoyment? 
3|186| You will, certainly, be tried with your wealth and yourselves and you will, certainly, hear much annoyance from those who were given the Book before you and from those who ascribed partners with God. And if you endure patiently and are Godfearing, then, truly, that is of the commands to constancy. 
3|187| And when God took a solemn promise from those who were given the Book: You will make it manifest to humanity and keep it not back. Yet they repudiated it behind their backs and exchange it for a little price. And miserable will be what they buy! 
3|188| Assume not that those who are glad for what they brought and who love to be praised for what they accomplish not, assume not, then, that they will be kept safe from the punishment. And for them, a painful punishment. 
3|189| To God belongs the dominion of the heavens and of the earth. And God is Powerful over everything. 
3|190| Truly, in the creation of the heavens and of the earth and the alteration of nighttime and daytime there are signs for those imbued with intuition, 
3|191| those who remember God while upright and sitting and on their sides and they reflect on the creation of the heavens and the earth: Our Lord! Thou hadst not created this in vain. Glory be to Thee! Then, protect us from the punishment of the fire. 
3|192| Our Lord! Whomever Thou hast caused to enter the fire, surely, Thou hadst covered him with shame and there will not be for the ones who are unjust any helpers. 
3|193| Our Lord! Truly, we heard one who calls out, cries out for belief: Believe in your Lord! So we believed. Our Lord! So forgive Thou our impieties and absolve us of our evil deeds and gather us to Thee with the pious. 
3|194| Our Lord! Give us what Thou hadst promised us through Thy Messengers and cover us not with shame on the Day of Resurrection. Truly, Thou wilt not break Thy solemn declaration. 
3|195| And their Lord responded to them: I waste not the actions of ones who work among you from male or female. Each one of you is from the other. So those who emigrated and were driven out from their abodes and were maligned on My way and who fought and were slain, I will, certainly, absolve them of their evil deeds. And I will, certainly, cause them to enter into Gardens beneath which rivers run, a reward for good deeds from God. And God, with Him is the goodness of rewards for good deeds. 
3|196| Let not the going to and fro delude thee of those who were ungrateful in the land 
3|197| —a little enjoyment—again, their place of shelter will be hell. And it will be a miserable Final Place. 
3|198| But those who were Godfearing of their Lord, for them will be Gardens beneath which rivers run, ones who will dwell in them forever, a hospitality from God. And what is with God is best for the pious. 
3|199| And, truly, among the People of the Book are those who believe in God and what was caused to descend to you and what was caused to descend to them, ones who are humble toward God. They exchange not the signs of God for a little price. Those, for them, their compensation is with their Lord. And, truly, God is Swift in reckoning. 
3|200| O those who believed! Excel in patience and be steadfast. And be Godfearing of God so that perhaps you will prosper. 
4|1| O humanity! Be Godfearing of your Lord Who created you from a single soul and, from it, created its spouse and from them both disseminated many men and women. And be Godfearing of God through Whom you demand rights of one another and the wombs, the rights of blood relations. Truly, God had been watching over you. 
4|2| And give the orphans their property and take not in exchange the bad of yours for what is good of theirs. And consume not their property with your own property. Truly, this had been criminal, a hateful sin. 
4|3| And if you feared that you will not act justly with the orphans, then, marry who seems good to you of the women, by twos, in threes or four. But if you feared you will not be just, then, one or what your right hands possessed. That is likelier that you not commit injustice. 
4|4| And give wives their marriage portion as a spontaneous gift. Then, truly, if they (f) were pleased to offer to you anything of it on their (f) own, consume it wholesomely with repose. 
4|5| And give not the mentally deficient your wealth that God assigned to you to maintain for them, but provide for them from it and clothe them. And say honorable sayings to them. 
4|6| And test the orphans until when they reached the age for marriage. Then, if you observed them to be of right judgment, then, release their property to them and consume it not excessively and hastily, for they will develop. And whoever had been rich, let him have restraint and whoever had been poor, then, let him consume as one who is honorable. And when you released their property to them, call witnesses over them. And God sufficed as a Reckoner. 
4|7| For men is a share of what was left by the ones who are their parents and the nearest kin. And for women is a share of what was left by the ones who are their parents and nearest kin whether it was little or it was much—an apportioned share. 
4|8| And when the division is attended by those imbued with kinship and the orphans and the needy, then, provide for them from it and say honorable sayings to them. 
4|9| And let executors dread like those who, if they left behind weak offspring, would fear for them. Then, let them be Godfearing of God and let them say appropriate sayings. 
4|10| Truly, those who consume the wealth of orphans with injustice, consume only fire into their bellies and they will roast in a blaze. 
4|11| God enjoins you concerning your children. For the male, the like allotment of two females. And if there had been women, more than two, then, for them (f) two-thirds of what he left. But if there had been one, then, for her is half. And for one’s parents, for each one of them a sixth of what he left, if he would have a child. Then, if he be with no child and his parents inherited, then, a third to his mother. Then, if he had brothers, then a sixth for his mother. This is after any bequest he enjoins or any debt. Your parents or your children, you are not informed which of them is nearer to you in profit. This is a duty to God. Truly, God had been Knowing, Wise. 
4|12| And for you is a half of what your spouses left if they be with no child. Then, if they (f) had a child, then, for you is a fourth of what they (f) left. This is after any bequest which they bequeath or any debt. And for them (f) a fourth of what you left if you be with no child. And if you had a child, then, for them (f) is an eighth of what you left. This is after any bequest which you bequeath or any debt. And if a man would have no direct heirs, or a woman, but indirect heirs, and has a brother or sister, then, for each one of them (f), a sixth. Then, if there would be more than that, then, they would be ascribed associates in a third. This is after any bequest which is bequeathed or any debt without being one who presses the heirs. This is the enjoinment from God. And God is Knowing, Forbearing. 
4|13| These are the ordinances of God. And whoever obeys God and His Messenger, He will cause to enter Gardens beneath which rivers run, ones who will dwell in them forever. And that is the winning the sublime triumph. 
4|14| And whoever rebels against God and His Messenger and violates His ordinances, He will cause him to enter fire, one who shall dwell in it forever and he will have a despised punishment. 
4|15| And those who approach indecency among your wives, call to four among you to bear witness against them (f). Then, if they bore witness to the affair, then, hold them (f) back in their houses until death gathers them (f) to itself or God makes a way for them (f). 
4|16| And those two who among you approach that, then penalize them both. Then, if they repented and made things right, then, turn aside from them. Truly, God had been Accepter of Repentance, Compassionate. 
4|17| To turn only to God for forgiveness is for those who do evil in ignorance and, again, soon they are remorseful. Then, those are whom God turns to in forgiveness. And God had been Knowing, Wise. 
4|18| And there is not remorsefulness for those who do evil deeds until when one of them was attended by death, he would say: I, truly, repented now nor for those who die while they are ones who are ungrateful. Those, We made ready for them a painful punishment. 
4|19| O those who believed! It is not lawful for you that you inherit women unwillingly, and place not difficulties for them (f) so that you take away some of what you gave them (f), unless they approach a manifest indecency. And live as one who is honorable with them (f). Then, if you disliked them (f) perhaps you dislike something in which God makes much good. 
4|20| And if you wanted to exchange your spouse in place of another spouse and you gave one of them (f) a hundredweight, so take not anything from it. Would you take it by false charges to harm her reputation and in clear sin? 
4|21| And how would you take it when one of you had sexual intercourse with the other and they (f) took from you an earnest solemn promise? 
4|22| And marry not women whom your fathers married unless it was in the past. Truly, it had been an indecency and repugnant and how evil a way! 
4|23| Your mothers were forbidden to you and your daughters and your sisters and your paternal and maternal aunts and daughters of your brothers and daughters of your sisters and your foster mothers, those who breast fed you, and your sisters through fosterage and mothers of your wives and your stepdaughters, those who are in your care from wives, those with whom you have lain—but if you have not yet lain with them (f), then there is no blame on you; and wives of your sons who are of your loins; and that you should not gather two sisters together unless it be from the past. Truly, God had been Forgiving, Compassionate 
4|24| Forbidden to you are the ones who are married women, but from females whom your right hands (f) possessed. This is prescribed by God for you. And were permitted to you those who were beyond these so that with your wealth you be looking as males, ones who seek wedlock, not as ones who are licentious males. For what you enjoyed of it from them (f), give them (f) their bridal due as their dowry portion. And there is no blame on you for what you agreed on among yourselves after the duty. Truly, God had been Knowing, Wise. 
4|25| And whoever of you is not affluent to be able to marry the ones who are free, chaste females, the female believers, then, from females whom your right hands possessed, the ones who are female spiritual warriors, female believers And God is greater in knowledge about your belief. You are of one another. So marry them (f) with the permission of their people, and give them (f) their bridal due as one who is honorable, they being ones who are free, chaste females, without being ones who are licentious females, nor females, ones who take lovers to themselves. And when they (f) are in wedlock, if they (f) approached indecencies, then on them is half of the ones who are free, chaste females of the punishment. That is for those who dreaded fornication among you. And that you endure patiently is better for you. God is Forgiving, Compassionate. 
4|26| God wants to make manifest to you and to guide you to customs of those who were before you and to turn to you in forgiveness. And God is Knowing, Wise. 
4|27| God wants that He turn to you in forgiveness while those who follow their lusts want that you turn against God in a serious deviation. 
4|28| God wants to lighten the burden on you. And the human being was created weak. 
4|29| O those who believed! Consume not your wealth between you with falsehood, but that it be a transaction of agreeing together among you. And kill not yourselves. Truly, God had been Compassionate to you. 
4|30| But whoever accomplishes that through deep seated dislike and injustice, We will scorch him in a fire. And that would have been easy for God. 
4|31| If you avoid major sins that you are prohibited, We will absolve you of your minor sins and cause you to enter a generous gate. 
4|32| And covet not what God gave as advantage of it to some of you over others. For men is a share of what they deserved and for women is a share of what they (f) deserved. And ask God for His grace. Truly, God had been Knowing of everything. 
4|33| And to everyone We assigned inheritors to what the ones who are your parents and the nearest kin left. And those with whom you made an agreement with your sworn oaths, then, give them their share. Truly, God had been Witness over everything. 
4|34| Men are supporters of wives because God gave some of them an advantage over others and because they spent of their wealth. So the females, ones in accord with morality are the females, ones who are morally obligated and the females, ones who guard the unseen of what God kept safe. And those females whose resistance you fear, then admonish them (f) and abandon them (f) in their sleeping places and go away from them (f). Then if they (f) obeyed you, then look not for any way against them (f). Truly, God had been Lofty, Great. 
4|35| And if you feared a breach between the two, then, raise up an arbiter from his people and an arbiter from her people. If they both want to make things right, God will reconcile it between the two. Truly, God had been Knowing, Aware. 
4|36| And worship God and ascribe nothing as partners with Him. And kindness to the ones who are your parents and to the possessors of kinship and the orphans and the needy, to the neighbor who is as a possessor of strangeness and the neighbor who is kin and to the companion by your side and the traveler of the way and whom your right hands possessed. Truly, God loves not ones who had been proud, boastful, 
4|37| those who are misers and command humanity to miserliness and keep back what God gave them of His grace. And We made ready for the ones who are ungrateful a despised punishment 
4|38| and for those who spend their wealth to show off to humanity and believe neither in God nor in the Last Day. And to whomever Satan would be a comrade, then how evil a comrade! 
4|39| And what would be for them if they believed in God and the Last Day and spent out of what God provided them? God had been Knowing of them. 
4|40| Truly, God does not wrong even the weight of an atom. And if there be benevolence, He multiplies it and gives that which proceeds from His Presence a sublime compensation. 
4|41| Then, how will it be when We brought about from each community a witness and We brought thee about as witness against these? 
4|42| On a Day those who were ungrateful and rebelled against the Messenger will wish that the earth be shaped over them but they will not keep back God’s discourse. 
4|43| O those who believed! Come not near the formal prayer while you are intoxicated until you know what you are saying nor defiled but as one who passes through a way until you wash yourselves. And if you had been sick or on a journey or one of you drew near from the privy or you came into sexual contact with your wives and you find no water, then, aim at getting wholesome, dry earth. Then, wipe your faces and your hands. Truly, God had been Pardoning, Forgiving. 
4|44| Hast thou not considered those who were given a share of the Book? They exchange fallacy and they want you to go astray from the way. 
4|45| And God is greater in knowledge of your enemies. And God sufficed as a protector. And God sufficed as a helper. 
4|46| Among those who became Jews are those who tamper with words out of context. They say: We heard and we rebelled and: Hear—without being one who is caused to hear and: Look at us—distorting their tongues and discrediting the way of life. And if they said: We heard and we obeyed and: Hear thou and: Wait for us, it would have been better for them and more upright, except God cursed them for their ingratitude. So they believe not but a few. 
4|47| O those who were given the Book! Believe in what We sent down, that which establishes as true what was with you, before We obliterate faces, and repel them backward or curse them as We cursed the Companions of the Sabbath. And the command of God had been one that is accomplished. 
4|48| Truly, God forgives not to ascribe partners with Him and He forgives other than that whomever He wills. And whoever ascribes partners with God, then, surely, he devised a serious sin. 
4|49| Hast thou not considered those who make themselves seem pure? Nay! God makes pure whom He wills and they will not be wronged in the least. 
4|50| Look on how they devise a lie against God; and it sufficed as clear sin. 
4|51| Hast thou not considered those who were given a share of the Book? They believe in false gods and false deities and they say to those who were ungrateful: These are better guided than those who believed in the way! 
4|52| Those are those whom God cursed. And for whomever God curses, then, thou wilt not find a helper for him. 
4|53| Or share they in the dominion? Then, they give not humanity in the least. 
4|54| Are they jealous of humanity for what God gave them of His grace? Then, surely, We gave the people of Abraham the Book and wisdom and We gave them a sublime dominion. 
4|55| Then, among them are some who believed in him and among them are some who barred him. And hell sufficed for a blaze. 
4|56| Truly, those who were ungrateful for Our signs, We will scorch them in a fire. As often as their skins were wholly burned, We will substitute with other skins so that they will experience the punishment. Truly, God had been Almighty, Wise. 
4|57| And those who believed and did as the ones in accord with morality, We will cause them to enter into Gardens beneath which rivers run, ones who will dwell in them forever, eternally. For them in it will be purified spouses. And We will cause them to enter into plenteous shady shadow. 
4|58| Truly, God commands you to give back trusts to the people. And when you gave judgment between humanity, give judgment justly. Truly, how excellent God admonishes you of it. Truly, God had been Hearing, Seeing. 
4|59| O those who believed! Obey God and obey the Messenger and those imbued with authority among you. Then, if you contended with one another in anything, refer it to God and the Messenger if you had been believing in God and the Last Day. That is better and a fairer interpretation. 
4|60| Hast thou not considered those who claim that they believed in what was caused to descend to thee and what was caused to descend before thee? They want to take their disputes to another for judgment—to false deities—while they were commanded to disbelieve in them, but Satan wants to cause them to go astray—a far wandering astray. 
4|61| And when it was said to them: Approach now to what God caused to descend and approach now to the Messenger, thou hadst seen the ones who are hypocrites barring thee with hindrances. 
4|62| How then will it be when they are lit on by an affliction for what their hands put forward? Again, they drew near thee, swearing by God: Truly, we wanted but kindness and conciliation! 
4|63| They are those whom God knows what is in their hearts. So turn aside from them and admonish them and say to them concerning themselves penetrating sayings. 
4|64| And We never sent a Messenger, but he is obeyed with the permission of God. And if, when they did wrong themselves, they drew near to thee and asked for the forgiveness of God and the Messenger asked for forgiveness for them, they found God Accepter of Repentance, Compassionate. 
4|65| But no! By thy Lord! They will not believe until they make thee a judge in what they disagreed about between them. Again, they find within themselves no impediment to what thou hadst decided, resigning themselves to submission, full submission. 
4|66| And if We prescribed for them that you: Kill yourselves, or: Go forth from your abodes, they would not have accomplished it, but a few of them. And had they accomplished what they are admonished by it, it would have been better for them and a stauncher confirming. 
4|67| And, then, We would have given them from that which proceeds from Our Presence a sublime compensation. 
4|68| And We would have guided them on a straight path. 
4|69| And whoever obeys God and the Messenger, those are to whom God was gracious among the Prophets and just persons and the witnesses and the ones in accord with morality. And excellent were those as allies! 
4|70| That is the grace from God. And God sufficed as Knowing. 
4|71| O those who believed! Take your precautions. Then, move forward in companies of men or move forward altogether. 
4|72| And, truly, among you is he who lingers behind. Then, if affliction lit on you, he would say: Surely, God was gracious to me that I not be a witness to them. 
4|73| And if the grace of God lit on you, certainly, he would say, as if there be not any affection between you and between him: Would that I had been with them so that I would have won a triumph, winning a sublime triumph! 
4|74| Then, let fight in the way of God those who sell this present life for the world to come. And whoever fights in the way of God, then, is slain or is vanquished, We will give him a sublime compensation. 
4|75| And why should you not fight in the way of God and for the ones taken advantage of due to weakness among the men and the women and the children, those who say: Our Lord! Bring us out from this town whose people are the ones who are unjust and assign for us a protector from Thy Presence and assign for us a helper from Thy Presence? 
4|76| Those who believed fight in the way of God. And those who were ungrateful fight in the way of the false deity. So fight the protectors of Satan. Truly the cunning of Satan had been weak. 
4|77| Hast thou not considered those who when it was said to them: Limit your hands from warfare and perform the formal prayer and give the purifying alms? Then, when fighting was prescribed for them, there was a group of people among them who dread humanity, even dreading God or with a more severe dreading, and they said: Our Lord! Why hadst Thou prescribed fighting for us? Why hadst Thou not postponed it for another near term for us? Say: The enjoyment of the present is little and the world to come is better. For whomever was Godfearing, you will not be wronged in the least. 
4|78| Wherever you be, death will overtake you, even if you had been in imposing towers. And when benevolence lights on them, they say: This is from God. And when an evil deed lights on them, they say: This is from thee. Say: All is from God. So what is with these folk that they understand almost no discourse? 
4|79| Whatever of benevolence lit on thee is from God. And whatever evil deeds lit on thee, then, is from thyself. And We sent thee to humanity as a Messenger. And God sufficed as Witness. 
4|80| Whoever obeys the Messenger, surely, obeyed God and whoever turned away, then We sent thee not as a guardian over them. 
4|81| And they say: Obedience! Then, when they departed from thee, a section of them spent the night planning on other than what thou hast said. And God records what they spend the night planning. So turn aside from them and put thy trust in God. And God sufficed as Trustee. 
4|82| But no! They meditate not on the Recitation. And if it had been from other than God, certainly, they would have found in it many contradictions. 
4|83| Whenever drew near them a command of public safety or fear, they broadcasted it. But if they referred it to the Messenger, and to those imbued with authority among them, they would have known it—those who investigate from among them. And if it were not for the grace of God on you and His mercy, certainly, you would have followed Satan, but a few. 
4|84| So fight thou in the way of God. Thou art not placed with a burden but for thyself. And encourage the ones who believe. Perhaps God will limit the might of those who were ungrateful. And God is Stauncher in might and Stauncher in making an example. 
4|85| Whoever intercedes with a benevolent intercession, there will be for himself a share of it. And whoever intercedes with an intercession for bad deeds, there will be for himself a like part of it. And God had been over everything One Who Oversees. 
4|86| And when you were given greetings with greetings, then, give greetings fairer than that or return the same to them. Truly, God had been over everything a Reckoner. 
4|87| God, there is no god but He. He will, certainly, gather you on the Day of Resurrection. There is no doubt about it. And who is one who is more sincere in discourse than God? 
4|88| Then, what is it with you that you be two factions concerning the ones who are hypocrites? And God overthrew them for what they earned? Want you to guide whom God caused to go astray? And whomever God causes to go astray, thou wilt never find for him a way. 
4|89| They wished for you to be ungrateful as they were ungrateful so you become equals. So take not to yourselves protectors from them until they emigrate in the way of God. Then, if they turned away, then, take them and kill them wherever you found them. And take not to yourselves from them either a protector or a helper, 
4|90| but those who reach out to a folk who between you and between them is a solemn promise or when they drew near to you, their breasts were reluctant that they fight you or they fight their folk? And if God willed, He would have given them authority over you and they would have fought you. So if they withdrew from you and fight not against you and gave a proposal of surrender to you, then, God has not assigned any way for you against them. 
4|91| You will find others who want that they be safe from you and that they be safe from their folk. Whenever they were returned to temptation, they were overthrown in it. So if they withdraw not from you, nor give a proposal of surrender to you and limit not their hands, then, take them and kill them wherever you came upon them. And those, We made for you a clear authority against them. 
4|92| And it had not been for the one who believes to kill one who believes unless by error. And whoever killed one who believes by error the letting go of a believing bondsperson and blood money should be handed over to his family unless that family be charitable. And if he had been from the enemy folk of yours and he be one who believes, then, there should be the letting go of a believing bondsperson. And if he had been of a folk who between you and between them is a solemn promise, then, blood money should be handed over to the family and the letting go of a believing bondsperson. Then, whoever finds not the means, then, formally fast for two successive months as a penance from God. And God had been Knowing, Wise. 
4|93| And whoever kills one who believes as one who is willful, then, his recompense is hell, one who will dwell in it forever. And God was angry with him and cursed him and He prepared for him a tremendous punishment. 
4|94| O those who believed! When you traveled in the way of God, then be clear and say not to whomever gave you a proposal of peace: Thou art not one who believes, looking for advantage in this present life. With God is much gain. Thus, you had been like that before, then God showed grace to you, so be clear. Truly, God had been Aware of what you do. 
4|95| Not on the same level are the ones who sit at home among the ones who believe—other than those imbued with disability—and the ones who struggle in the way of God with their wealth and their lives. God gave advantage to the ones who struggle with their wealth and their lives by a degree over the ones who sit at home. And to each God promised the fairer. And God gave advantage to the ones who struggle over the ones who sit at home with a sublime compensation 
4|96| degrees from Him and forgiveness and mercy. And God had been Forgiving, Compassionate. 
4|97| Truly, those whom the angels gathered to themselves—ones who are unjust to themselves—they will say: In what condition had you been? They will say: We had been ones taken advantage of due to weakness on the earth. They will say: Be not the earth of God that which is extensive enough to emigrate in it? Then, for those, their place of shelter will be hell. And how evil a Homecoming! 
4|98| But the ones taken advantage of due to weakness of the men and the women and the children who are neither able to access some means, nor are they truly guided to the way 
4|99| then those, perhaps God will pardon them. And God had been Pardoning, Forgiving. 
4|100| And whoever emigrates in the way of God will find in and on the earth many places of refuge and plenty. And whoever goes forth from his house as one who emigrates for God and His Messenger, and, again, death overtakes him, then, surely, his compensation will fall on God. And God had been Forgiving, Compassionate. 
4|101| And when you traveled on the earth, there is no blame on you if you shorten the formal prayer if you feared that you would be persecuted by those who were ungrateful. The ones who are ungrateful, they had been for you a clear enemy. 
4|102| And when thou hadst been among them, performing the formal prayer with them, let a section of them stand up with thee and take their weapons. And when they prostrated themselves, then, let them move behind you and let another section approach who has not yet formally prayed. Then, let them formally pray with thee and let them take their precaution and their weapons. Those who were ungrateful wished for you to be heedless of your weapons and your sustenance. They would turn against you with a single turning. And there is no blame on you if you had been annoyed because of rain or you had been sick that you lay down your weapons. And take precaution for yourselves. Truly, God prepared for the ones who are ungrateful a despised punishment. 
4|103| Then, when you satisfied the formal prayer, then, remember God when upright and sitting and on your sides. And, then, when you were secured, perform the formal prayer. Truly, the formal prayer had been —for the ones who believe— a timed prescription. 
4|104| And be not feeble in looking for the folk. If you be suffering, they suffer as you suffer, yet you hope for from God what they hope not for, and God had been Knowing, Wise. 
4|105| Truly, We caused to descend to thee the Book with The Truth so that thou wilt give judgment between humanity by what God caused thee to see. And be thou not the pleader for ones who are traitors. 
4|106| And ask God for forgiveness. Truly, God had been Forgiving, Compassionate. 
4|107| And dispute not for those who are dishonest to themselves. Truly, God loves not anyone who had been a sinful betrayer. 
4|108| They conceal themselves from humanity, but they conceal themselves not from God, as He is with them when they spend the night planning with sayings with which He is not well-pleased. God had been One Who Encloses what they do. 
4|109| Lo, behold! You are these who disputed for them in this present life. Then, who will dispute with God for them on the Day of Resurrection? Or who will be a trustee over them? 
4|110| And whoever does evil or does wrong to himself, again, asks for forgiveness from God will, truly, find God Forgiving, Compassionate. 
4|111| And whoever earns a sin, truly, he earns it only against himself. And God had been Knowing, Wise. 
4|112| And whoever earns a transgression or a sin, and, again, accuses an innocent one, surely, laid a burden on himself of false charges that harm another’s reputation and a clear sin. 
4|113| And were it not for the grace of God on thee and His mercy, a section of them was about to do something that would cause thee to go astray. And they cause none to go astray but themselves and they injure thee not at all. And God caused the Book to descend to thee and wisdom and taught thee what thou art not knowing. The grace of God had been sublime upon thee. 
4|114| No good is there in most of their conspiring secretly, but for him who commanded charity or one who is honorable or makes things right between humanity. And whoever accomplishes that—looking for the goodwill of God—then, We will give him a sublime compensation. 
4|115| And whoever makes a breach with the Messenger after the guidance became clear to him and follows a way other than that of the ones who believe, We will turn him away from what he turns to and We will scorch him in hell. How evil a Homecoming! 
4|116| Truly, God forgives not to ascribe partners with Him. And He forgives other than that whomever He wills. And whoever ascribes partners with God, then, surely, went astray, a wandering far astray. 
4|117| They call to other than Him none but female gods and they call to but the rebellious Satan. 
4|118| God cursed him.• And Satan said: Truly, I will take to myself of Thy servants, an apportioned share, 
4|119| and I will cause them to go astray. And I will fill them with false desires. And I will command them, then they will slit the ears of the flocks. And I will command them, and they will alter the creation of God. And whoever takes Satan to himself for a protector other than God, then, surely, he lost, a clear loss. 
4|120| Satan promises them and fills them with false desires and Satan promises them nothing but delusion. 
4|121| Those, their place of shelter will be hell and they will find no way to escape from it. 
4|122| But those who believed and did as the ones in accord with morality, We will cause them to enter Gardens beneath which rivers run, ones who will dwell in them forever, eternally. The promise of God is true. And who is One More Sincere in speech than God? 
4|123| Paradise will be neither after your fantasies, nor the fantasies of the People of the Book. Whoever does evil will be given recompense for it and he will not find for himself other than God either a protector or a helper. 
4|124| And whoever does as the ones in accord with morality—whether male or female—and is one who believes then, those will enter the Garden and they will not be wronged, in the least. 
4|125| And who is fairer in the way of life than he who submitted his face to God and he is one who is a doer of good and followed the creed of Abraham, a monotheist? And God took Abraham to Himself as a friend. 
4|126| And to God is whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in and on the earth. And God had been One Who Encloses everything. 
4|127| And they ask thee for advice about women. Say: God pronounces to you about them (f) and what is recounted to you in the Book about women who have orphans, those to whom (f) you give not what was prescribed for them (f) because you prefer that you marry them (f) and about the ones taken advantage of due to weakness among children and that you stand up for the orphans with equity. And whatever you accomplish of good, then, truly, God had been Knowing of it. 
4|128| And if a woman feared resistance or turning aside from her husband no blame on either of them that they make things right between the two, that there be reconciliation. And reconciliation is better. And persons were prone to stinginess. And if you do good and are Godfearing, then, truly, God had been Aware of what you do. 
4|129| You will never be able to be just between wives, even if you were eager so incline not with total inclination away from her, forsaking her as if she be one who is in suspense. And if you make things right and are Godfearing, then, truly, God had been Forgiving, Compassionate. 
4|130| And if the two split up, God will enrich each of them from all His plenty. And God had been One Who is Extensive, Wise. 
4|131| And to God is whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in and on the earth and, certainly, We charged those who were given the Book before you, and to you, that you be Godfearing of God alone. And if you are ungrateful, then, truly, to God belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in and on the earth. And God had been Sufficient, Worthy of Praise. 
4|132| And to God belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in and on the earth. And God sufficed as a Trustee. 
4|133| If He wills, He will cause you to be put away—O humanity—and approach with others. And over that God had been Powerful. 
4|134| Whoever had been wanting a reward for good deeds in the present, then with God is The Reward for good deeds in the present and in the world to come. And God had been Hearing, Seeing. 
4|135| O those who believed! Be staunch in equity as witnesses to God even against yourselves or the ones who are your parents or the nearest of kin, whether you would be rich or poor, then God is Closer to both than you are. So follow not your desires that you become unbalanced. And if you distort or turn aside, then, truly, God had been Aware of what you do. 
4|136| O those who believed! Believe in God and His Messenger and the Book which He sent down to His Messenger and the Book that He caused to descend before. And whoever is ungrateful to God and His angels and His Books and His Messengers and the Last Day, then, surely, went astray, a wandering far astray. 
4|137| Truly those who believed, and, again, disbelieved, and, again, believe and, again, disbelieve, and, again, added to disbelief, neither will God be forgiving of them nor guide them to a way. 
4|138| Give thou good tidings to the ones who are hypocrites that, truly, for them is a painful punishment, 
4|139| those who take to themselves the ones who are ungrateful as their protectors instead of the ones who believe! Are they looking for great glory with them? Truly, then, all great glory belongs to God alone. 
4|140| And, surely, He sent down to you in the Book that when you heard the signs of God being unappreciated and being ridiculed, then, and sit not with them until they discuss in conversation about other than that or else, you will be like them. Truly, God is One Who Gathers the ones who are hypocrites and the ones who are ungrateful altogether in hell. 
4|141| Those who lie in wait for you, if there had been a victory from God for you, they would say: Have we not been with you? If the ones who are ungrateful had been with a share, they would say: Gain we not mastery over you and secure you from among the ones who believe? And God will give judgment between you on the Day of Resurrection. God will never assign the ones who are ungrateful any way over the ones who believe. 
4|142| Truly, the ones who are hypocrites seek to trick God. And He is The One Who Deceives them, and when they stood up for formal prayer, they stood up lazily to make display to humanity. And they remember not God but a little, 
4|143| ones who are wavering between this and that, neither with these, nor with these. And whom God causes to go astray, thou wilt never find a way for him. 
4|144| O those who believed! Take not to yourselves the ones who are ungrateful as protectors instead of the ones who believe. Want you to assign to God clear authority against yourselves? 
4|145| Truly, the ones who are hypocrites will be in the lowest, deepest reaches of the fire. And thou wilt not find for them any helper, 
4|146| but those who repented and made things right and cleaved firmly to God and made sincere their way of life for God, then, those will be with the ones who believe. And God will give the ones who believe a sublime compensation. 
4|147| What would God accomplish by your punishment if you gave thanks to Him and believed in Him? God had been One Who is Responsive, Knowing. 
4|148| God loves not the open publishing of evil sayings, the open publishing of evil sayings, but by him who was wronged. God had been Hearing, Knowing. 
4|149| If you show good or conceal it or pardon evil, then, truly, God had been Pardoning, Powerful. 
4|150| Truly, those who are ungrateful to God and His Messengers and they want to separate and divide between God and His Messengers and they say: We believe in some and we disbelieve in others, they want that they take themselves to a way between that. 
4|151| Those, they are, in truth, the ones who are ungrateful. We made ready for the ones who are ungrateful a despised punishment. 
4|152| And those who believed in God and His Messengers and they separate and divide not between any of them, those, He will give them their compensation. And God had been Forgiving, Compassionate. 
4|153| The People of the Book ask thee that thou hast sent down to them a Book from heaven. Surely, they had asked Moses for greater than that. Then, they said: Cause us to see God publicly. So a thunderbolt took them for their injustice. Again, they took the calf to themselves after what drew near to them—the clear portents. Even so We pardoned that. And We gave Moses a clear authority. 
4|154| And We exalted the mount above them for their solemn promise. And We said to them: Enter the door as ones who prostrate themselves. And We said to them: Disregard not the Sabbath! And We took from them an earnest solemn promise 
4|155| for their breaking their solemn promise and their ingratitude for the signs of God and their killing the Prophets without right and their saying: Our hearts are encased. Nay! God set a seal on them for their ingratitude—so they believe not but a few— 
4|156| and for their ingratitude and their saying against Mary serious, false charges to harm her reputation 
4|157| and for their saying: We killed the Messiah, Jesus son of Mary, the Messenger of God. And they killed him not, nor they crucified him. Rather, a likeness to him of another was shown to them. And, truly, those who were at variance in it are in uncertainty about it. There is no knowledge with them about it but they are pursuing an opinion. And they for certain killed him not. 
4|158| Nay! God exalted him to Himself. And God had been Almighty, Wise. 
4|159| Yet there is none among the People of the Book but will, surely, believe in Jesus before his death. And on the Day of Resurrection he will be a witness against them. 
4|160| So for the injustice of those who became Jews, We forbade them what was good that was permitted to them and for their barring many from the way of God 
4|161| and for their taking usury—although they were prohibited from it—and for their consuming the wealth of humanity with falsehood. We made ready for the ones who are ungrateful among them a painful punishment. 
4|162| But the ones who are firmly rooted in knowledge among them and the ones who believe, they believe in what was caused to descend to thee and what was caused to descend before thee. They are the ones who perform the formal prayer. And they are the ones who give the purifying alms. They are the ones who believe in God and the Last Day. It is those to whom We will give a sublime compensation. 
4|163| Truly, We revealed to thee, as We revealed to Noah and the Prophets after him. And We revealed to Abraham and Ishmael and Isaac and Jacob and the Tribes and Jesus and Job and Jonah and Aaron and Solomon. And We gave David the Psalms. 
4|164| And Messengers We related to thee before and Messengers We relate to thee not. God spoke directly to Moses, speaking directly. 
4|165| Messengers are ones who give good tidings and ones who warn so that humanity not be in disputation against God after the Messengers. And God had been Almighty, Wise. 
4|166| And God bears witness to what He caused to descend to thee. He caused it to descend with His knowledge. And the angels also bear witness. And God sufficed as witness. 
4|167| Truly, those who were ungrateful and barred others from the way of God, they, surely, went astray, a wandering far astray. 
4|168| Truly, those who were ungrateful and did wrong, God will never be forgiving of them, nor guide them to a road 
4|169| but the road to hell, ones who will dwell in it forever, eternally. And that had been easy for God. 
4|170| O humanity! Surely, the Messenger drew near you with The Truth from your Lord. So believe, it is better for you. And if you are ungrateful, then, truly, to God is whatever is in the heavens and the earth. And God had been Knowing, Wise. 
4|171| O People of the Book! Go not beyond the limits in your way of life and say not about God but The Truth: That the Messiah, Jesus son of Mary, was a Messenger of God and His Word that He cast to Mary and a Spirit from Him. So believe in God and His Messengers. And say not: Three. To refrain yourselves from it is better for you. There is only One God. Glory be to Him that He have a son! To Him belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in and on the earth and God sufficed as a Trustee. 
4|172| The Messiah will never disdain that he be a servant of God nor the angels, the ones who are brought near to Him. And whoever disdains His worship and grows arrogant, He will assemble them altogether to Himself. 
4|173| Then, as for those who believed and did as the ones in accord with morality, then, He will pay their compensation in full and increase His grace for them. And as for those who disdained and grew arrogant, He will punish them with a painful punishment. They will not find for themselves other than God a protector or a helper. 
4|174| O humanity! Surely, there drew near you proof from your Lord. And We caused to descend to you a clear light. 
4|175| So for those who believed in God and cleaved firmly to Him, then, He will cause them to enter into mercy from Him and grace and guide them to Himself on a straight path. 
4|176| They ask thee for advice. Say: God pronounces to you about indirect heirs. If a man perished and he be without children and he has a sister, then, for her is half of what he left. And he inherits from her if she be without children. And if there had been two sisters, then, for them (f), two-thirds of what he left. And if there had been brothers/sisters, men and women, the man will have the like allotment as two females. God makes manifest to you so that you go not astray, and God is Knowing of everything. 
5|1| O those who believed! Live up to your agreements. Flocks of animals were permitted to you, but what is now recounted to you: You are not ones who are permitted hunting while you are in pilgrim sanctity. Truly, God gives judgment how He wants. 
5|2| O those who believed! Profane not the waymarks of God nor the Sacred Month nor the sacrificial gift nor the garlanded nor ones who are bound for the Sacred House looking for grace from their Lord and contentment. And when you left your pilgrim sanctity, then, hunt. And let not that you detest a folk who barred you from the Masjid al-Haram drive you into exceeding the limits.• And cooperate with one another in virtuous conduct and God-consciousness and cooperate not with one another in sin and deep seated dislike. And be Godfearing of God. Truly, God is Severe in repayment. 
5|3| Carrion was forbidden to you and blood and flesh of swine and what of it was hallowed to other than God and the one that is a strangled beast and the one that is beaten to death and the animal one fallen to its death and the animal gored to death or eaten by a beast of prey—but what you slew lawfully—and what were sacrificed to fetishes and what you partition by divining arrows. That is contrary to moral law. Today, those who were ungrateful gave up hope because of your way of life. So dread them not but dread Me. Today, I perfected your way of life for you and I fulfilled My divine blessing on you and I was well-pleased with submission to the One God for your way of life. Whoever was driven by necessity due to emptiness—not one who inclines to sin—then, truly, God is Forgiving, Compassionate. 
5|4| They ask thee what was permitted to them. Say: That which is good was permitted to you and what you taught of hunting creatures, as one who teaches hunting dogs of what God taught you. So eat of what they seized for you and remember the Name of God over it and be Godfearing of God. Truly, God is Swift in reckoning. 
5|5| Today, what is good was permitted to you. The food of those to whom We gave the Book is allowed to you and your food is allowed to them. And the ones who are free, chaste females from the females, ones who believe and the ones who are free, chaste females from among those who were given the Book before you when you were to give them their bridal due, as males, ones who seek wedlock, not as ones who are licentious males, nor as males, ones who take lovers to themselves. And whoever disbelieves after belief, then, surely, his actions will be fruitless. And he in the world to come will be among the ones who are losers. 
5|6| O those who believed! When you stood up for the formal prayer, then, wash your faces and your hands up to the elbows and wipe your heads and your feet up to the ankles. If you had been defiled, then, cleanse yourselves. And if you had been sick or on a journey or one of you drew near from the privy or you came into sexual contact with your wives and you find no water, then, aim at getting wholesome, dry earth and wipe your faces and hands with it. God wants not to make any impediment for you and He wants to purify you and to fulfill His divine blessing on you, so that perhaps you will give thanks. 
5|7| And remember the divine blessing of God on you and His solemn promise that he made as a covenant with you by it when you said: We heard and we obeyed. And be Godfearing of God. Truly, God is Knowing of what is in the breasts. 
5|8| O those who believed! Be staunch in equity as witnesses to God and let not that you detest a folk drive you into not dealing justly. Be just. That is nearer to God-consciousness. And be Godfearing of God. Truly, God is Aware of what you do. 
5|9| And God promised those who believed and did as the ones in accord with morality that for them is forgiveness and a sublime compensation. 
5|10| And those who were ungrateful and denied Our signs, those will be the Companions of Hellfire! 
5|11| O those who believed! Remember the divine blessing of God on you when they, a folk, were about to extend their hands against you, but He limited their hands from you. And be Godfearing of God. And in God let the ones who believe put their trust. 
5|12| And, certainly, God took a solemn promise from the Children of Israel and We raised up among them twelve chieftains. And God said: Truly, I am with you. If you performed the formal prayer and gave the purifying alms and believed in My Messengers and you supported them and you lent God a fairer loan, I would, certainly, absolve you of your evil deeds. And I would, certainly, cause you to enter Gardens beneath which rivers run. Then, whoever among you was ungrateful after this, then, surely, he went astray from the right way. 
5|13| Then, for their breaking their solemn promise, We cursed them and We made their hearts ones that harden. They tamper with the words out of context and they forgot an allotment of what they were reminded of in it. Thou wilt not cease to peruse the treachery of them, but a few of them. Then, overlook and pardon them. Truly, God loves the ones who are doers of good. 
5|14| And from those who said: We are Christians, We took their solemn promise, but they forgot an allotment of what they were reminded of it so We stirred up enmity and hatred among them until the Day of Resurrection. And God will tell them of what they had been crafting. 
5|15| O People of the Book! Surely, Our Messenger drew near you. He makes manifest to you much of what you had been concealing of the Book and pardons much. Surely, from God drew near you a light and a clear Book. 
5|16| God guides with it whoever followed His contentment to ways of peace and He brings them out from the shadows into the light with His permission and He guides them to a straight path. 
5|17| Certainly, ungrateful were those who said: Truly, God is the Messiah, the son of Mary. Say: Who, then, has any sway over God? If He wanted to He would cause the Messiah son of Mary and his mother to perish and whatever is in and on the earth altogether. To God belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth and what is between the two. He creates what He wills. And God is Powerful over everything. 
5|18| And the Jews and Christians said: We are the children of God and His beloved. Say: Why, then, does He punish you for your impieties? Nay! You are mortals whom He created. He forgives whom He wills and He punishes whom He wills. And to God belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth and what is even between the two. And to Him is the Homecoming! 
5|19| O People of the Book! Surely, Our Messenger drew near you. He makes manifest to you the way of life—after an interval without Messengers—so that you say not: There drew not near us either a bearer of good tidings or a warner. Then, surely, drew near to you a bearer of good tidings and a warner. And God is Powerful over everything. 
5|20| And mention when Moses said to his folk: O my folk! Remember the divine blessing of God on you when He assigned Prophets among you and assigned kings and gives you what He gave not to anyone of the worlds. 
5|21| O my folk! Enter the region, one that is sanctified, that God prescribed for you and go not back, turning your back, for, then, you will turn about as ones who are losers. 
5|22| They said: O Moses! Truly, in it is a haughty folk and we will never enter it until they go forth from it, but if they go forth from it, then, we will, certainly, be ones who enter. 
5|23| Two men to whom God was gracious said among those who fear to disobey: Enter on them through the door! And when you entered it, you will, certainly, be ones who are victors. And put your trust in God if you had been ones who believe. 
5|24| They said: O Moses! We will never enter it as long as they continued in it, so thou and thy Lord, you two go and fight. We are here, ones who sit at home. 
5|25| He said: My Lord! I control no one but myself and my brother so separate Thou between us and between the folk, the ones who disobey. 
5|26| He said: Truly, it is that which is forbidden to them ^for forty years.^ They will wander about the earth. So grieve not for the folk, the ones who disobey. 
5|27| And recount thou to them the tiding of the two sons of Adam in Truth when they both brought near a sacrifice and it was received from one of them but there is non-acceptance from the other. He said: I will, surely, kill thee. He said: Truly, God receives only from the ones who are Godfearing. 
5|28| If thou wert to extend thy hand against me so that thou wouldst kill me, I would not be one who stretches out my hand towards thee so that I kill thee. I fear God, Lord of the worlds. 
5|29| Truly, I want that thou wilt draw the burden of my sin and thy sin, then, to be among the Companions of the Fire. That is the recompense of the ones who are unjust. 
5|30| Then, his soul prompted him to kill his brother. And he killed him and became among the ones who are losers. 
5|31| Then, God raised up a raven to scratch the earth, to cause him to see how to cover up the naked corpse of his brother. He says: Woe to me! Was I unable to be like this raven to cover up the naked corpse of my brother? Then, he became among the ones who were remorseful. 
5|32| On account of that, We prescribed for the Children of Israel that whoever killed a person, other than in retribution for another person, or because of corruption in and on the earth, it will be as if he had killed all of humanity. And whoever gave life to one, it will be as if he gave life to all of humanity. And, certainly, our Messengers drew near them with the clear portents. Again, truly, many of them after that were ones who were excessive in and on the earth. 
5|33| The only recompense for those who war against God and His Messenger and hasten about corrupting in and on the earth, is that they be killed or caused to be crucified or their hands and their feet be cut off on opposite sides or they be expelled from the region. That for them is their degradation in the present. And for them in the world to come, there is a tremendous punishment, 
5|34| but for those who repented before you have power over them. So know you that God is Forgiving, Compassionate. 
5|35| O those who believed! Be Godfearing of God and look for an approach to Him and struggle in His way so that perhaps you will prosper. 
5|36| Truly, those who were ungrateful, if they had whatever is in and on the earth and the like of it with as much again that they offer it as ransom from the punishment on the Day of Resurrection, it would not be received from them and for them is a painful punishment. 
5|37| They will want to go forth from the fire, but they will not be ones who go forth from it. And for them is an abiding punishment. 
5|38| And as for the one who is a male thief and the one who is a female thief, then, sever their hands as recompense for what they earned, an exemplary punishment from God. And God is Almighty, Wise. 
5|39| But whoever repents after his injustice and made things right, then, truly, God will turn to him in forgiveness. Truly, God is Forgiving, Compassionate. 
5|40| Hast thou not known that to God, to Him belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth? He punishes whom He wills and He forgives whom He wills. And God is Powerful over everything. 
5|41| O Messenger! Let them not dishearten thee—those who compete with one another in ingratitude among those who said: We believed with their mouths while their hearts believe not. ^And among those who became Jews^ are ones who hearken to lies, ones who hearken to folk of others who approach not thee. They tamper with the words out of context. They say: If you were given this, then, take it, but if you are not given this, then, beware! And for whomever God wants to test, thou wilt never have sway over him against God at all. Those are whom God wants not to purify their hearts. For them in the present is degradation. And for them in the world to come is a tremendous punishment. 
5|42| They are ones who hearken to lies, the ones who devour the wrongful. Then, if they drew near thee, then, give thou judgment between them or turn aside from them. And if thou hast turned aside from them, then, they will never injure thee at all. And if thou hadst given judgment, then, give judgment between them with equity. Truly, God loves the ones who act justly. 
5|43| And how will they make thee their judge while with them is the Torah wherein is the determination of God? Yet, again, after that, they turn away. Those are the ones who believe not. 
5|44| Truly, We caused the Torah to descend wherein is guidance and light. The Prophets give judgment with it, those who submitted to God, for those who became Jews and the rabbis and learned Jewish scholars who committed to memory the Book of God and they had been witnesses to it. So dread not humanity, but dread Me. And exchange not My signs for a little price. And whoever gives not judgment by what God caused to descend, those, they are the ones who are ungrateful. 
5|45| And We prescribed for them in it: A life for a life and an eye for an eye and a nose for a nose and an ear for an ear and a tooth for a tooth and for injuries to the body, reciprocation. Then, whoever was charitable and forgives it, it will be an atonement for him. And whoever gives judgment not by what God caused to descend, then, those, they are the ones who are unjust. 
5|46| And We sent following in their footsteps, Jesus son of Mary, one who establishes as true what was before him in the Torah. And We gave him the Gospel in which is guidance and light, and that which establishes as true what was before him in the Torah and a guidance and admonishment for the ones who are Godfearing. 
5|47| And let the People of the Gospel give judgment by what God caused to descend in it. And whoever gives not judgment by what God caused to descend, then, those, they are the ones who disobey. 
5|48| And We caused the Book to descend to thee with The Truth, that which establishes as true what was before it of the Book and that which preserves it. So give judgment between them by what God caused to descend. And follow not their desires that drew near thee against The Truth. For each among you We made a divine law and an open road. And if God willed, He would have made you one community to try you with what He gave you so be forward in good deeds. To God is your return altogether. Then, He will tell you about what you had been at variance in it. 
5|49| And give judgment between them by what God caused to descend and follow not their desires and beware of them so that they tempt thee not from some of what God caused to descend to thee. And if they turned away, then, know that God only wants that He light on them for some of their impieties. And, truly, many within humanity are ones who disobey. 
5|50| Look they for a determination of Age of Ignorance? And who is fairer than God in determination for a folk who are certain? 
5|51| O those who believed! Take not to yourselves the Jews and the Christians as protectors. Some of them are protectors of one another. And whoever among you turns away to them, then, he is of them. Truly, God guides not the folk, the ones who are unjust. 
5|52| And thou hast seen those who in their hearts is a sickness. They compete with one another. They say: We dread that a turn of fortune should light on us. Then, perhaps God brings a victory or a command from Him? Then, they will become —from what they kept secret within themselves—ones who are remorseful. 
5|53| And those who believed will say: Are these they who swore an oath by God —the most earnest of sworn oaths—that they were with you? Their actions were fruitless. They became ones who are losers. 
5|54| O those who believed! Whoever of you goes back on his way of life, God will bring the folk whom He loves and whom love Him, humble-spirited towards the ones who believe, disdainful towards the ones who are ungrateful. They struggle in the way of God and they fear not the reproach of one who is reproached. That is the grace of God. He gives it to whom He wills. And God is One Who is Extensive, Knowing. 
5|55| Your protector is only God and His Messenger and those who believed and those who perform the formal prayer and give the purifying alms and they are ones who bow down. 
5|56| And whoever turns in friendship to God and His Messenger and those who believed, then, behold the Party of God. They are the ones who are victors. 
5|57| O those who believed! Take not to yourselves those who took to themselves your way of life in mockery and as a pastime from among those who were given the Book before you and the ones who are ungrateful, as protectors. And be Godfearing of God if you had been ones who believe. 
5|58| And when you cried out for formal prayer they took it to themselves in mockery and as a pastime. That is because they are a folk who are not reasonable. 
5|59| Say: O People of the Book! Seek you revenge on us because we believed in God and what was caused to descend to us and what was caused to descend before, while, truly, most of you are ones who disobey? 
5|60| Say: Will I tell thee of worse than that as a reward from God? He whom God cursed and with whom He was angry and He made some of them into apes and swine who worshiped the false deities. Those are worse placed and ones who go astray from the right way. 
5|61| And when they drew near you they said: We believed. And, surely, they entered with ingratitude and they, surely, went forth with it. And God is greater in knowledge of what they had been keeping back. 
5|62| And thou hast seen many of them competing with one another in sin and deep seated dislike and in consuming the wrongful. What they had been doing was miserable. 
5|63| Why prohibit not the rabbis and learned Jewish scholars their sayings of sin and their consuming the wrongful? Miserable was what they had been crafting. 
5|64| And the Jews said: The hand of God is one that is restricted! Restricted were their hands! And they were cursed for what they said.• Nay! His hands are ones that are stretched out: He spends how He wills. And, certainly, many of them increase by what was caused to descend to thee from thy Lord in defiance and in ingratitude. And We cast among them enmity and hatred until the Day of Resurrection. Whenever they kindled a fire of war, God extinguished it. And they hasten about corrupting in and on the earth. And God loves not the ones who make corruption. 
5|65| And if the People of the Book believed and were Godfearing, certainly, We would have absolved them from their evil deeds and caused them to enter into Gardens of Bliss. 
5|66| And if they adhered to the Torah and the Gospel—what was caused to descend to them from their Lord, they would, certainly, have eaten in abundance from above them and from beneath their feet. Among them is a community of ones who halt between two opinions. But many of them, how evil is what they do! 
5|67| O Messenger! State what was caused to descend to thee from thy Lord, for if thou hast not accomplished it, then, thou wilt not have stated His message. And God will save thee from the harm of humanity. Truly, God guides not the folk, the ones who are ungrateful. 
5|68| Say: O People of the Book! You are not based on anything until you adhere to the Torah and the Gospel and what was caused to descend to you from your Lord. And, certainly, many of them increase by what was caused to descend to thee from thy Lord in defiance and ingratitude. So grieve not for folk, the ones who are ungrateful. 
5|69| Truly, those who believed, those who became Jews and Sabeans and Christians—whoever believed in God and the Last Day and did as one in accord with morality, then, there will be neither fear in them nor will they feel remorse. 
5|70| Certainly, We took a solemn promise from the Children of Israel and We sent Messengers to them. Whenever a Messenger drew near them with what they themselves yearn not for, a group of people denied them and a group of people kill them. 
5|71| And they assumed there would be no test. They were in darkness and became unhearing. Again, God turned to them in forgiveness. Again, in darkness and became unhearing many of them. And God is Seeing of what they do. 
5|72| And, certainly, were ungrateful those who said: Truly, God is He, the Messiah, son of Mary, but the Messiah said: O Children of Israel! Worship God, my Lord and your Lord. Truly, whoever ascribes partners with God, then, surely, God forbade the Garden to him. And his place of shelter will be the fire. And for the ones who are unjust, there are no helpers. 
5|73| Certainly, ungrateful were those who said: Truly, God is the third of three.• There is no god but One God. And if they refrain not themselves from what they say, there will afflict those who were ungrateful among them a painful punishment. 
5|74| Will they not, then, turn to God for forgiveness and ask for His forgiveness? And God is Forgiving, Compassionate. 
5|75| The Messiah son of Mary was not but a Messenger. Surely, Messengers passed away before him. And his mother was a just person (f). They both had been eating food. Look on how We make manifest the signs to them. Again, look on how they are misled! 
5|76| Say: Worship you other than God what controls neither hurt nor profit for you? And God, He is The Hearing, The Knowing. 
5|77| Say: O People of the Book! Go not beyond limits in your way of life but with The Truth and follow not the desires of the folk who, surely, went astray before. And they caused many to go astray. And they themselves went astray from the right way. 
5|78| Those who were ungrateful were cursed among the Children of Israel by the tongue of David and that of Jesus son of Mary. That was because they would rebel and they had been exceeding the limits. 
5|79| They had not been forbidding one another from that which is unlawful that they committed. Miserable was what they had been committing! 
5|80| Thou hast seen many of them turning away to those who were ungrateful. Miserable was what was put forward for them themselves so that God was displeased with them and in their punishment they are ones who will dwell in it forever. 
5|81| If they had been believing in God and the Prophet and what was caused to descend to him, they would not have taken them to themselves protectors, but many of them are ones who disobey. 
5|82| Truly, thou wilt find the hardest of humanity in enmity to those who believed are the Jews and those who have ascribed partners with God. And, certainly, thou wilt find the nearest of them in affection to those who believed are those who said: We are Christians. That is because among them are priests and monks and they grow not arrogant. 
5|83| And when they heard what was caused to descend to the Messenger, thou hast seen their eyes overflow with tears because they recognized The Truth. They say: Our Lord! We believed so write us down with the ones who bear witness. 
5|84| And why believe we not in God and in what drew near us of The Truth? And we are desirous that Our Lord would cause us to enter the Garden among the folk—the ones in accord with morality. 
5|85| Then, God repaid them for what they said—Gardens beneath which rivers run, ones who will dwell in them forever. And that is the recompense of the ones who are doers of good. 
5|86| But those who are ungrateful and denied Our signs, those will be the Companions of Hellfire. 
5|87| O those who believed! Forbid not what is good that God permitted to you and exceed not the limits. Truly, God loves not the ones who exceed the limits. 
5|88| And eat of what God provided you, the lawful, what is good. And be Godfearing of God in Whom you are ones who believe. 
5|89| God will not take you to task for what is idle talk in your oaths, but He will take you to task for oaths you made as an agreement. Then, its expiation is the feeding of ten needy people of the average of what you feed your own people or clothing them or letting go of a bondsperson. But whoever finds not the means, then, formal fasting for three days. That is the expiation for your oaths when you swore them. And keep your oaths safe. Thus, God makes manifest His signs to you so that perhaps you will give thanks. 
5|90| O those who believed! Truly, intoxicants and gambling and fetishes and divining arrows are of the disgraceful actions of Satan. Then, avoid them so that perhaps you will prosper. 
5|91| But Satan only wants that he precipitate enmity and hatred between you through intoxicants and gambling and bar you from the remembrance of God and from formal prayer. Then, will you be ones who desist? 
5|92| And obey God and obey the Messenger and beware. Then, truly, if you turned away, then, know that only on Our Messenger is the delivering of Our clear message. 
5|93| There is not for those who believed and did as the ones in accord with morality blame for what they tasted when they were Godfearing and believed and did as the ones in accord with morality and, again, they were Godfearing and believed. And, again, they were Godfearing and did good. And God loves the ones who are doers of good. 
5|94| O those who believed! Certainly, God will try you with something of the game that your hands and your lances attain so that God knows who fears Him in the unseen. Then, whoever exceeded the limits after that, for him is a painful punishment. 
5|95| O those who believed! Kill not game when you are in pilgrim sanctity. And whoever of you killed as one who is willful, then, the recompense is like what he killed of flocks by two possessors of justice who give judgment. Among you will be a sacrificial gift—that which reaches the Kabah—or the expiation of food for the needy or the equivalent of that in formal fasting so that he, certainly, experiences the mischief of his conduct. God pardoned what is past. And whoever reverted to it, then, God will requite him. And God is Almighty, Possessor of Requital. 
5|96| The game of the sea was permitted to you and the food of it as sustenance for you and for a company of travelers, but the game of dry land was forbidden to you as long as you continued in pilgrim sanctity. And be Godfearing of God to Whom you will be assembled. 
5|97| God made the Kabah the Sacred House, maintaining it for humanity and the Sacred Month and the sacrificial gift and the garlanded. That is so that you will know that God knows whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in and on the earth and that God is Knowing of everything. 
5|98| Know that God is Severe in repayment and that God is Forgiving, Compassionate. 
5|99| What is with the Messenger is not but the delivering of the message. And God knows whatever you show and whatever you keep back. 
5|100| Say: Not on the same level are the bad and what is good even if the prevalence of the bad impressed thee. So be Godfearing of God, O those imbued with intuition, so that perhaps you will prosper. 
5|101| O those who believed! Ask not about things that if they are shown to you would raise anger in you. Yet if you ask about them at the time when the Quran is being sent down, they will be shown to you. God pardoned that which is past. And God is Forgiving, Forbearing. 
5|102| Surely, the folk asked about them before you. Again, they became ones who are ungrateful for it. 
5|103| God made not the thing called Bahirah nor Saibah nor Wasilah nor Hami, but those who were ungrateful, they devise lies against God and most of them are not reasonable. 
5|104| And when it was said to them: Approach now to what God caused to descend and to the Messenger, they said: Enough is what we found our fathers upon. Even though their fathers had been knowing nothing nor are they truly guided? 
5|105| O those who believed! Upon you is the charge of your souls. He who went astray injures you not if you were truly guided. To God is the return of you all. Then, He will tell you what you had been doing. 
5|106| O those who believed! Have testimony between you when death attended anyone of you. At the time of bequeathing, have two possessors of justice from among yourselves or two others from among others if you traveled through the region and the affliction of death lit on you. You will detain them both after the formal prayer. And they will swear by God. If you were in doubt about them, have them say: We will not exchange it for a price even if he had been possessing kinship. And we will not keep back testimony of God. Truly, we, then, would be among the ones who are perverted. 
5|107| Then, if it was ascertained that the two merited an accusation of sin, then, two others will stand up in their station from among those who are the most deserving, nearest in kinship, and they both swear an oath by God saying: Our testimony has a better right than the testimony of the other two. And we exceeded not the limits, for, truly, we, then, would be among the ones who are unjust. 
5|108| That is likelier that they bring testimony in proper form or they fear that their oaths will be repelled after the others’ oaths. So be Godfearing of God and hear. And God guides not the folk, the ones who disobey. 
5|109| On a Day when God will gather the Messengers and will say: What was your answer? They will say: We have no knowledge. Truly, Thou, Thou alone art Knower of the unseen. 
5|110| Mention when God said: O Jesus son of Mary! Remember My divine blessing on thee and on the one who is thy mother, when I confirmed thee, Jesus, with the hallowed Spirit so that thou hast spoken to humanity from the cradle and in manhood and when I taught thee the Book and wisdom and the Torah and the Gospel and when thou hast created from clay the likeness of a bird with My permission and thou hast breathed into it and it becomes a bird with My permission and thou hast cured one blind from birth and the leper with My permission and when thou hast brought out the dead with My permission and when I limited the Children of Israel from thee when thou hadst drawn near them with the clear portents. And those who were ungrateful among them said: This is nothing but clear sorcery. 
5|111| Mention when I inspired the disciples: Believe in Me and My Messenger. They said: We believed and bear witness that we are ones who submit to God. 
5|112| Mention when the disciples said: O Jesus son of Mary! Is thy Lord able to send down to us a table spread with food from heaven? Jesus said: Be Godfearing of God, if you had been ones who believe. 
5|113| They said: We want that we eat of it so that our hearts be at rest and we know that thou, surely, wast sincere to us and that we be the ones who bear witness to that. 
5|114| Jesus son of Mary said: O God! Our Lord! Cause to descend for us a table spread with food from heaven that it will be a festival for the first of us and the last of us and a sign from Thee. And provide us. And Thou art Best of the ones who provide. 
5|115| God said: Truly, I am One Who Sends Down to you. But whoever is ungrateful after that among you, then, I will punish him with a punishment that I punish not anyone of the worlds. 
5|116| And mention when God said: O Jesus son of Mary! Hadst thou said to humanity: Take me and my mother to yourselves other than God? He would say: Glory be to Thee! It is not for me that I say what there is no right for me to say. If I had been saying it, then, surely, Thou wouldst have known it. Thou hast known what is in my soul and I know not what is in Thy Soul. Truly, Thou, Thou alone art Knower of the unseen. 
5|117| I said not to them but what Thou hadst commanded me of it: That you worship God, my Lord and your Lord. And I had been witness over them as long as I continued among them. Then, when Thou hadst gathered me to Thyself, Thou hadst been The Watcher over them. Thou art, truly, Witness over everything. 
5|118| If Thou art to punish them, then, they are but Thy servants. And if Thou art to forgive them truly, Thou, Thou alone art The Almighty, The Wise. 
5|119| God would say: This Day the ones who are sincere will profit from their sincerity. For them are Gardens beneath which rivers run, ones who will dwell in them forever, eternally. God was well-pleased with them and they are well-pleased with Him. That is the winning the sublime triumph. 
5|120| To God belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth and whatever is in and on them. And He is Powerful over everything. 
6|1| The Praise belongs to God Who created the heavens and the earth and made the shadows and the light. Again, those who were ungrateful to their Lord, they equate others to Him. 
6|2| It was He Who created you from clay, and, again, decided a term, a term, that which was determined by Him. Again, you contest. 
6|3| And He is God in the heavens and in and on the earth. He knows your secret and what you openly publish and He knows whatever you earn. 
6|4| And a sign not approaches for them from the signs of their Lord but they would be ones who turn aside from it. 
6|5| Then, surely, they denied The Truth when it drew near to them. Then, tidings approach them of what they had been ridiculing of it. 
6|6| Consider they not how many a generation before them We caused to perish? We established them firmly in and on the earth such as We firmly establish not for you. And We sent abundant rain from heaven. And We made rivers run beneath them. So We caused them to perish for their impieties and We caused to grow after them other generations. 
6|7| And if We sent down to thee a Book on parchment, then, they would have stretched towards it with their hands. Those who were ungrateful would have said: This is nothing but clear sorcery. 
6|8| And they said: Why was an angel not caused to descend to him? And, certainly, if We caused to descend an angel, the command would be decided. Again, no respite would be given to them. 
6|9| And if We made him an angel, certainly, We would have made him as a man and We would have confused them when they are already confused. 
6|10| And, certainly, Messengers were ridiculed before thee. So those who derided them were surrounded by what they had been ridiculing. 
6|11| Say: Journey through the earth; again, look on how had been the Ultimate End of the ones who deny. 
6|12| Say: To whom is whatever is in the heavens and the earth? Say: To God. He prescribed mercy for Himself. He will, certainly, gather you on the Day of Resurrection. There is no doubt in it. Those who lost themselves that Day, then, they will not believe. 
6|13| And to Him belongs whatever inhabited the nighttime and the daytime. And He is The Hearing, The Knowing. 
6|14| Say: Will I take to myself, other than God, a protector, One Who is Originator of the heavens and the earth? And it is He who feeds and He who is never fed. Say: Truly, I was commanded: that I be the first who submitted to the One God. And thou hast not been among the ones who are polytheists. 
6|15| Say: Truly, I fear if I rebelled against my Lord, the punishment of the tremendous Day! 
6|16| He who is turned away from it on that Day, then, surely, He had mercy on him. And that is the winning the clear triumph. 
6|17| And if God touches thee with harm, then, no one will remove it but He. And if He touches thee with good, then, He is Powerful over everything. 
6|18| He is The One Who is Omniscient over His servants. And He is The Wise, The Aware. 
6|19| Say: Which thing is greater in testimony? Say: God is Witness between me and you. And this, the Quran, was revealed to me that I should warn you with it and whomever it reached. Truly, are you bearing witness that there are other gods with God? Say: I bear not such witness. Say: He is not but One God and I am, truly, free from partners you ascribe with Him. 
6|20| Those to whom We gave the Book recognize it as they recognize their own children.• But those, they who lost themselves, they believe not. 
6|21| And who does greater wrong than he who devised a lie against God or denied His signs. Truly, the ones who are unjust will not prosper. 
6|22| And on a Day We will assemble them altogether. Again, We will say to those who ascribed partners with God: Where are your ascribed associates with God whom you had been claiming? 
6|23| Again, their dissent will not be but that they would say: By God! Our Lord! We had not been ones who are polytheists. 
6|24| Look on how they have lied against themselves. Went astray with them that which they had been devising. 
6|25| And among them are those who listen to thee. But We laid sheathes on their hearts so that they not understand it and in their ears is a heaviness. And if they are to see every sign they will not believe in it. So that when they drew near thee, they dispute with thee. Those who were ungrateful say: This is nothing but fables of the ancient ones. 
6|26| And they prohibit others from it. And they withdraw aside from it. And they cause to perish, no doubt, none but themselves, but they are not aware. 
6|27| And if thou wouldst see when they would be stationed by the fire, they will say: Would that we be returned to life. Then, we would not deny the signs of our Lord and we would be among the ones who believe. 
6|28| Nay! Shown to themselves will be what they had been concealing before. And even if they were returned, they would revert to what they were prohibited from there and, truly, they are the ones who lie. 
6|29| They said: There is nothing but this, our present life and we are not ones who will be raised up. 
6|30| And if thou wouldst see when they would be stationed before their Lord. He would say: Is this not The Truth? They would say: Yea, by Our Lord. He would say: Then, experience the punishment for what you had been ungrateful. 
6|31| Surely, those lost who denied the meeting with God until when the Hour drew near them suddenly, they would say: What a regret for us that we neglected in it! And they will carry heavy loads on their backs. How evil is what they bear! 
6|32| And this present life is nothing but a pastime and diversion. And the Last Abode is better for those who are Godfearing. Will you not, then, be reasonable? 
6|33| Surely, We know that what they say disheartens thee. Truly, they deny thee not. Rather the ones who are unjust negate the signs of God. 
6|34| And, certainly, Messengers before thee were denied yet they endured patiently that they were denied and they were maligned until Our help approached them. And no one will change the Word of God. And, certainly, there drew near thee tidings of the ones who are sent. 
6|35| If their turning aside had been troublesome to thee, then, if thou wert able, be looking for a hole in the earth or a ladder to heaven so that thou wouldst bring them some sign. If God willed, He would have gathered them to The Guidance. Be thou not among the ones who are ignorant. 
6|36| It is only those who hear who respond.• As for the dead, God will raise them up. Again, they are returned to Him. 
6|37| And they said: Why was a sign not sent down to him from his Lord? Say: Truly, God is One Who Has Power over what sign He sends down, except most of them know not. 
6|38| And there is no moving creature in or on the earth, none that is a fowl flying with its two wings, but they are communities like yours. We neglected not anything in the Book. Again, they will be assembled to their Lord. 
6|39| And those who denied Our signs are unwilling to hear and unwilling to speak. They are in the shadows. Whomever God wills, He causes to go astray. And whomever He wills, He lays on a straight path. 
6|40| Say: Considered you that if the punishment of God approached you or the Hour approached you, would you call to any other than God if you had been ones who are sincere? 
6|41| Nay! To Him alone you would call and He would remove that for which you call to Him—if He willed—and you will forget whatever partners you ascribe with Him. 
6|42| And, certainly, We sent to communities that were before thee. Then, We took them with desolation and tribulation so that perhaps they will lower themselves to Us. 
6|43| Then, why when drew near them Our might, they lowered not themselves? Rather, their hearts became hard. And Satan made appear pleasing to them what they had been doing. 
6|44| So when they forgot about what they were reminded in it, We opened to them the doors of everything. Until when they were glad with what they were given, We suddenly took them. That is when they were ones who are seized with despair. 
6|45| So cut off were the last remnant of the folk who did wrong. And The Praise belongs to God, Lord of the worlds. 
6|46| Say: Considered you that if God took your having the ability to hear and your sight and sealed over your hearts, what god other than God restores them to you? Look on how We diversify the signs! Again, they still drew aside. 
6|47| Say: Considered you that if the punishment of God approached you suddenly or publicly, will anyone be caused to perish but the folk, the ones who are unjust? 
6|48| We send not the ones who are sent, but as ones who give good tidings and ones who warn. So whoever believed and made things right, then, there will be neither fear in them nor will they feel remorse. 
6|49| But those who denied Our signs, the punishment will afflict them because they had been disobeying. 
6|50| Say: I say not to you: With me are treasures of God nor that I know the unseen nor say I to you that I am an angel. I follow only what is revealed to me. Say: Are they on the same level— the unwilling to see and the seeing? Will you, then, not reflect? 
6|51| And warn with the Quran those who fear that they will be assembled before their Lord. Other than He there is neither a protector nor an intercessor, so that perhaps they will be Godfearing. 
6|52| And drive not away those who call to their Lord in the morning and the evening, wanting His Countenance. Their reckoning is not on thee at all. And thy reckoning is not on them at all. If thou wast to drive them away, then, thou wouldst be among the ones who are unjust. 
6|53| Thus, We tried some of them with others that they should say: Is it these to whom God showed grace from among us? Is not God greater in knowledge of the ones who are thankful? 
6|54| And when drew near thee, those who believe in Our signs, say: Peace be to you. Your Lord prescribed mercy for Himself so that anyone of you who did evil in ignorance—again, repented afterwards and made things right—then, truly, He is Forgiving, Compassionate. 
6|55| And, thus, We explain Our signs distinctly so that the way is indicated for the ones who sin. 
6|56| Say: I was prohibited that I worship those whom you call to other than God. Say: I will not follow your desires, for, then, I would have gone astray. I would not be of the ones who are truly guided. 
6|57| Say: I am with a clear portent from my Lord and you denied it. I have not of that which you seek to hasten. The determination is with God. He relates The Truth. And He is Best of the ones who distinguish truth from falsehood. 
6|58| Say: Truly, if with me was what you seek to hasten, the command would be decided between me and between you. And God is greater in knowledge of the ones who are unjust. 
6|59| With Him are the keys of the unseen. None knows them but He. And He knows whatever is on dry land and in the sea. Not a leaf descends but He knows it, nor a grain in the shadows of the earth, nor fresh nor dry thing, but it is in a clear Book. 
6|60| It is He Who gathers you to Himself by nighttime and He knows what you were busy with by daytime. Again, He raises you up in it so that the term, that which is determined, is decided. Again, to Him is your return. Again, He will tell you of what you had been doing. 
6|61| And He is The One Who Is Omniscient over His servants. And He sends over you recorders until when death drew near one of you. Our messengers gathered him to themselves and they neglect not. 
6|62| Again, they would be returned to God, their Defender, The True. Is not the determination for Him? And He is The Swiftest of the ones who reckon. 
6|63| Say: Who delivers you from the shadows of the dry land and the sea? You call to Him humbly and inwardly: If Thou wert to rescue us from this, we will be of the ones who are thankful. 
6|64| Say: God delivers you from them and from every distress. And, again, you ascribe partners with Him. 
6|65| Say: He is The One Who Has Power to raise up on you a punishment from above you, or from beneath your feet or to confuse you as partisans and to cause you to experience the violence of some of you to one another. Look on how We diversify the signs so that perhaps they will understand! 
6|66| And thy folk denied it and it is The Truth. Say: I am not a trustee over you. 
6|67| For every tiding there is an appointed time. And you will know it. 
6|68| And when thou hadst seen those who engage in idle talk about Our signs, then, turn aside from them until they discuss in conversation other than that. And if Satan should cause thee to forget, then, after a reminder, sit not with the folk, the ones who are unjust. 
6|69| There is not on those who are Godfearing anything of their reckoning, but a reminder so that perhaps they will be Godfearing. 
6|70| Forsake those who took to themselves their way of life as a pastime and as a diversion and whom this present life deluded. But remind with it, the Quran, so that a soul would not be given up to destruction for what it earned. Other than God there is not for it a protector nor an intercessor. And even if it be an equitable equivalent, it will not be taken from it. Those are those who were given up to destruction for what they earned. For them is a drink of scalding water and a painful punishment because they had been ungrateful. 
6|71| Say: Will we call to other than God what can neither hurt nor profit us? And are we repelled on our heels after God guided us like one whom the satans lured, bewildered in and on the earth although he has companions who call him to the guidance saying: Approach us? Say: Truly, the guidance of God is The Guidance. And we were commanded to submit to the Lord of the worlds 
6|72| and to perform the formal prayer and be Godfearing of Him. And it is He to Whom you will be assembled. 
6|73| And it is He Who created the heavens and the earth with The Truth. And on a Day He says: Be! Then, it is! His saying is The Truth. And His is the dominion on a Day when the trumpet will be blown. He is One Who Knows of the unseen and the visible. And He is The Wise, The Aware. 
6|74| And mention when Abraham said to his father Azar: Hast thou taken idols to thyself as gods? Truly, I see thee and thy folk clearly wandering astray. 
6|75| And, thus, We cause Abraham to see the kingdom of the heavens and the earth so that he would be of the ones who are certain in belief. 
6|76| So when night outspread over him, he saw a star. He said: This is my Lord. Then, when it set, he said: I love not that which sets. 
6|77| Then, when he saw the moon, that which rises, he said: This is my Lord. Then, when it set, he said: If my Lord guides me not, certainly, I would have been among the folk, the ones gone astray. 
6|78| Then, when he saw the sun, that which rises, he said: This is my Lord. This is greater. Then, when it set, he said: O my folk! Truly, I am free from the partners you ascribe with Him. 
6|79| Truly, I turned my face to He Who Originated the heavens and the earth—as a monotheist and I am not of the ones who are polytheists. 
6|80| And his folk argued with him. He said: You argue with me about God while, surely, He guided me? I fear not whatever partners you ascribe with Him. When my Lord wills a thing, my Lord encompassed everything in His knowledge. Will you not, then, recollect? 
6|81| And how should I fear what you ascribed as partners with Him while you fear not that you ascribe as partners with God? He sends not down to you any authority for it. Then, which of the two groups of people has better right to a place of sanctuary if you had been knowing? 
6|82| Those who believed and confuse not their belief with injustice, those, to them belongs the place of sanctuary. And they are ones who are truly guided. 
6|83| And that was Our disputation that We gave Abraham against his folk. We exalt in degrees whom We will, truly, thy Lord is Wise, Knowing. 
6|84| And We bestowed on him Isaac and Jacob. Each of them We guided. And Noah We guided before and among his offspring are David and Solomon and Job and Joseph and Moses and Aaron. And, thus, We gave recompense to the ones who are doers of good. 
6|85| And Zechariah and Yahya and Jesus and Elijah—all are among the ones in accord with morality. 
6|86| And Ishmael and Elisha and Jonah and Lot. We gave all an advantage over the worlds. 
6|87| And from among their fathers and their offspring and their brothers/sisters, We elected them and We guided them to a straight path. 
6|88| That is guidance of God. He guides with it whom He wills of His servants. And if they ascribed partners with Him, what they had been doing was fruitless for them. 
6|89| Those are those to whom We gave the Book and critical judgment and prophethood. So if these are ungrateful for them, then, surely, We charged a folk with them who is not of the ones who are ungrateful for them. 
6|90| Those are those whom God guided. So imitate their guidance. Say: I ask of you no compensation for it. It is not but a reminder for the worlds. 
6|91| And they measured not God with His true measure when they said: God caused not to descend anything to a mortal. Say: Who caused the Book to descend that was brought about for Moses as a light and guidance for humanity? You make it into parchments. You show them some of it and conceal much of it. And you were taught what you know not, you nor your fathers. Say: God revealed it. Again, forsake them playing, engaging in their idle talk. 
6|92| And this is a Book We caused to descend—that which is blessed—and that which establishes as true what was before it and for thee to warn the Mother of Towns and who are around it and those who believe in the world to come believe in it. And they over their formal prayers are watchful. 
6|93| And who does greater wrong than he who devised lies against God or said: It was revealed to me, when nothing is revealed to him. Or who said: I will cause to descend the like of what God caused to descend. And if thou wouldst see when the ones who are unjust are in the perplexity of death and the angels—the ones who stretch out their hands will say: Relinquish your souls. Today, you will be given recompense with the humiliating punishment for what you had been saying about God other than The Truth. And you had been growing arrogant to His signs. 
6|94| And, certainly, you drew near Us one by one as We created you the first time. And you left what We granted you behind your backs. We see not your intercessors with you, those whom you claimed as your ascribed associates. Certainly, the bonds between you were cut asunder. And gone astray from you is what you had been claiming. 
6|95| Truly, it is God who is One Who Causes to Break Forth the grain and the pit of a date. He brings out the living from the dead and is One Who Brings Out the dead from the living. That is God. Then, how you are misled. 
6|96| He is One Who Causes to Break Forth the morning dawn and He made the night as a place of comfort and rest and the sun and the moon to keep count. That is the foreordaining of The Almighty, The Knowing. 
6|97| And it is He Who made the stars for you so that you will be truly guided by them in the shadows of dry land and the sea. Surely, We explained distinctly the signs for a folk who know. 
6|98| And it is He Who caused you to grow from a single soul, then, a temporary stay and a repository. Surely, We explained distinctly the signs for a folk who understand. 
6|99| And it is He Who caused to descend water from heaven. Then, We brought out from it every kind of bringing forth. Then, We brought out herbs from it. We bring out from it thick-clustered grain and from the date palm tree, from the spathe of it, thick clusters of dates, that which draws near and gardens of the grapevines and the olives and the pomegranates, like each to each and not resembling one another. Look on its fruit when it bore fruit and its ripening. Truly, in this are signs for a folk who believe. 
6|100| And they made as associates with God—the jinn—although He created them. And they falsely attributed to Him sons and daughters without knowledge. Glory be to Him! Exalted is He above what they allege. 
6|101| He is Beginner of the heavens and the earth. How would He have a child when He is without a companion and He created everything and He is Knowing of everything? 
6|102| That is God, your Lord. There is no god but He—the One Who is Creator of everything—so worship Him. For He is Trustee over everything. 
6|103| No sight overtakes Him, but He overtakes sight. And He is The Subtle, The Aware. 
6|104| Surely, clear evidence drew near you from your Lord. So whoever perceived, it will be for his own soul. Whoever was in darkness will be against his own soul. Say: And I am not a guardian over you. 
6|105| And, thus, We diversify the signs and they will say: Thou hadst received instruction and We will make the Quran manifest for a folk who know. 
6|106| Follow thou what was revealed to thee from thy Lord. There is no god but He. Turn thou aside from the ones who are polytheists. 
6|107| And if God willed, they would not have ascribed partners with Him, We made thee not a guardian over them, nor art thou a trustee for them. 
6|108| And offend not those who call to other than God so that they not offend God out of spite without knowledge. Thus, We made to appear pleasing the actions of every community. Again, to their Lord is their return. Then, He will tell them what they had been doing. 
6|109| And they swear by God the most earnest sworn oaths that if a sign would draw near them, they would, certainly, believe in it. Say: The signs are only with God. And what will cause you to realize that even if the signs were to draw near, they would not believe? 
6|110| We will turn around and around their minds and their sight as they believe not in it the first time. And We will forsake them in their defiance, wandering unwilling to see. 
6|111| And even if We sent down the angels to them and the dead spoke to them and we assembled everything against them, face to face, yet they would not believe unless God wills, except many of them are ignorant. 
6|112| And, thus, We made an enemy for every Prophet, satans from among humankind and the jinn. Some of them reveal to some others an ornamented saying, a delusion. And if thy Lord willed, they would not have accomplished it. So forsake them and what they devise, 
6|113| while minds will bend towards it of those who believe not in the world to come and they will be well-pleased with it. And they will gain what the ones who gain gain. 
6|114| Will I be looking for an arbiter other than God while it is He Who caused to descend to you the Book, one that is distinct? And those to whom We gave the Book, they know that it is one that is sent down by thy Lord with The Truth. So thou hast not been among the ones who contest. 
6|115| Completed was the Word of thy Lord in sincerity and justice. There is no one who changes His Words. And He is The Hearing, The Knowing. 
6|116| And if thou hast obeyed most of who are on the earth, they will cause thee to go astray from the way of God. They follow nothing but opinion and they only guess. 
6|117| Truly, thy Lord is He Who is greater in knowledge of who goes astray from His way. And He is greater in knowledge of the ones who are truly guided. 
6|118| So eat of that over which the Name of God was remembered if you had been ones who believe in His signs. 
6|119| And why should you not eat of that over which the Name of God was remembered on it? Surely, He explained distinctly to you what He forbade to you unless you were driven by necessity to it. And, truly, many cause others to go astray by their desires without knowledge. Truly, thy Lord, He is greater in knowledge of the ones who exceed the limits. 
6|120| And forsake manifest sin and its inward part. Truly, those who earn sin, they will be given recompense for what they had been gaining. 
6|121| Eat not of that over which the Name of God is not remembered on it. Truly, it is contrary to moral law. And, truly, the satans will reveal to their protectors so that they dispute with you and if you obeyed them, truly, you would be of the ones who are polytheists. 
6|122| Is he who had been lifeless and We gave him life and We made a light for him by which he walks among humanity like he who is in the shadows and is not one who goes forth from them? Thus, it was made to appear pleasing to ones who are ungrateful what they had been doing. 
6|123| And, thus, We made in every town greater ones who sin that they plan in it. Yet they plan not but against themselves although they are not aware. 
6|124| And when a sign drew near them they said: We will not believe until we are given the like of what was given to Messengers of God.• God is greater in knowledge where to assign His message. On those who sinned will light contempt from God and a severe punishment for what they had been planning. 
6|125| And whomever God wants, He guides him. He expands his breast for The Submission to One God. And whomever He wants to cause to go astray, He makes his breast tight, troubling, as if he had been climbing up a difficult ascent. Thus, God assigns disgrace on those who believe not. 
6|126| And this is the path of thy Lord, one that is straight. Surely, We explained distinctly the signs for a folk who recollect. 
6|127| For them is the abode of peace with their Lord. And He is their protector for what they had been doing. 
6|128| And mention on a Day He will assemble them altogether. O assembly of the jinn! Surely, you acquired much from humankind. And their protectors among humankind would say: Our Lord! Some of us enjoyed some others and we reached our term that was appointed by Thee for us. He would say: The fire is your place of lodging, ones who will dwell in it forever, but what God willed. Truly, thy Lord is Wise, Knowing. 
6|129| And, thus, that is how We make some of them friends with some others who are ones who are unjust to one another for what they had been earning. 
6|130| O assembly of jinn and humankind! Approach not Messengers from among yourselves relating to you My signs, and warning you of the meeting of this, your Day? They said: We bore witness against ourselves. This present life deluded them and they bore witness against themselves that they had been ones who are ungrateful. 
6|131| That is because thy Lord would never be One Who Causes to Perish towns unjustly while their people are ones who are heedless. 
6|132| And for everyone there are degrees for what they did. And thy Lord is not One Who is Heedless of what they do. 
6|133| Thy Lord is The Sufficient, Possessor of Mercy. If He wills, He will cause you to be put away and will make a successor after you of whomever He wills, just as He caused you to grow from offspring of other folk. 
6|134| Truly, what you are promised is, certainly, that which arrives and you will not be ones who frustrate it. 
6|135| Say: O my folk! Act according to your ability. Truly, I too am one who acts. Then, you will know for whom the Ultimate End will be the abode. Truly, the ones who are unjust will not prosper. 
6|136| And they assigned to God of what He made numerous of cultivation and flocks a share. Then, they said in their claim: This is for God and this is for our ascribed associates. But what had been ascribed for their associates then, reaches not out to God and what had been ascribed for God then, reaches out to their associates. How evil is the judgment they give! 
6|137| And, thus, made to appear pleasing to many of the ones who are polytheists was the killing of their children by those whom they ascribe as associates with Him so that they deal them destruction and so that they confuse their way of life for them. And if God willed, they would not have accomplished it. So forsake them and what they devise. 
6|138| And they said: These flocks and cultivation are banned. None should taste them, but whom we will, so they claim. And there are flocks whose backs were forbidden and flocks that they remember not the Name of God on it, a devising against Him. He will give them recompense for what they had been devising. 
6|139| And they said: What is in the bellies of these flocks is exclusively for our males and is that which is forbidden to our female spouses, but if it would be born dead, then, they are ascribed as associates in it. He will give recompense to them for their allegations. Truly, He is Wise, Knowing. 
6|140| They, surely, lost those who foolishly kill their children without knowledge. They forbade what God provided them in a devising against God. They, surely, went astray and had not been ones who are truly guided. 
6|141| And it is He Who caused gardens to grow, trellised and without being trellised and the date palm trees and a variety of harvest crops and the olives and the pomegranates resembling and not resembling one another. Eat of its fruit when it bore fruit and give its due on the day of its reaping and exceed not all bounds. Truly, He loves not the ones who are excessive. 
6|142| And of the flocks are some as beasts of burden and some for slaughter. Eat of what God provided you and follow not in the steps of Satan. Truly, he is a clear enemy to you. 
6|143| Eight diverse pairs; two of sheep and two of goats. Say: Forbade He the two males or the two females? Or what is contained in the wombs of the two females? Tell me with knowledge if you had been ones who are sincere. 
6|144| And of the camels two and of cows two, say: Forbade He the two males or the two females or what is contained in the wombs of the two females? Had you been witnesses when God charged you with this? Then, who does greater wrong than he who devised a lie against God to cause humanity to go astray without knowledge. Truly, God guides not the folk, the ones who are unjust. 
6|145| Say: I find not in what was revealed to me to taste that which is forbidden to taste, but that it be carrion or blood, that which is shed or the flesh of swine for that, truly, is a disgrace or was hallowed—contrary to moral law—to other than God on it. Then, whoever was driven by necessity other than being one who is willfully disobedient or one who turns away. Then, truly, thy Lord is Forgiving, Compassionate. 
6|146| And to those who became Jews, We forbade every possessor of claws. And of the cows and the herd of sheep, We forbade them their fat, but what their backs carried or entrails or what mingled with bone. Thus, we gave them recompense for their insolence and We are, truly, ones who are sincere. 
6|147| If they denied thee, say: Your Lord is the Possessor of Extensive Mercy. And His might is not repelled from the folk, ones who sin. 
6|148| Those who ascribed partners with God will say: If God willed, neither would we have ascribed partners with God, nor our fathers, nor would we have forbidden anything. Thus, denied those who were before them until they experienced Our might. Say: Is there any knowledge with you that you bring out to us? You follow not but opinion and, then, you only guess. 
6|149| Say: God has the conclusive disputation. And if He willed, He would have guided you one and all. 
6|150| Say: Come on! Bring your witnesses who bear witness that God forbade this. Then, if they bore witness, bear you not witness with them. And follow thee not the desires of those who denied Our signs and those who believe not in the world to come and they equate others with their Lord. 
6|151| Say: Approach now. I will recount what your Lord forbade you Ascribe nothing as partners with Him. And show kindness to the ones who are your parents. And kill not your children from want. We will provide for you and for them. And come not near any indecencies whether these were manifest or what was inward. And kill not a soul which God forbade, unless rightfully. He charged you with that so that perhaps you will be reasonable. 
6|152| And come not near the property of the orphan but with what is fairer until one reaches the coming of age. And live up to the full measure and balance with equity. We will not place a burden on any soul, but to its capacity. And when you said something, be just, even if it had been with possessors of kinship and live up to the compact of God. Thus, He charged you with it so that perhaps you will recollect. 
6|153| And that this is My straight path, so follow it. And follow not the ways that will split you up from His way. He charged you this with it, so that perhaps you will be Godfearing. 
6|154| Again, We gave Moses the Book rendered complete for him who did good, a decisive explanation of all things and as a guidance and mercy, so that perhaps they will believe in the meeting with their Lord. 
6|155| And this Book We caused to descend is that which is blessed so follow it and be Godfearing so that perhaps you will find mercy, 
6|156| so that you not say: The Book was only caused to descend to two sections before us. And, truly, we had been ones who are heedless of their study. 
6|157| Or so that you not say: If the Book was caused to descend to us, we would have been better guided than they. Surely, there drew near you clear portents from your Lord and a guidance and a mercy. And who, then, does greater wrong than he who denied the signs of God and drew aside from them. We will give recompense to those who draw aside from Our signs with a dire punishment because they had been drawing aside. 
6|158| Look they on only that the angels approach them? Or thy Lord approach them? Or some signs of thy Lord approach them? On a Day that approach some signs of thy Lord, belief will not profit a person if he believed not before, nor earned good because of his belief. Say: Wait awhile! We too are ones who are waiting awhile! 
6|159| Truly, those who separated and divided their way of life and had been partisans, be thou not concerned with them at all. Truly, their affair is only with God. Again, He will tell them what they had been accomplishing. 
6|160| Whoever drew near with benevolence, then, for him, ten times the like of it. And whoever drew near with an evil deed, then, recompense will not be given but with its like and they, they will not be wronged. 
6|161| Say: Truly, my Lord guided me to a straight path, a truth-loving way of life, the creed of Abraham, the monotheist. And he had not been of the ones who are polytheists. 
6|162| Say: Truly, my formal prayer and my ritual sacrifice and my living and my dying are for God, Lord of all the worlds. 
6|163| No associates are to be ascribed with Him and of this was I commanded and I am the first of the ones who submit to God. 
6|164| Say: Is it other than God that I should desire as a lord while He is Lord of everything? And each soul will earn only for itself. No burdened soul will bear another’s heavy load. Again, to your Lord will you return. Then, He will tell you about what you had been at variance in it. 
6|165| And it is He who made you as viceregents on the earth and exalted some of you above some others in degree that He try you with what He gave you. Truly, thy Lord is Swift in repayment and He, truly, is Forgiving, Compassionate. 
7|1| Alif L[m M\m @[d. 
7|2| It is a Book that was caused to descend to thee. So let there be no impediment in thy breast about it so that thou wilt warn with it and as a reminder to the ones who believe. 
7|3| Follow what was caused to descend to you from your Lord and follow not protectors other than He. Little you recollect! 
7|4| And how many towns We caused to perish! And Our might drew near them at night or when they were ones who sleep at noon! 
7|5| Then, there had been no calling out when Our might drew near to them, but that they said: Truly, we had been ones who are unjust. 
7|6| Then, We will, certainly, ask those to whom were sent Messengers to them and We will, certainly, ask the ones who are sent. 
7|7| Then, We will relate to them with knowledge for We had never been of ones who are absent. 
7|8| The weighing of deeds on that Day will be The Truth. So ones whose balance was heavy from good deeds, then, those, they are the ones who prosper. 
7|9| And ones whose balance was made light from bad deeds those are those who have lost their souls because they had been doing wrong with Our signs. 
7|10| And, certainly, We established you firmly on the earth and We made for you in it a livelihood. But little you give thanks! 
7|11| And, certainly, We created you. Again, We formed you. Again, We said to the angels: Prostrate yourselves before Adam! Then, they prostrated themselves, but Iblis. He would not be of the ones who prostrate themselves. 
7|12| He said: What prevented thee from prostrating thyself when I commanded thee? Satan said: I am better than he. Thou hadst created me of fire and Thou hadst created him of clay. 
7|13| He said: So get thee down from this! It will not be for thee to increase in pride in it. Then, thou go forth. Truly, thou art of the ones who are disgraced. 
7|14| Satan said: Give me respite until the Day they are raised up. 
7|15| He said: Truly, thou art among the ones who are given respite. 
7|16| Satan said: Because Thou hadst led me into error, certainly, I will sit in ambush for them on Thy path, one that is straight. 
7|17| Again, I will approach them from between the front of them and from behind them and from their right and from their left. And Thou wilt not find many of them ones who are thankful. 
7|18| He said: Go thou forth from this—one who is scorned, one who is rejected. Whoever heeded thee among them, I will, certainly, fill hell with you, one and all. 
7|19| And: O Adam! Inhabit thou and thy spouse the Garden and both eat from where you both willed, but neither of you come near this tree or you both will be of the ones who are unjust. 
7|20| And Satan whispered evil to them both to show them both what was kept secret from them both—their intimate parts. And he said: The Lord of both of you prohibited you both from this tree so that neither of you be angels nor be ones who will dwell forever. 
7|21| And he swore an oath to them both that I am the one who gives advice to both of you. 
7|22| Then, he led both of them on to delusion. Then, when they both experienced of the tree, the intimate parts of both showed to both themselves and both of them took to doing stitching together over both from the leaves of the Garden. And the Lord of both of them proclaimed to them: Prohibited I not both of you from that tree? And said I not to both of you: Truly, Satan is a clear enemy of you both. 
7|23| They both said: Our Lord! We did wrong to ourselves. And if Thou wilt not forgive us and have mercy on us, we will, certainly, be among the ones who are losers. 
7|24| He said: Get you down, some of you an enemy to some other. And for you on the earth an appointed time and enjoyment for awhile. 
7|25| He said: You will live in it and you will die in it and from it you will be brought out. 
7|26| O Children of Adam! Surely, We caused to descend to you garments to cover up your intimate parts and finery, but the garment of God-consciousness, that is better. That is of the signs of God so that perhaps they will recollect! 
7|27| O Children of Adam! Let not Satan tempt you as he drove your parents out of the Garden, tearing off their garments from both of them to cause them to see their intimate parts. Truly, he and his type sees you whereas you see them not. Truly, We made he and the satans protectors of those who believe not. 
7|28| And when they committed an indecency, they said: We found our fathers on it and God commanded us in it. Say: Truly, God commands not depravities. Say you about God what you know not? 
7|29| Say: My Lord commanded me to equity. And set your faces at every place of prostration and call to Him ones who are sincere and devoted in the way of life to Him. As He began you, you will revert to Him. 
7|30| He guided a group of people and a group of people realized their fallacy. Truly, they took satans to themselves as protectors instead of God and they assume that they are ones who are truly guided. 
7|31| O Children of Adam! Take your adornment at every place of prostration. And eat and drink, but exceed not all bounds. Truly, He loves not the ones who are excessive. 
7|32| Say: Who forbade the adornment of God that He brought out for His servants. And what is the good of His provision? Say: They are for those who believed in this present life and, exclusively, on the Day of Resurrection. Thus, We explain distinctly the signs for a folk who know. 
7|33| Say: My Lord forbade not but indecencies—what was manifest or what was inward—and sins and unrightful insolence, to ascribe partners with God when He sends not down for it any authority and that you say about God what you know not. 
7|34| And for every community there is a term. And when their term drew near, they will not delay it by an hour, nor press it forward. 
7|35| O Children of Adam! If Messengers from among you approach relating My signs to you, then, whoever was Godfearing and made things right, then, there will be neither fear in them nor will they feel remorse. 
7|36| But those who denied Our signs and grew arrogant against them, those are the Companions of the Fire; they are ones who will dwell in it forever. 
7|37| Then, who does greater wrong than he who devised a lie against God or denied His signs? Those, they will attain their share from the Book. Until Our Messengers drew near to gather them to themselves, they will say: Where are who you had been calling on other than God? They will say: They went astray from us. And they bore witness against themselves that, truly, they had been ones who are ungrateful. 
7|38| He will say: Enter among the communities that passed away before you of jinn and humankind into the fire. Every time a community entered, it would curse its sister community until when they will come successively in it altogether. The last of them would say to the first of them: Our Lord! These caused us to go astray so give them a double punishment of the fire. He will say: For everyone it is double except you know not. 
7|39| And the first of them would say to the last of them: You have had no superiority over us so experience the punishment for what you had been earning. 
7|40| Truly, those who denied Our signs and grew arrogant among them, the doors of heaven will not be opened up to them nor will they enter the Garden until a he-camel penetrates through the eye of the needle. And, thus, We give recompense to the ones who sin. 
7|41| For them hell will be their cradling and above them, the overwhelming event. Thus, We give recompense to the ones who are unjust. 
7|42| But for those who believed and did as the ones in accord with morality, We place no burden on any soul beyond its capacity. Those will be the Companions of the Garden. They are ones who will dwell in it forever. 
7|43| And We will draw out what was in their breasts of grudges. And rivers will run beneath them. And they will say: The Praise belongs to God Who truly guided us to this! And we would not have been guided if God guided us not. Certainly, the Messengers of our Lord drew near us with The Truth. And it was proclaimed to them that this, the Garden, was given to you as inheritance for what you had been doing. 
7|44| And the Companions of the Garden would cry out to the Companions of the Fire: Surely, we found what our Lord promised us to be true. Found you not what your Lord promised to be true? They would say: Yes. Then, it will be announced by one who announces among them: May the curse of God be on the ones who are unjust, 
7|45| those who bar the way of God and who desire it to be crooked. And in the world to come they will be ones who are ungrateful. 
7|46| And between them both is a partition. And on the Elevated Places will be men who recognize everyone by their mark. And they will cry out to the Companions of the Garden that: Peace be on you. They enter it not and they are desirous of it. 
7|47| And when their sight would be turned away of its own accord to the Companions of the Fire, they will say: Our Lord assign Thou us not with the folk, ones who are unjust! 
7|48| The Companions of the Elevated Places would cry out to men whom they would recognize by their mark. They would say: Your amassing availed you not, nor that you had been growing arrogant. 
7|49| Are these, those about whom you swore an oath that God would never impart mercy? Enter the Garden. There will be neither fear in you nor will you feel remorse. 
7|50| And the Companions of the Fire would cry out to the Companions of the Garden: Pour some water on us, or some of what God provided you. They would say: Truly, God forbade them both to the ones who are ungrateful, 
7|51| those who took their way of life to themselves as a diversion and as a pastime. This present life deluded them. So today We will forget them as they forgot the meeting of this their Day and because they had been negating Our signs. 
7|52| And, surely, We brought about a Book to them in which We explained distinctly, with knowledge, a guidance and a mercy for a folk who believe. 
7|53| Did they look on for nothing but its interpretation? The Day its interpretation approaches, those who forgot it before will say: Surely, Messengers of our Lord drew near us with The Truth. Have we any intercessors who will intercede for us? Or will we be returned so we do other than what we had been doing before? Surely, they lost themselves. Went astray from them what they had been devising. 
7|54| Truly, your Lord is God, He Who created the heavens and the earth in six days. Again, He turned His attention to the Throne. He covers the nighttime with the daytime that seeks it out urgently. And the sun and the moon and the stars are ones caused to be subservient to His command. Truly, His is not but the creation and the command. Blessed be God, Lord of the worlds. 
7|55| Call to your Lord humbly and inwardly. Truly, He loves not the ones who exceed the limits. 
7|56| Make not corruption in the earth after things were made right and call to Him with fear and hope. Truly, the mercy of God is Near to the ones who are doers of good. 
7|57| And it is He Who sends the winds, ones that are bearers of good news before His mercy until when they were charged with heavy clouds. We will drive it to a dead land. Then, We caused water to descend from the cloud and with it We bring out by water all kinds of fruits. Thus, We bring out the dead so that perhaps you will recollect. 
7|58| As for the good land, its plants go forth with permission of its Lord. While, as for what was bad, it goes forth not but scantily. Thus, We diversify the signs for a folk who give thanks. 
7|59| Surely, We sent Noah to his folk. And he said: O my folk! Worship God! You have no god other than He. Truly, I fear for you the punishment of a tremendous Day. 
7|60| The Council of his folk said: Truly, we see thee clearly wandering astray. 
7|61| He said: O my folk! There is no fallacy in me. I am only a Messenger from the Lord of the worlds. 
7|62| I state the messages of my Lord to you and advise you and I know from God what you know not. 
7|63| Or marveled you that there drew near you a remembrance from your Lord through a man among you that he warn you and that you be Godfearing so that perhaps you will find mercy? 
7|64| Then, they denied him. Then, We rescued him and those who were with him on the boat and We drowned those who denied Our signs. Truly, they, they had been a folk in the dark. 
7|65| And to Ad, God sent their brother Hud. He said: O my folk! Worship God. You have no god but He. Will you not, then, be Godfearing? 
7|66| The Council of those who were ungrateful said among his folk: Truly, we see foolishness in thee. And, truly, we think that thou art among the ones who lie. 
7|67| He said: O my folk! There is no foolishness in me. I am only a Messenger from the Lord of the worlds. 
7|68| I state the messages of my Lord to you and I am one who gives advice to you, trustworthy. 
7|69| Or marveled you that there drew near you a remembrance from your Lord through a man from among you that he may warn you? And remember when He made you viceregents after the folk of Noah and increased you greatly in constitution? Then, remember the benefits of God so that perhaps you will prosper. 
7|70| They said: Hast thou brought about to us that we should worship God alone and forsake what our fathers had been worshipping? So approach us with what thou hast promised us if thou hadst been among the ones who are sincere. 
7|71| He said: Surely, fell on you disgrace and anger from your Lord. Dispute you with me over names which you named, you and your fathers, for which God sent not down any authority? Then, wait awhile. Truly, I will be with you among the ones who are waiting awhile. 
7|72| Then, We rescued him and those with him by a mercy from Us. And We severed the last remnant of those who denied Our signs. And they had not been ones who believe. 
7|73| And to Thamud God sent their brother Salih. He said: O my folk! Worship God! You have no god but He. Surely, drew near you clear portents from your Lord. This is the she-camel of God as a sign so allow her to eat on the earth of God and afflict her not with evil so a painful punishment not take you. 
7|74| And remember when He made you viceregents after Ad and placed you on the earth. You take to yourselves palaces on the plains and carve out the mountains as houses. So remember the benefits of God. And do no mischief as ones who make corruption in and on the earth. 
7|75| Said the Council of those who grew arrogant among his folk to those who were taken advantage of due to their weakness, to those who believed among them: Know you that Salih is one who is sent from his Lord? They said: Truly, in what he was sent, we are ones who believe. 
7|76| Those who grew arrogant said: Truly, we are in what you believed, ones who disbelieve. 
7|77| Then, they crippled the she-camel and defied the command of their Lord and they said: O Salih! Approach us with what thou hast promised us if thou hadst been among the ones who are sent. 
7|78| So the quaking of the earth took them. And it came to be in the morning they were in their abodes ones who are fallen prostrate. 
7|79| Then, he turned away from them and said: O my folk! Certainly, I expressed to you the message of my Lord and advised you, except you love not the ones who give advice. 
7|80| And mention Lot, when he said to his folk: You approach indecency as preceded you not anyone therein in the worlds? 
7|81| Truly, you, you approach men with lust instead of women? Nay! You are a folk, ones who are excessive. 
7|82| And the answer of his folk had not been but that they said: Bring them out from your town. Truly, they are a clan to cleanse themselves. 
7|83| Then, We rescued him and his people, but his woman. She had been among the ones who stay behind. 
7|84| And We rained down a rain on them. So look on how had been the Ultimate End of the ones who sin. 
7|85| And to Midian God sent their brother Shuayb. He said: O my folk! Worship God! You have no god other than He. Surely, a clear portent drew near you from your Lord so live up to the full measure and the balance and diminish not the things of humanity nor make corruption in and on the earth after things were made right. That will be better for you if you had been ones who believe. 
7|86| And sit not by every path intimidating and barring from the way of God those who believed in Him and you desire it to be crooked. And remember when you had been few and He augmented you. And look on how had been the Ultimate End of the ones who make corruption. 
7|87| And if there had been a section of you who believed in what I was sent with and a section believe not, have patience until God gives judgment between us. And He is Best of the ones who judge. 
7|88| Said the Council of those who grew arrogant from among his folk: O Shuayb! We will, certainly, drive thee out—and those who believed with thee—from our town or else you revert to our creed. He said: Even if we had been ones who dislike it? 
7|89| Surely, we would have devised a lie against God if we reverted to your creed after God delivered us from it. And it will not be for us that we revert to it unless God, our Lord, wills. Our Lord encompassed everything in knowledge. In God we put our trust. Our Lord! Give victory between us and between our folk in Truth and Thou art Best of the ones who are deliverers. 
7|90| But said the Council of those who were ungrateful among his folk: If you followed Shuayb, then, truly, you will be ones who are losers. 
7|91| Then, the quaking of the earth took them and they came to be in the morning ones who are fallen prostrate in their abodes. 
7|92| Those who denied Shuayb had been as if they had not dwelt in them. Those who denied Shuayb they, they had been the ones who were losers. 
7|93| So he turned away from them and said: O my folk! Certainly, I expressed to you the messages of my Lord and I advised you. Then, how should I grieve for a folk, ones who are ungrateful? 
7|94| And We sent not any Prophet to a town, but We took its people with tribulation and desolation so that perhaps they will lower themselves. 
7|95| Again, We substituted in place of evil deeds, benevolence, until they exceeded in number and they said: Surely, our fathers were touched by tribulation and gladness. Then, We took them suddenly while they are not aware. 
7|96| And if the people of the towns believed and were Godfearing, We would have opened blessings for them from the heaven and the earth, except they denied. So We took them for what they had been earning. 
7|97| Were, then, the people of the towns safe when Our might approaches them at night while they are ones who sleep? 
7|98| Or were the people of the towns safe when Our might approaches them in the forenoon while they play? 
7|99| Were they safe from the planning of God? No one deems himself safe from the planning of God but the folk, the ones who are losers! 
7|100| Guides not those who inherit the earth after its previous people that if We will, We would light on them for their impieties, and We set a seal on their hearts so they hear not? 
7|101| These are the towns. Their tidings We relate to thee. And, certainly, their Messengers drew near them with the clear portents. But they had not been believing in what they denied before. Thus, God set a seal on the hearts of the ones who are ungrateful. 
7|102| And We found not in many of them any compact. And, truly, We found many of them are ones who disobey. 
7|103| Again, We raised up Moses after them with Our signs to Pharaoh and his Council, but they did wrong to them. So look on how had been the Ultimate End of the ones who make corruption. 
7|104| And Moses said: O Pharaoh! Truly, I am a Messenger from the Lord of the worlds. 
7|105| I am approved on condition that I say nothing but The Truth about God. Surely, I drew near you with a clear portent from your Lord. So send the Children of Israel with me. 
7|106| Pharaoh said: If thou hadst been drawing near with a sign, then, approach with it if thou hadst been among the ones who are sincere. 
7|107| Then, Moses cast his staff. That is when it became a clear serpent. 
7|108| And he drew out his hand. That is when it was shimmering white to the ones who look. 
7|109| The Council of the folk of Pharaoh said: Truly, this is a knowing sorcerer. 
7|110| He wants to drive you out from your region so what is your command? 
7|111| They said: Put him and his brother off and send to the cities to the place where ones who assemble are. 
7|112| Let them approach thee with every knowing sorcerer. 
7|113| And the ones who are sorcerers drew near to Pharaoh. They said: Truly, would we have compensation if we had been the ones who are victors? 
7|114| Pharaoh said: Yes! And, truly, you will be of the ones who are brought near to me. 
7|115| They said: O Moses! Either thou cast, or will we be the ones who cast? 
7|116| He said: You cast. So when they cast, they cast a spell on the eyes of the personages and terrified them. And a tremendous sorcery drew near. 
7|117| And We revealed to Moses that: Cast thy staff. That is when it swallowed what they faked. 
7|118| Thus, The Truth came to pass and proved false what they had been doing. 
7|119| So they were vanquished there and turned about as ones who are disgraced. 
7|120| The ones who are sorcerers were made to fall down as ones who prostrate themselves. 
7|121| They said: We believed in the Lord of the worlds, 
7|122| the Lord of Moses and Aaron. 
7|123| Pharaoh said: You believed in Him before I give permission to you. Truly, this is a plan you planned in the city that you drive out the people from it but you will know. 
7|124| I will, certainly, cut off your hands and your feet on opposite sides. Again, I will cause you to be crucified, one and all. 
7|125| They said: Truly, we are ones who are turning to our Lord. 
7|126| Thou hast sought revenge on us only because we believed in the signs of our Lord when they drew near us. Our Lord! Pour out patience on us and call us to Thyself as ones who submit to God. 
7|127| And the Council of the folk of Pharaoh said: Wilt thou forsake Moses and his folk to make corruption in and on the earth while they forsake thee and thy gods? Pharaoh said: We will slay their children and we will save alive their women. And truly, we are ones who are ascendant over them. 
7|128| Moses said to his folk: Pray for help from God and have patience. Truly, the earth belongs to God. He gives it as inheritance to whom He wills of His servants. And that is the Ultimate End for the ones who are Godfearing. 
7|129| They said: We were maligned before thou hast approached us and after thou hast drawn near to us. He said: Perhaps your Lord will cause your enemy to perish and make you successors to him on the earth so that He will look on how you do. 
7|130| And, certainly, We took the people of Pharaoh with years of diminution of fruits, so that perhaps they will recollect. 
7|131| And when benevolence drew near them, they would say: This belongs to us. But if an evil deed lights on them, they augur ill of Moses and who were with him. Certainly, that which are their omens are with God except most of them know not. 
7|132| And they said: Whatever sign thou hast brought to us to cast a spell on us with it, we will not be ones who believe in thee. 
7|133| Then, We sent on them the deluge and the locusts and the lice and the frogs and blood as distinct signs, but they grew arrogant and they had been a folk, ones who sin. 
7|134| And when the wrath fell on them, they said: O Moses! Call to thy Lord for us because of the compact made with thee. If thou wert to remove the wrath from us, we would, certainly, believe in thee. And we will send the Children of Israel with thee. 
7|135| But when We removed the wrath from them for a term, that which is conclusive, they break their oath. 
7|136| So We requited them and drowned them in the water of the sea because they denied Our signs and they had been ones who are heedless of them. 
7|137| And We gave as inheritance to the folk who had been taken advantage of due to their weakness, the east of the region and its west which We blessed. And completed was the fairer Word of thy Lord for the Children of Israel because they endured patiently. And We destroyed what Pharaoh and his folk had been crafting and what they had been constructing. 
7|138| And We brought the Children of Israel over the sea. Then, they approached on a folk who give themselves up to their idols. They said: O Moses! Make for us a god like the gods they have. He said: Truly, you are an ignorant folk! 
7|139| Truly, these are the ones who are ruined and falsehood is what they had been doing. 
7|140| He said: Should I look for any god other than God for you while He gave you an advantage over the worlds? 
7|141| Mention when We rescued you from the people of Pharaoh who cause an affliction to befall you of a dire punishment. They slay your children and save alive your women. And in that was a trial for you from your Lord, tremendous. 
7|142| And We appointed thirty nights for Moses. And We completed them with ten more. Thus, fulfilled was the time appointed by his Lord of forty nights. And Moses said to his brother, Aaron: Be my successor among my folk and make things right and follow not the way of the ones who make corruption. 
7|143| And when Moses drew near Our time appointed and his Lord spoke to him, he said: O my Lord! Cause me to see that I look on Thee. He said: Thou wilt never see Me but look on the mountain. Then, if it stayed fast in its place, then, thou wilt see Me. Then, when his Lord Self-disclosed to the mountain, He made it as ground powder and Moses fell down swooning. And when he recovered he said: Glory be to Thee! I repented to Thee and I am the first of the ones who believe. 
7|144| He said: O Moses! Truly, I favored thee above humanity by My messages and by My assertion. So take what I gave thee and be among the ones who are thankful. 
7|145| And We wrote down for him on the Tablets something of all things and an admonishment and a decisive explanation of all things. So take these with firmness and command thy folk to take what is fairer. I will cause you to see the abodes of the ones who disobey. 
7|146| I will turn away from My signs those who increase in pride on the earth without right. And if they see every sign, they believe not in it. And if they see the way of right judgment, yet they will not take that way to themselves. But if they see the way of error, they will take themselves to that way. That is because they denied Our signs and had been ones who are heedless of them. 
7|147| And as for those who denied Our signs and the meeting in the world to come, their actions were fruitless. Will they be given recompense but for what they had been doing? 
7|148| And the folk of Moses took to themselves after him from out of their glitter a calf, a lifeless body like one that has the lowing sound of flocks. See they not that it neither speaks to them nor guides them to a Way?• Yet they took it to themselves. And they had been the ones who are unjust. 
7|149| And when they became ones who are remorseful and saw that they, surely, went astray, they said: If our Lord not have mercy on us and forgive us, we will, certainly, be among the ones who are losers. 
7|150| And when Moses returned to his folk enraged, grieved, he said: Miserable was what you succeeded in after me. Would you hasten the command of your Lord? And he cast down the Tablets. He took his brother by his head, pulling him to himself. Aaron said: O son of my mother, truly, the folk took advantage of my weakness and are about to kill me. So let not my enemies gloat over me and assign me not with the folk, the ones who are unjust. 
7|151| Moses said: Lord! Forgive me and my brother and cause us to enter into Thy mercy for Thou art One Who is Most Merciful of the ones who are merciful. 
7|152| Those who took the calf to themselves attain anger from their Lord and abasement in this present life. And, thus, We give recompense to the ones who devise. 
7|153| But those who did evil deeds and repented and, again, believed, truly, thy Lord, after that, will be Forgiving, Compassionate. 
7|154| And when the anger subsided in Moses, he took the Tablets. There was guidance and mercy in their inscription for those, they who have reverence for their Lord. 
7|155| And Moses chose of his folk seventy men for Our time appointed. And when the quaking of the earth took them, he said: Lord! If Thou wilt, Thou wouldst cause them to perish and me before. Wouldst Thou cause us to perish for what the foolish among us accomplished? It is not but Thy test. With it Thou wilt cause to go astray whom Thou wilt and Thou wilt guide whom Thou hadst willed. Thou art our protector, so forgive us and have mercy on us for Thou art Best of the ones who forgive. 
7|156| And prescribe for us in the present benevolence and in the world to come. Truly we turned back to Thee. He said: I light My punishment on whom I will and My mercy encompassed everything. Then, I will prescribe it for those who are Godfearing and give the purifying alms and those, they who believe in Our signs, 
7|157| those who follow the Messenger—the unlettered Prophet—whom they will find with them that which is a writing in the Torah and the Gospel. He commands them to that which is honorable and prohibits them from that which is unlawful. And He permits to them what is good and forbids them from deeds of corruption. And He lays down for them severe tests, and the yokes that had been on them. So those who believed in him and supported him and helped him and followed the light that was caused to descend to him, those, they are the ones who prosper. 
7|158| Say: O humanity! Truly, I am the Messenger of God to you all of Him to Whom belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth. There is no god but He. He gives life and He causes to die. So believe in God and His Messenger, the unlettered Prophet, who believes in God and His words and follow him so that perhaps you will be truly guided. 
7|159| And among the folk of Moses there is a community that guides with The Truth and by it is just. 
7|160| And We sundered them into twelve tribes as communities. And We revealed to Moses when his folk asked him for water: Strike the rock with thy staff. Then, burst forth out of it twelve springs: Surely, each clan knew its drinking place. And We shaded them with cloud shadows. We caused to descend manna and the quails for them. Eat of what is good that We provided you! And they did not wrong Us, but they had been doing wrong to themselves. 
7|161| And mention when it was said to them: Inhabit this town and eat from it wherever you willed. Say: Unburden us of sin! And enter the door as ones who prostrate themselves We will forgive you your transgressions. We will increase the ones who are doers of good. 
7|162| But among those who did wrong, they substituted a saying other than what was said to them. Then, We sent wrath from heaven because they had been doing wrong. 
7|163| And ask them about the town—that which had been bordering the sea— when they disregarded the Sabbath, when their great fish would approach them on the day of the Sabbath, one that was visible on the shore. And the day they keep not the Sabbath, they approach them not. Thus, We try them because they had been disobeying. 
7|164| And mention when a community of them said: Why admonish a folk whom God is One Who Causes them to Perish or One Who Punishes them with a severe punishment. They said: To be free from guilt before your Lord and so that perhaps they will be Godfearing. 
7|165| So when they forgot of what they were reminded, We rescued those who prohibited evil and We took those who did wrong with a terrifying punishment because they had been disobeying. 
7|166| Then, when they defied what they were prohibited We said to them: Be you apes, ones who are driven away. 
7|167| And mention when thy Lord caused to be proclaimed that He would, surely, raise up against them until the Day of Resurrection who cause an affliction to befall on them of a dire punishment. Truly, thy Lord is Swift in repayment. And, truly, He is Forgiving, Compassionate. 
7|168| And We sundered them in the region into communities. Some of them were the ones in accord with morality and others were other than that. And We tried them with benevolence and evil deeds so that perhaps they will return to obedience. 
7|169| Then, after that succeeded successors who inherited the Book. They take advantage of this nearer world, and they say: We will be forgiven. And if an advantage approaches them like it, they will take it. Is not a solemn promise taken from them with the Book that they would say about God only The Truth? And studied they not what is in it, and know that the Last Abode is better for those who are Godfearing? Will you not, then, be reasonable? 
7|170| And those who keep fast to the Book and performed the formal prayer, We will not waste the compensation of the ones who make things right. 
7|171| Mention when We shook up the mountain over them, as if it had been an overshadowing, and they thought it was that which would fall on them: It was said: Take with firmness what We gave you and remember what is in it so that perhaps you will be Godfearing. 
7|172| And mention when thy Lord took from the Children of Adam—from their generative organs—their offspring and called to them to witness of themselves: Am I not your Lord? They said: Yea! ^We bore witness^ so that you say not on the Day of Resurrection: Truly, we had been ones who were heedless of this. 
7|173| Or you not say: Our fathers before us ascribed partners with God. We had been offspring after them. Wilt Thou cause us to perish for what the ones who deal in falsehood accomplished? 
7|174| And, thus, We explain Our signs distinctly so that perhaps they will return. 
7|175| And recount to them the tiding of him to whom We gave Our signs, but he cast himself off from them. So Satan pursued him then, he had been among the ones who are in error. 
7|176| And if We willed, We would have exalted him with them, but he inclined towards the earth, and followed his own desires. And his parable is like the parable of a dog. If thou wilt attack it, it pants. Or if thou wilt leave it, it pants. That is the parable of the folk, those who denied Our signs. Then, relate these narratives so that perhaps they will reflect. 
7|177| How evil is the parable of the folk who denied Our signs! And they had been doing wrong to themselves. 
7|178| Whomever God guides, then, he is one who is truly guided. And whomever He causes to go astray, then, those, they are the ones who are losers. 
7|179| And, certainly, We made numerous for hell many of the jinn and humankind. They have hearts with which they understand not. And they have eyes with which they perceive not. And they have ears with which they hear not. Those are like flocks. Nay! They are ones who go astray. Those, they are the ones who are heedless. 
7|180| To God belongs the Fairer Names, so call to Him by them. And forsake those who blaspheme His Names. They will be given recompense for what they had been doing. 
7|181| And of whom We created there is a community that guides with The Truth, and with it, it is just. 
7|182| And those who denied Our signs, We will draw them on gradually from where they will not know. 
7|183| And I will grant them indulgence for a while. Truly, My strategizing is sure. 
7|184| Reflect they not? There is no madness in their companion. He is but a clear warner. 
7|185| Expect they not in the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and whatever things God created that perhaps their term be near? Then, in which discourse after this will they believe? 
7|186| Whomever God causes to go astray then, there is no one who guides him. And He forsakes them in their defiance, wandering unwilling to see. 
7|187| They ask thee about the Hour, when will it berth? Say: The knowledge of that is only with my Lord. None will display its time but He. It was heavy, hidden in the heavens and the earth. It will approach you not but suddenly. They will ask thee as if thou hadst been one who is well-informed about it. Say: The knowledge of that is only with God, but most of humanity knows not. 
7|188| Say: I rule not over myself either for profit or for hurt, but what God willed. And if the unseen had been known to me, I would have acquired much good and evil would not have afflicted me. I am but a warner and a bearer of good tidings to a folk who believe. 
7|189| It is He Who created you from a single soul. And out of it made its spouse that he rest in her. And when he laid over her, she carried a light burden and moved about with it. But when she was weighed down, they both called to God their Lord saying: If Thou wouldst give us one in accord with morality, we will certainly be among the ones who are thankful. 
7|190| Then, when He gave them both one in accord with morality, they made ascribed associates with Him in what He gave them both. God was Exalted above partners they ascribe! 
7|191| Ascribe they partners with God who create nothing and are themselves created? 
7|192| And they are not able to help them nor help themselves? 
7|193| And if you call them to the guidance, they will not follow you. It is equal whether you called to them or you be ones who remain quiet. 
7|194| Truly, those whom you call to other than God are servants like you. So call to them and let them respond to you if you had been ones who are sincere. 
7|195| Have they feet by which they walk? Or have they hands by which they seize by force? Or have they eyes by which they perceive? Or have they ears by which they hear? Say: Call you to your ascribed associates. Again, try to outwit me and give me no respite. 
7|196| Truly, God is my protector, Who sent down the Book. And He takes into His protection the ones in accord with morality. 
7|197| And those whom you call to other than Him, they are not able to help you, nor are they able to help themselves. 
7|198| And if you call them to the guidance, they hear not. Thou hast seen them look on thee, but they perceive not. 
7|199| Take the extra and command what is honorable. And turn aside from the ones who are ignorant. 
7|200| But if enmity is sown by Satan in thee, sowing enmity, then, seek refuge in God. Truly, He is Hearing, Knowing. 
7|201| Truly, those who were Godfearing when they were touched by a visitation from Satan, they recollected. That is when they were ones who perceive. 
7|202| And their brothers/sisters cause them to increase in error, and, again, they never stop short. 
7|203| When thou hast not approached them with a sign, they said: Why hadst thou not improvised one? Say: I follow only what is revealed to me from my Lord. This is clear evidence from your Lord and guidance and mercy for a folk who believe. 
7|204| And when the Quran was recited, listen and pay heed so that perhaps you will find mercy. 
7|205| And remember thy Lord in thyself humbly and with awe instead of openly publishing the sayings at the first part of the day and the eventide. And be thou not among the ones who are heedless. 
7|206| Truly, those who are with thy Lord grow not arrogant from His worship. And they glorify Him and they prostrate themselves to Him.‡ 
8|1| They ask thee about the spoils of war. Say: The spoils of war belong to God and the Messenger so be Godfearing of God and make things right among you and obey God and his Messenger if you had been ones who believe. 
8|2| The ones who believe are only those whose hearts took notice when God was remembered. When His signs were recounted to them, their belief increased and they put their trust in the Lord— 
8|3| those who perform the formal prayer and spend out of what We provided them, 
8|4| those, they are the ones who truthfully believe. For them are degrees with their Lord and forgiveness and generous provision. 
8|5| Just as thy Lord brought thee out from thy house with The Truth, and, truly, a group of people among the ones who believe were the ones who dislike it. 
8|6| They dispute with thee about The Truth—after it became clear—as if they had been driven to death and they look on at it. 
8|7| And when God promises you, one of the two sections: It will, truly, be for you. And you wish that the one that is unarmed should be yours. And God wants that He verify The Truth by His Words and to sever the last remnant of the ones who are ungrateful 
8|8| that He may verify The Truth and render the falsehood untrue even if the ones who sin disliked it. 
8|9| Mention when you cry for help from your Lord and He responded to you: Truly, I am One Who Reinforces you with a thousand angels, ones who come one after another. 
8|10| And did God make this as good tidings for you so that with it your hearts will be at rest in it? And there is no help but from God alone. Truly, God is Almighty, Wise. 
8|11| Mention when a sleepiness enwraps you as a safety from Him. He sends down water from heaven for you and He purifies you by it and causes to be put away from you the defilement of Satan. He invigorates your hearts and makes your feet firm by it. 
8|12| Mention when thy Lord reveals to the angels: I am, truly, with you, so make those who believed firm. I will cast alarm into the hearts of those who were ungrateful. So strike above their necks and strike each of their fingers from them. 
8|13| That is because they made a breach with God and His Messenger. And to whomever makes a breach with God and His Messenger, then, truly, God is Severe in repayment. 
8|14| That is for you, so experience it, and, truly, for the ones who are ungrateful, the punishment of the fire. 
8|15| O those who believed! When you met those who were ungrateful marching to battle, then, turn not your backs to them in flight. 
8|16| And whoever turns his back that Day—but one who withdraws from fighting for a purpose—or one who moves aside to another faction, he, surely, drew the burden of the anger from God and his place of shelter will be hell. And miserable will be the Homecoming! 
8|17| Then, you kill them not, but God killed them. And thou hadst not thrown when thou hadst thrown but God threw. He tries by experiment the ones who believe with a fairer trial from Him. Truly, God is Hearing, Knowing. 
8|18| That is so, and, truly, God is One Who Makes Frail the cunning of the ones who are ungrateful. 
8|19| If you seek a judgment then, surely, drew near to you the victory. And if you refrain yourselves, then, that would be better for you. And if you revert, We will revert. And your factions will not avail you at all even if they were many. And God is with the ones who believe. 
8|20| O those who believed! Obey God and His Messenger and turn not away from him when you hear his command. 
8|21| And be not like those who said: We heard, when they hear not. 
8|22| Truly, the worst of moving creatures with God are unwilling to hear and unwilling to speak, those who are not reasonable. 
8|23| If God knew any good in them He would have caused them to be willing to hear. And even if He had caused them to be willing to hear, truly, they would have turned away, and they are ones who turn aside. 
8|24| O those who believed! Respond to God and to the Messenger when He called you to what gives you life. And know, truly, that God comes between a man and his heart and that to Him you will assemble. 
8|25| Be Godfearing of a test which will not light on those of you, particularly, who did wrong. And know that God is, truly, Severe in repayment. 
8|26| And remember when you were few, ones taken advantage of due to weakness on the earth. You fear humanity would snatch you away so He gave you refuge and confirmed you with His help and provided you with what is good so that perhaps you will give thanks. 
8|27| O those who believed! Betray not God and the Messenger nor betray your trusts when you know. 
8|28| And know that your wealth and your children are a test and that God, with Him is a sublime compensation. 
8|29| O those who believed! If you are Godfearing of God, He will assign you a Criterion between right and wrong and will absolve you of your evil deeds and will forgive you. And God is Possessor of Sublime Grace. 
8|30| And mention when those who were ungrateful plan against thee to bring thee to a standstill or to kill thee or to drive thee out. And they plan and God plans, but God is Best of the ones who plan. 
8|31| And when Our signs are recounted to them, they said: We heard this. If we will, we would say the like of this. Truly, this is only fables of ancient ones. 
8|32| And when they said: O God! Truly, if this had been The Truth from Thee, rain down rocks on us from heaven or bring us a painful punishment. 
8|33| But God had not been punishing them with thee among them. Nor had God been One Who Punishes them while they ask for forgiveness. 
8|34| And what is with them that God should not punish them while they bar worshipers from the Masjid al-Haram and they had not been its protectors? Truly, its protectors are but ones who are Godfearing except most of them know not. 
8|35| Their formal prayer at the House had been nothing but whistling and clapping of hands. So experience the punishment because you had been ungrateful. 
8|36| Truly, those who were ungrateful spend their wealth so that they bar the way of God. They will spend it. Again, it will become a regret for them. Again, they will be vanquished. And those who were ungrateful will be assembled in hell. 
8|37| God will differentiate the bad from what is good. And He will lay the bad, some on some other, and heap them up altogether and lay them into hell. Those, they are the ones who are losers. 
8|38| Say to those who were ungrateful: If they refrain themselves, what is past will be forgiven. And if they repeat then, surely, a custom passed of the ancient ones as a warning. 
8|39| And fight them until there be no persecution and the way of life—all of it—be for God. Then, if they refrained themselves, then, truly, God is Seeing of what they do. 
8|40| And if they turned away, then, know that God is your Defender. How excellent a Defender and how excellent a Helper! 
8|41| And know that whatever thing you gain as booty, then, truly one-fifth of it belongs to God and to the Messenger and to the possessors of kinship and the orphans and the needy and the traveler of the way. if you had been believing in God and in what We caused to descend to Our servant on the Day of the Criterion between right and wrong, the day when the two multitudes met one another. And God is Powerful over everything. 
8|42| Mention when you were on the nearer bank of the valley and they were on the farther bank of the valley and the cavalcade was below you. Even if you made a promise together, you would be, certainly, at variance as to the solemn declaration because God decrees a command that had been one that is accomplished so that he who perishes would have perished by a clear portent and he who lives would live on by a clear portent. And, truly, God is Hearing, Knowing. 
8|43| Mention when God causes thee to see them as few in thy slumbering. If He caused thee to see them as many, you would have lost heart and contended with one another about the command except God saved you. Truly, He is Knowing of what is in the breasts. 
8|44| And mention when He causes you to see them when you met one another as few in your eyes and He makes you few in their eyes so that God decrees a command that had been one that is accomplished. And commands are returned to God. 
8|45| O those who believed! When you met a faction, then, stand firm and remember God frequently so that perhaps you will prosper. 
8|46| And obey God and His Messenger and contend not with one another. Then, you lose heart and your competence go. And have patience. Truly, God is with the ones who remain steadfast. 
8|47| And be not like those who went forth from their abodes recklessly to show off to personages and bar them from the way of God. And God is One Who Encloses what they do. 
8|48| And mention when Satan made to appear pleasing their actions to them and said: No one will be ones who are victors against you this day from among all personages. And, truly, I will be your neighbor. But when the two factions sighted one another, he receded on his two heels and said: Truly, I am free of you. Truly, I see what you see not. Truly, I fear God. And God is Severe in repayment. 
8|49| Mention when the ones who are hypocrites say and those who, in their hearts, is a sickness: Their way of life deluded these, but whoever puts his trust in God. Then, truly, God is Almighty, Wise. 
8|50| And if thou wouldst see when those who were ungrateful are called to themselves by the angels, they are striking their faces and their backs saying: Experience the punishment of the burning. 
8|51| That is because of what your hands put forward of evil and, truly, God is not unjust to His servants. 
8|52| In like manner of the people of Pharaoh—and of those before them— they were ungrateful for the signs of God so God took them for their impieties. Truly, God is Strong, Severe in repayment. 
8|53| Know that God will never be One Who Causes to Alter a divine blessing when He was gracious to a folk unless they first alter what is within themselves. And, truly, God is Hearing, Knowing. 
8|54| In like manner of the people of Pharaoh, and those before them, they denied the signs of their Lord, so We caused them to perish for their impieties. And We drowned the people of Pharaoh. And they all had been ones who are unjust. 
8|55| Truly, the worst of moving creatures with God are those who were ungrateful, so they will not believe. 
8|56| Those with whom thou hast made a contract, again, they break their compact every time and they are not Godfearing. 
8|57| So if thou hast come upon them in war, then, break them up, whoever is behind them, so that perhaps they will recollect. 
8|58| And if thou hast feared treachery from a folk, then, dissolve the relationship with them equally. Truly, God loves not the ones who are traitors. 
8|59| Assume thou not that those who were ungrateful will outdo Me. Truly, they will never weaken Him. 
8|60| And prepare for them whatever you were able of strength, including a string of horses, to put fear in the enemy of God and your enemy and others besides whom you know them not. God knows them. And whatever thing you spend in the way of God, the account will be paid in full to you and you will not be wronged. 
8|61| And if they tended towards peace, then, tend thou towards it and put thy trust in God. Truly, He is The Hearing, The Knowing. 
8|62| And if they want to deceive thee, then, truly, God is Enough. It is He Who confirmed thee with His help and with the ones who believe. 
8|63| And He brought their hearts together. If thou hadst spent all that is in and on the earth, thou wouldst not have brought together their hearts, except God brought them together. Truly, He is Almighty, Wise. 
8|64| O Prophet! God is Enough for thee and for whoever followed thee among the ones who believe. 
8|65| O Prophet! Encourage fighting to the ones who believe. If there be twenty of you, ones who remain steadfast, they will vanquish two hundred. And if there be a hundred of you, they will vanquish a thousand of those who were ungrateful because they are a folk who understand not. 
8|66| Now God lightened your burden from you for He knew that there was a weakness in you. So if there would be a hundred of you, ones who remain steadfast, they will vanquish two hundred. And if there would be a thousand of you, they will vanquish two thousand with the permission of God. And God is with the ones who remain steadfast. 
8|67| It had not been for a Prophet that he would have prisoners of war unless he gives a sound thrashing in the region. You want the advantages of the present, but God wants the world to come. And God is Almighty, Wise. 
8|68| Were it not for a preceding prescription from God, you would, certainly, be afflicted with a tremendous punishment for what you took. 
8|69| Eat of what you gained as booty, lawful, what is good. And be Godfearing of God. Truly, God is Forgiving, Compassionate. 
8|70| O Prophet! Say to whom are in your hands of the prisoners of war: If God knows any good in your hearts, He will give you better than what was taken from you and He will forgive you. And God is Forgiving, Compassionate. 
8|71| But if they want treachery against thee, they, surely, betrayed God before, so He gave thee power over them. And God is Knowing, Wise. 
8|72| Truly, those who believed and emigrated and struggled with their wealth and their lives in the way of God, and those who gave refuge and helped, those are protectors, some of some others. And those who believed, but emigrate not, you have no duty of friendship to them at all until they emigrate. And if they asked you for help in the way of life, then, it would be upon you to help them, but against the folk whom between you and between them there is a solemn promise. And God is Seeing of what you do. 
8|73| And those who were ungrateful, some are protectors of some others. If you accomplish not allying with other believers there will be persecution on the earth and the hateful sin of corruption. 
8|74| And those who believed and emigrated and struggled in the way of God and those who gave refuge and helped, those, they are the ones who truthfully believe. For them is forgiveness and generous provision. 
8|75| And those who believed afterwards, and emigrated and struggled beside you, then, those are of you. And those imbued through wombs, blood relations, some are more deserving than some others in what is prescribed by God, truly, God is Knowing of everything. 
9|1| God and His Messenger declare disassociation from those with whom you made a contract among the ones who were polytheists who violated it: 
9|2| Roam about on the earth for four months and know that you will not be ones who frustrate God and that God is One Who Covers with shame the ones who are ungrateful. 
9|3| And the announcement from God and His Messenger to humanity on the day of the greater pilgrimage to Makkah is that God is free from the ones who are polytheists and so is His Messenger. Then, it will be better for you if you repented. But if you turned away, then, know that you are not ones who frustrate God. And give thou tidings to those who were ungrateful of a painful punishment. 
9|4| But those with whom you made a contract—among the ones who are polytheists—and again, they reduce you not at all nor do they back anyone against you, then, fulfill their compact with them until their term of contract expires. Truly, God loves the ones who are Godfearing. 
9|5| When the months of pilgrim sanctity were drawn away, then, kill the ones who are polytheists wherever you found them and take them and besiege them and sit in every place of ambush. Then, if they repented and performed the formal prayer and gave the purifying alms, then, let them go their way. Truly, God is Forgiving, Compassionate. 
9|6| And if anyone of the ones who are polytheists sought asylum with thee, then, grant him protection so that he hears the assertions of God. Again, convey thou him to a place of safety. That is because they are a folk who know not. 
9|7| How will there be for the ones who are polytheists a compact with God and with His Messenger but for those with whom you made a contract near the Masjid al-Haram? If they go straight with you, then, go straight with them. Truly, God loves the ones who are Godfearing. 
9|8| How? And if they get the better of you, they regard not ties of relationship with you nor a pact? They please you with their mouths, but their hearts refuse compliance and many of them are ones who disobey. 
9|9| They sold out the signs of God for a little price and barred others from His way. Truly, how evil is what they had been doing. 
9|10| They regard not towards one who believes either ties of relationship or a pact. And those, they are the ones who exceed the limits. 
9|11| But if they repented and performed the formal prayer and gave the purifying alms, then, they are your brothers/sisters in your way of life, We explain the signs distinctly for a folk who know. 
9|12| But if they broke their sworn oaths after their compact and discredited your way of life, then, fight the leaders of ingratitude. Truly, they, their sworn oaths are nothing to them, so that perhaps they will refrain themselves. 
9|13| Will you not fight a folk who broke their sworn oaths and were about to expel the Messenger? Began they the first time against you? Will you dread them? God has a better right that you should dread Him if you had been ones who believe. 
9|14| Fight them! God will punish them by your hands and cover them with shame and help you against them. And He will heal the breasts of a folk, ones who believe, 
9|15| and He causes to be put away the rage in their hearts. And God turns to whom He wills in forgiveness. And God is Knowing, Wise. 
9|16| Or assumed you that you would be left before God knows those who struggled among you? And take not anyone to yourselves other than God and His Messenger and the ones who believe as intimate friends. And God is Aware of what you do. 
9|17| It had not been for the ones who are polytheists to frequent the places of prostration to God while they are ones who bear witness against themselves of their ingratitude. Those, their actions were fruitless. They are ones who will dwell in the fire forever! 
9|18| Only he frequents places of prostration to God who believed in God and the Last Day and performed the formal prayer and gave the purifying alms and dreads none but God. Perhaps those will be among the ones who are truly guided. 
9|19| Made you the giving of water to drink to the ones who are pilgrims and frequenting the Masjid al-Haram the same as he who believed in God and the Last Day and struggled in the way of God? They are not on the same level with God. And God guides not the folk, ones who are unjust. 
9|20| Those who believed and emigrated and struggled in the way of God with their wealth and their lives are sublime in their degree with God. And those, they are the ones who are victorious. 
9|21| Their Lord gives them good tidings of mercy from Him and His contentment and of Gardens for them in which is abiding bliss. 
9|22| They are ones who will dwell in them forever, eternally. Truly, God, with Him is a sublime compensation. 
9|23| O those who believed! Take not to yourselves your fathers and brothers/sisters as protectors if they embraced disbelief instead of belief. And whoever of you turns away to them, then, those, they are the ones who are unjust. 
9|24| Say: If had been your fathers and your children and your brothers/sisters and your spouses and your kinspeople and the wealth you gained and the transactions you dread slacken and the dwellings with which you are well-pleased were more beloved to you than God and His Messenger and struggling in His Way, then, await until God brings His command. And God guides not the folk, ones who disobey. 
9|25| God, certainly, helped you in many battlefields and on the day of Hunayn when you were impressed with your great numbers, but it avails you not at all. And the earth was narrow for you for all its breadth. Again, you turned as ones who draw back. 
9|26| Again, God caused His tranquility to descend on His Messenger and on the ones who believed and caused armies you see not to descend and punished those who were ungrateful. And this is the recompense of the ones who were ungrateful. 
9|27| Again, God will turn to whom He will in forgiveness after that. And God is Forgiving, Compassionate. 
9|28| O those who believed! Truly, the ones who are polytheists are unclean, so let them come not near the Masjid al-Haram after this year. And if you feared being poverty-stricken, God will enrich you out of His grace if He willed. Truly, God is Knowing, Wise. 
9|29| Fight those who believe not in God nor the Last Day nor forbid what God and His Messenger forbade nor practice the way of life of The Truth among those who were given the Book until they give the tribute out of hand and they be ones who comply. 
9|30| And the Jews said: Ezra is the son of God and the Christians said: The Messiah is the son of God. That is the saying with their mouths. They conform with the sayings of those who were ungrateful before. God took the offensive. How they are misled! 
9|31| They took to themselves their learned Jewish scholars and their monks as lords—other than God—and the Messiah son of Mary. And they were only commanded to worship The One God. There is no god but He! Glory be to Him above the partners they ascribe! 
9|32| They want to extinguish the light of God with their mouths, but God refuses so that He fulfill His light even if the ones who are ungrateful disliked it. 
9|33| It is He Who sent His Messenger with the guidance and the way of life of The Truth so that He may uplift it over all ways of life, even if the ones who are polytheists disliked it. 
9|34| O those who believed! Truly, there are many of the learned Jewish scholars and monks who consume the wealth of humanity in falsehood and bar from the way of God and those who treasure up gold and silver and spend it not in the way of God. Give to them tidings of a painful punishment, 
9|35| on a Day it will be hot in the fire of hell. Then, by it are branded their foreheads and their sides and their backs. It will be said: This is what you treasured up for yourselves so experience what you had been treasuring up. 
9|36| Truly, the period of months with God is twelve lunar months in the Book of God. On the day when He created the heavens and the earth of them. Four are sanctified. That is the truth-loving way of life. So do not wrong yourselves in it. And fight the ones who are polytheists collectively, as they fight you collectively. And know that God is with the ones who are Godfearing. 
9|37| Truly, the postponing a Sacred Month is an increase in ingratitude. By it are caused to go astray those who were ungrateful, for they permit it a year, and forbid it a year, so that they agree with the period that God forbade, and they permit what God forbade. Made to appear pleasing to them was the evil of their actions. And God guides not the folk, the ones who are ungrateful. 
9|38| O those who believed! What was it with you when was said to you: Move forward in the way of God, you inclined heavily downwards to the earth? Were you so well-pleased with this present life instead of the world to come? But the enjoyment of this present life is not but little compared to the world to come. 
9|39| Unless you move forward, He will punish you with a painful punishment and will have in exchange for you a folk other than you. And you will not injure Him at all. And God is Powerful over everything. 
9|40| If you help him not, then, surely, God helped him when those who were ungrateful drove him out. The second of two, when they were both in the cavern, he says to his companion: Feel no remorse. Truly, God is with us. Then, God caused His tranquility to descend on him and confirmed him with armies that you see not and made the word of those who were ungrateful the lowest. And the Word of God is Lofty. God is Almighty, Wise. 
9|41| Move forward light and heavy and struggle with your wealth and your lives in the way of God. That is better for you if you had been knowing. 
9|42| If it had been a near advantage and an easy journey, they would have followed thee, except the destination of the journey was distant for them. And they will swear by God: If we were able, we would, certainly, have gone forth with you. They will cause themselves to perish. And God knows that they are the ones who lie. 
9|43| God pardon thee! Why hadst thou given permission to them before it becomes clear to thee those who were sincere and thou hast known who are the ones who lie? 
9|44| They ask not permission of thee, those who believe in God and the Last Day, that they struggle with their wealth and their lives. And God is Knowing of the ones who are Godfearing. 
9|45| It is only those who ask permission of thee who believe not in God and the Last Day and whose hearts were in doubt, so they go this way and that in their doubts. 
9|46| And if they wanted to go forth, certainly, they would have prepared for it some preparation, except God disliked arousing them, so He caused them to pause and it was said: Sit along with the ones who sit at home. 
9|47| If they went forth with you, they would have increased nothing for you, but ruination. And they would have rushed to and fro in your midst with insolent dissension. And among you are ones who would have harkened to them. And God is Knowing of the ones who are unjust. 
9|48| Certainly, they were looking for dissension before. And they turned around and around for thee the commands until The Truth drew near, and the command of God became manifest although they were ones who dislike it. 
9|49| Among them is he who says: Give me permission and tempt me not. But they descended into dissension. And, truly, hell is that which encloses the ones who are ungrateful. 
9|50| If lights on thee benevolence, they are raised to anger, but if an affliction lights on thee, they say: Surely, we took our commands before. And they turn away and they are glad. 
9|51| Say: Nothing will light on us but what God had been prescribing for us. He is our Defender. And in God let the ones who believe put their trust. 
9|52| Say: Are you watching for something, but one of the two fairer things to befall us? And we watch for you, whether God will light on you a punishment from Him or from our hands. So watch! We are ones who are waiting with you. 
9|53| Say: Spend willingly or unwillingly. There will be only non-acceptance. Truly, you, you had been a folk, ones who disobey. 
9|54| And nothing prevented their contributions being accepted from them but that they were ungrateful to God and His Messenger and that they not approach formal prayer but while they are lazy and they spend but as ones who dislike to spend. 
9|55| So let not their wealth impress thee nor their children. God wants only to punish them in this present life and so that their souls depart while they are ones who are ungrateful. 
9|56| And they swear by God that they are, truly, of you while they are not of you. They are but a folk who are in fear. 
9|57| If they find a shelter or a place to creep into or a place of retreat, they would turn to it as they rush away. 
9|58| And among them there are some who find fault with thee about charities. If they were given a part of it, they were well-pleased, but if they are not given of it, that is when they are displeased. 
9|59| Better if they were well-pleased with what God gave them and His Messenger. And they had said: God is Enough for us. God will give to us of His grace and so will His Messenger. Truly, to God we are ones who quest. 
9|60| Charities are only for the poor and the needy and the ones who work to collect it and the ones whose hearts are brought together and to free the bondsperson and the ones who are in debt and in the way of God and for the traveler of the way. This is a duty to God. And God is Knowing, Wise. 
9|61| And among them are those who malign the Prophet and say: He is unquestioning. Say: He is unquestioning of what is good for you. He believes in God and believes in ones who believe. And he is a mercy to those of you who believed. And those of you who malign the Messenger of God, for them is a painful punishment. 
9|62| They swear by God to you to please you, but God and His Messenger have better right that they should please Him if they had been ones who believe. 
9|63| Know they not that whoever opposes God and His Messenger, then, truly, for him will be the fire of hell—one who will dwell in it forever? That is the tremendous degradation. 
9|64| The ones who are hypocrites are fearful that should be sent down against them a Chapter of the Quran to tell them what is in their hearts. Say: Ridicule us, but, truly, God is One Who Drives Out that of which you are fearful. 
9|65| And if thou hadst asked them, they would say: Truly, we had only been engaging in idle talk and playing. Say: Was it God and His signs and His Messenger that you had been ridiculing? 
9|66| Make no excuses! Surely, you disbelieved after your belief. If We pardon a section of you, We will punish another section because, truly, they had been ones who sin. 
9|67| The ones who are male hypocrites and the ones who are female hypocrites, some are of some other. They command that which is unlawful and prohibit that which is honorable and close their hands. They forgot God so He forgot them. Truly, the ones who are hypocrites, they are the ones who disobey. 
9|68| And God promised the males, ones who hypocrites and the females, ones who are hypocrites and the ones who are ungrateful, the fire of hell, ones who will dwell in it forever! It will be enough for them. God cursed them. And for them is an abiding punishment. 
9|69| Like those before you who had been with more strength than you and more wealth and children, they enjoyed their apportionment so you enjoyed your apportionment as enjoyed those who were before you their apportionment. And you engaged in idle talk as they engaged in idle talk. As to those, their actions were fruitless in the present and are such in the world to come. And those, they are the ones who are losers. 
9|70| Approaches them not the tidings of those before them—the folk of Noah and of Ad and of Thamud, and of a folk of Abraham, and of the Companions of Midian, and that which are cities overthrown? Their Messengers approached them with the clear portents. So it had not been God who did wrong to them, rather, they had been doing wrong to themselves. 
9|71| The males, ones who believe and the females, ones who believe, some are protectors of some other. They command to that which is honorable and they prohibit that which is unlawful and they perform the formal prayer and give the purifying alms and obey God and His Messenger. Those, God will have mercy on them. Truly, God is Almighty, Wise. 
9|72| God promised males, the ones who believe and the females, the ones who believe, Gardens beneath which rivers run, ones who will dwell in them forever and good dwellings in the Gardens of Eden. And the greater contentment is with God. That, it is the winning of the sublime triumph. 
9|73| O Prophet! Struggle with the ones who are ungrateful and the ones who are hypocrites and be thou harsh against them. And their place of shelter will be hell. Miserable will be the Homecoming! 
9|74| They swear by God that they said not against the Prophet but, certainly, they said the word of ingratitude and they were ungrateful after their submission to God. And they were about to do something that they never attain. And they sought revenge but that God would enrich them and His Messenger with His grace. And if they repent, it would be better for them. And if they turn away, God will punish them with a painful punishment in the present and in the world to come. And there is not for them on earth either a protector or a helper. 
9|75| And of them are some who made a contract with God saying: If He gave us of His grace, we will be charitable and, certainly, we will be among the ones in accord with morality. 
9|76| Then, when He gave them of His grace, they were misers with it and turned away and they were ones who turn aside. 
9|77| He made the consequence hypocrisy in their hearts until a Day they will meet Him because they broke with God what they promised Him, because they had been lying against Him. 
9|78| Know they not that God knows their conspiring secretly and their secret? And that God is The Knower of the unseen. 
9|79| Those who find fault with ones who are volunteer donors to charities from among the ones who believe and those who find not but their striving to give, so they derided them. God will deride them. And they will have a painful punishment. 
9|80| Ask for forgiveness for them or ask not for forgiveness for them, if thou hast asked for forgiveness for them seventy times, God will never forgive them. That is because they were ungrateful to God and His Messenger. And God guides not the folk, the ones who disobey. 
9|81| The ones who are left behind were glad of their positions behind the Messenger of God. And they disliked struggling with their wealth and themselves in the way of God. And they said: Move not forward in the heat. Say: The fire of hell has more severe heat. Would that they had been understanding! 
9|82| So let them laugh a little and weep much as a recompense for what they had been earning. 
9|83| Then, God returned thee to a section of them. And they asked thy permission for going forth. Then, say: You will never ever go forth with me nor fight an enemy with me. You were well-pleased sitting the first time. Then, sit—ones who await with who lagged behind. 
9|84| Pray thou not formally for any of them who died, ever, nor stand up at his grave. Truly, they were ungrateful to God and His Messenger and died while they are ones who disobey. 
9|85| And let not their wealth impress you nor their children. For God only wants to punish them with these in the present and their souls depart while they were ones who are ungrateful. 
9|86| When a Chapter of the Quran was caused to descend saying that: Believe in God and struggle along with His Messenger, those imbued with affluence ask permission of thee. And they said: Forsake us. We would be with the ones who sit at home. 
9|87| They were well-pleased to be with those who stay behind. And a seal was set on their hearts so they understand not. 
9|88| But the Messenger and those who believed with him struggled with their wealth and their lives. Those, for them are good deeds. And those, they are the ones who will prosper. 
9|89| God prepared for them Gardens beneath which rivers run, ones who will dwell in them forever. That is the winning of the sublime triumph. 
9|90| And the ones who make excuses drew near from among the nomads that permission be given them. And they sat back, those who lied against God and His Messenger. There will light on those who were ungrateful among them a painful punishment. 
9|91| Not on the weak nor on the sick nor on those who find nothing to spend is there fault if they were true to God and His Messenger. There is no way against the ones who are doers of good. And God is Forgiving, Compassionate. 
9|92| Nor on those who when they approached thee that thou wouldst find mounts to carry them, thou hadst said: I find not what will carry you. So they turned away while their eyes overflow with tears of grief when they find nothing for them to spend in the way of God. 
9|93| The way of blame is only against those who ask thee permission to remain behind and they are rich. They were well-pleased to be with those who stay behind. And God set a seal on their hearts so that they know not. 
9|94| They will make excuses to you when you returned to them. Say: Make no excuses. We will never believe you. Surely, God told us news about you. God and His Messenger will consider your actions. Again, you will be returned to One Who Knows the unseen and the visible. Then, He will tell you of what you had been doing. 
9|95| They will swear to you by God when you turned about to them so that you renounce them. So renounce them. Truly, they are a disgrace. And their place of shelter will be hell, as a recompense for what they had been earning. 
9|96| They swear to you so that you will be well-pleased with them. So while you be well-pleased with them, then, truly, God is not well-pleased with the folk, the ones who disobey. 
9|97| The nomads are stauncher in ingratitude and hypocrisy and more likely not to know the ordinances that God caused to descend to His Messenger. And God is Knowing, Wise. 
9|98| And of the nomads are some who take what they spend to themselves as something owed them and await for some turn of your fortunes. Theirs will be the reprehensible turn of fortune. And God is Hearing, Knowing. 
9|99| And of the nomads are some who believe in God and the Last Day and take for himself what he spends—as an offering to God—and blessings of the Messenger that will be sent for them. No doubt these are not but an offering from them. God will cause them to enter into His mercy. Truly, God is Forgiving, Compassionate. 
9|100| As for the forerunners, the ones who take the lead among the ones who emigrate and the helpers and those who followed them with kindness, God was well-pleased with them and they were well-pleased with Him. He prepared for them Gardens beneath which rivers run, ones who will dwell in them forever, eternally. That is the winning of the sublime triumph. 
9|101| And from around you of the nomads are ones who are hypocrites. And from among the people of the city, some grew bold in hypocrisy. Thou hast not known them but We know them. We will, truly, punish them two times in this world. Again, they will be returned to a tremendous punishment. 
9|102| And others acknowledged their impieties. They mixed actions, ones in accord with morality with others that are bad deeds. Perhaps God will turn to them in forgiveness. Truly, God is Forgiving, Compassionate. 
9|103| Take charity from their wealth to purify them and make them pure with it. And invoke blessings for them. Truly, thy entreaties will bring a sense of comfort and rest to them. And God is Hearing, Knowing. 
9|104| Know they not that God is He Who accepts remorse from His servants and takes charities and that God, He is The Accepter of Repentance, The Compassionate? 
9|105| And say: Act! God will consider your actions and so will His Messenger and the ones who believe. And you will be returned to Him, One Who Knows of the unseen and the visible. Then, He will tell you what you had been doing. 
9|106| And there are others, ones who are waiting in suspense for the command of God. Either He will punish them or He will turn to them in forgiveness. And God is Knowing, Wise. 
9|107| Mention those who took to themselves places of prostration by injuring and in ingratitude and separating and dividing between the ones who believe and as a stalking place for whoever warred against God and His Messenger before. And they will, certainly, swear that: We wanted nothing but the fairer. And God bears witness that they are, truly, ones who lie. 
9|108| And stand not up in it ever! A place of prostration that was founded from the first day on God-consciousness is more rightful that thou hast stood up in it. In it are men who love to cleanse themselves. And God loves the ones who cleanse themselves. 
9|109| Is one who founded his structure on the God-consciousness of God and His contentment better than he who founded his structure on the brink of a crumbling, tottering bank of a river so that it tumbled with him into the fire of hell? And God guides not the folk, the ones who are unjust! 
9|110| The structure they built will cease not the skepticism in their hearts until their hearts are cut asunder. And God is Knowing, Wise. 
9|111| Truly, God bought from the ones who believe themselves and their properties. For them is the Garden! They fight in the way of God so they kill and are slain. It is a promise rightfully on Him in the Torah and the Gospel and the Quran. And who is more true to His compact than God? Then, rejoice in the good tidings of the bargain that you made in trading with Him. And that, it is the winning the sublime triumph 
9|112| for the repentant worshippers, the ones who praise, the ones who are inclined to fasting, the ones who bow down, the ones who prostrate themselves, the ones who command that which is honorable and the ones who prohibit that which is unlawful, and the ones who guard the ordinances of God, and give thou good tidings to the ones who believe! 
9|113| It had not been for the Prophet and those who believed to ask for forgiveness for ones who are polytheists—even if they had been imbued with kinship—after it became clear to them that they are the Companions of Hellfire. 
9|114| And had not been Abraham asking for forgiveness for his father only because of a promise he had promised him? Then, when it became clear to him that, truly, he was an enemy to God, he cleared himself from him. Truly, Abraham was sympathetic and forbearing. 
9|115| God would not have been causing a folk to go astray after He guided them until He makes manifest to them of what they should be Godfearing. Truly, God is Knowing of everything. 
9|116| Truly, God, to Him belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth. He gives life and He causes to die. And there is not for you other than God, either a protector or a helper. 
9|117| Certainly, God turned towards the Prophet and the ones who emigrate and the helpers who followed him in the hour of adversity after the hearts of a group of people were about to swerve among them. Again, He turned towards them. Truly, He is Gentle, Compassionate. 
9|118| And upon the three who were left behind when the earth became narrow for them—for all its breadth—and their souls became narrow for them and they thought that there was no shelter from God, but in Him, again, He turns to them in forgiveness so that they would turn towards Him. Truly, God, He is The Accepter of Repentance, The Compassionate. 
9|119| O those who believed! Be Godfearing of God and be with the ones who are sincere. 
9|120| It had not been for the people of the city and among the nomads around them to stay behind from the Messenger of God nor prefer themselves more than himself. That is because they were neither lit on by thirst nor fatigue nor emptiness in the way of God nor tread they any treading on any ground—enraging the ones who are ungrateful—nor glean any gleaning of ground against the enemy but as an action in accord with morality written down for them. Truly, God wastes not the compensation of the ones who are doers of good. 
9|121| Nor spend they contributions—be they small or great—nor cross they over a valley, but it was written down for them that God will give recompense to them for the fairer of what they had been doing. 
9|122| And it had not been for the ones who believe to move forward collectively. If every band moved not forward of them but a section of people only, that they become learned in the way of life and that they warn their folk when they returned to them so that perhaps they will beware? 
9|123| O those who have believed! Fight the ones who are close to you of the ones who are ungrateful. And let them find harshness in you. And know that God is with the ones who are Godfearing. 
9|124| And whenever there was caused to descend a Chapter of the Quran, some of them say: Which of you had this increased in belief? As for those who believed, it increased them in belief and they rejoice at the good tidings. 
9|125| But as for those who, in their hearts, is a sickness, it increased disgrace to their disgrace and they died while they are the ones who are ungrateful. 
9|126| Consider they not that they are tried one time or two times a year? Again, they neither repent nor they recollect. 
9|127| And whenever there was caused to descend a Chapter of the Quran, some looked at some others saying: Is anyone seeing you? Again, they took flight. God turned away from their hearts because they are a folk who understand not. 
9|128| Certainly, there drew near to you a Messenger from among yourselves. It was grievous to him that you fell into misfortune. He is anxious for you and to the ones who believe, gentle, compassionate. 
9|129| But if they turned away, say: God is enough for me. There is no god but He. In Him I put my trust. And He is the Lord of the Sublime Throne. 
10|1| Al\f L[m R[. 
10|2| These are the signs of the wise Book. Had it been for humanity to wonder that We revealed to a man from among them that: Warn humanity and give thou good tidings to those who believed so that they will have a sound footing with their Lord? The ones who are ungrateful said: Truly, this is one who is a clear sorcerer. 
10|3| Truly, your Lord is God Who created the heavens and the earth in six days. Again, He turned Himself to the Throne managing the command. There is no intercessor but after His permission. That is God, your Lord, so worship Him alone. Will you not, then, recollect? 
10|4| To Him is your return, altogether. The promise of God is true. It is He Who begins the creation. Again, He will cause it to return so that He may give recompense to those who believed and did as the ones in accord with morality with equity. And those who are ungrateful, for them is a drink of scalding water and a painful punishment because they had been ungrateful. 
10|5| It is He Who made the sun an illumination and the moon as a light and ordained its mansions so that you would know the number of the years and the reckoning. God created that only in Truth. He explains distinctly the signs for a folk who know. 
10|6| Truly, in the alternation of the nighttime and the daytime and whatever God has created in the heavens and the earth are signs for a folk who are Godfearing. 
10|7| Truly, those who hope not for their meeting with Us, but were well-pleased with this present life and were secured in it, those, they are ones who are heedless of Our signs. 
10|8| Those, their place of shelter will be the fire because of what they had been earning. 
10|9| Truly, those who believed and did as the ones in accord with morality, their Lord will guide them in their belief. Rivers will run beneath them in Gardens of Bliss. 
10|10| They will be calling out from there: Glory be to Thee, O God! And their greetings in it will be: Peace! And the last of their calling out will be that: The Praise belongs to God the Lord of the worlds! 
10|11| And if God is to quicken the worst for humanity, as they would desire to hasten for the good, their term would be decided. But We forsake those who hope not for the meeting with Us, wandering unwilling to see in their defiance. 
10|12| And when harm afflicted the human being, he calls to Us on his side or as one who sits at home or as one who is standing up. But when We removed his harm from him, he passed by as if he had never been calling to Us for harm that afflicted him. Thus, made to appear pleasing to the ones who are excessive is what they had been doing. 
10|13| And, certainly, We caused to perish generations before you when they did wrong while their Messengers drew near with the clear portents, but they had not been such as to believe. Thus, We give recompense to the folk, the ones who sin. 
10|14| Again, We made you viceregents on the earth after them that We look on how you would do. 
10|15| And when are recounted to them Our signs, clear portents, those who hope not for their meeting with Us said: Bring us a Recitation other than this or substitute it. Say: It be not possible for me to substitute it of my own accord. I follow nothing but what is revealed to me. Truly, I fear if I rebelled against my Lord a punishment on the tremendous Day. 
10|16| Say: If God willed, I would not have related it to you nor would He have caused you to recognize it. Surely, I lingered in expectation among you a lifetime before this. Will you not, then, be reasonable? 
10|17| So who did greater wrong than he who devised a lie against God or denied His signs? Truly, the ones who sin will not prosper. 
10|18| And they worship other than God things that injure them not, nor profit them. And they say: These are our intercessors with God. Say: Are you telling God of what He knows not in the heavens nor in and on the earth? Glory be to Him and exalted is He above partners they ascribe. 
10|19| And humanity had not been but one community, but, then, they became at variance. And if it were not for a Word that preceded from thy Lord, it would be decided between them immediately about what they are at variance in it. 
10|20| And they say: Why was a sign not caused to descend from his Lord? Say: Truly, the unseen belongs only to God. So wait awhile. Truly, I am with you of the ones who are waiting awhile. 
10|21| And when We caused humanity to experience mercy after tribulation afflicted them, that is when they conspired against Our signs. Say: God is Swifter in planning. Truly, Our messengers write down what you plan. 
10|22| He it is Who sets you in motion through dry land and the sea until when you had been in boats and they ran them with the good wind and they were glad in it. A tempest wind drew near them. Waves drew near from every place, and they thought that they were enclosed by it. They called to God, ones who are sincere and devoted in their way of life to Him saying: If Thou wert to rescue us from this, we will, certainly, be of the ones who are thankful. 
10|23| But when He rescued them, that is when they are insolent in and on the earth without right. O humanity, your insolence is only against yourselves, an enjoyment of this present life. Again, to Us is your return. Then, We will tell you what you had been doing. 
10|24| The parable of this present life is but like water that We caused to descend from heaven. It mingled with the plants of the earth—from which you eat—humanity and flocks—until when the earth took its ornaments and was decorated and its people thought that, truly, they are ones who have power over it! Our command approached it by nighttime or by daytime. Then, We made it stubble as if it flourished not yesterday. Thus, We explain distinctly the signs for a folk who reflect. 
10|25| And God calls to the Abode of Peace and He guides whom He wills to a straight path. 
10|26| For those who did good is the fairer and increase. Neither will gloom come over their faces nor abasement. Those are the Companions of the Garden. They are ones who will dwell in it forever. 
10|27| And for those who earned evil deeds, the recompense of an evil deed will be its like and abasement will come over them. They will have none but God as One Who Saves from Harm. It is as if their faces were covered with a strip of the night, one in darkness. Those are the Companions of the Fire. They are ones who will dwell in it forever. 
10|28| And on a Day We will assemble them altogether. Again, We will say to those who ascribed partners with God: Stay in your place, you and your ascribed associates. Then, We will set a space between them. And their ascribed associates would say: It had not been us that you were worshipping. 
10|29| And God sufficed as a witness between you and between us. We had been of your worship certainly, ones who are heedless. 
10|30| There every soul will be tried for what it has did in the past. And they would be returned to God, their Defender, The Truth. And from them will go astray what they had been devising. 
10|31| Say: Who provides for you from the heaven and the earth? Who controls having the ability to hear and sight? And Who brings out the living from the dead and brings out the dead from the living? And who manages the command? They will, then, say: God! Say: Will you not be Godfearing? 
10|32| Such is God, your Lord, The Truth. And what else is there after The Truth but wandering astray. Where, then, turn you away? 
10|33| Thus, was the Word of thy Lord realized against those who disobeyed that they will not believe. 
10|34| Say: Are there among your ascribed associates with God anyone who begins the creation and, then, causes it to return? Say: God begins the creation. Again, He causes it to return. Then, how you are misled! 
10|35| Say: Are there among your ascribed associates with God anyone who guides to The Truth? Say: God guides to The Truth. Has not He who guides to The Truth a better right to be followed than he who guides not unless he himself be guided? What is the matter with you? How you give judgment! 
10|36| And most of them follow nothing but opinion. Truly, opinion avails them not against The Truth at all. Truly, God is Knowing of what they accomplish. 
10|37| This Recitation had not been devised by other than God because it establishes as true what was before it and as a decisive explanation of the Book. There is no doubt in it. It is from the Lord of the worlds. 
10|38| Or they will say: He devised it. Say: Bring a Chapter of the Quran like it and call to whomever you were able—other than God—if you had been ones who are sincere. 
10|39| Nay! They denied the knowledge that they comprehend not while approaches them not the interpretation. Thus, those who were before them denied. So look on how had been the Ultimate End of the ones who are unjust! 
10|40| And of them are some who believe in it and of them are some who believe not in it. And thy Lord is greater in knowledge of the ones who make corruption. 
10|41| And if they denied thee, then, thou say: For me are my actions and for you are your actions. You are free of what I do and I am free of what you do. 
10|42| And among them are some who listen to thee. So hast thou caused someone unwilling to hear, to hear if they had not been reasonable? 
10|43| And among them are some who look on thee. So hast thou guided the unwilling to see if they had not been perceiving? 
10|44| Truly, God does not wrong humanity at all, but humanity does wrong itself. 
10|45| And on a Day He will assemble them as if they had not been lingering in expectation but an hour of the daytime. They will recognize one another among themselves. Surely, those who denied lost the meeting with God and they had not been ones who are truly guided. 
10|46| Whether We cause thee to see some of what We promise them or We call thee to Us, then, to Us is their return. Again, God will be witness to what they accomplish. 
10|47| Every community has its Messenger. So, then, when their Messenger drew near, it would be decided between them with equity. And they, they will not be wronged. 
10|48| And they say: When is this promise if you had been ones who are sincere? 
10|49| Say: I control not either hurt or profit for myself, but what God willed. To every community there is a term. When their term draws near, neither will they delay it an hour nor will they press it forward. 
10|50| Say: Considered you that if His punishment approached you at nighttime or at daytime, for which portion would the ones who sin be ones who seek to hasten? 
10|51| Again, when it falls on you, believed you in it? Now? While you had been seeking to hasten it? 
10|52| Again, it would be said to those who did wrong: Experience the infinite punishment! Will you be given recompense but for what you had been earning? 
10|53| And they ask thee to be told: Is it true? Say: Yes! By my Lord it is The Truth and you are not ones who frustrate Him. 
10|54| And if there would be for every person who did wrong whatever is in or on the earth, he would, certainly, offer it for his ransom. And they would keep secret their self-reproach when they considered the punishment. But it will be decided between them with equity. And they, they will not be wronged. 
10|55| No doubt to God belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth. No doubt the promise of God is true, but most of them know not. 
10|56| It is He Who gives life and causes to die and to Him you will return. 
10|57| O humanity! Surely, an admonishment drew near you from your Lord and a healing for what is in the breasts and a guidance and mercy for ones who believe. 
10|58| Say: In the grace of God and in His mercy therein let them be glad. That is better than what they gather. 
10|59| Say: Considered you from what God caused to descend for you of provision and that you made some of it unlawful and some lawful? Say: Gave God permission to you or devise you against God? 
10|60| And what is the opinion of those who devise a lie against God on the Day of Resurrection? Truly, God is Possessor of Grace to humanity, but most of them give not thanks. 
10|61| Neither hast thou been on any matter nor hast thou recounted from the Recitation nor are you doing any action but We had been ones who bear witness over you when you press on it. And nothing escapes from thy Lord of the weight of an atom in or on the earth nor in the heaven nor what is smaller than that nor what is greater than that but it is in a clear Book. 
10|62| No doubt with the faithful friends of God there will be neither fear in them nor will they feel remorse. 
10|63| Those who believed and had been Godfearing, 
10|64| for them are good tidings in this present life and in the world to come. There is no substitution of the Words of God. That, it is the winning the sublime triumph. 
10|65| And let not their saying dishearten thee.• Truly, all great glory belongs to God. He is The Hearing, The Knowing. 
10|66| No doubt to God belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in and on the earth. And follow not those who call to ascribed associates other than God. They follow nothing but opinion and they do nothing but guess. 
10|67| It is He Who made the nighttime for you so that you rest in it and the daytime for one who perceives. Truly, in this are signs for a folk who hear. 
10|68| They said God took to Himself a son. Glory be to Him. He is Sufficient. To Him is whatever is in the heavens and in and on the earth. With you there is no authority for this. Say you against God what you know not? 
10|69| Say: Truly, those who devise lies against God, they will not prosper, 
10|70| only an enjoyment in the present! Again, to Us will be their return. Again, We will cause them to experience the severe punishment because they had been ungrateful. 
10|71| And recount to them the tidings of Noah when he said to his folk: O my folk! If my station had been troublesome to you and my reminding you of the signs of God, then, in God I put my trust. So summon up your affair along with your ascribed associates. Again, there be no cause for doubt in your affair. Again, decide against me and give me no respite. 
10|72| Then, if you turned away, I asked you not for any compensation. My compensation is with God. And I was commanded that I be of the ones who submit to God. 
10|73| Then, they denied him, so We delivered him and some with him on the boat. And we made them the viceregents while We drowned those who denied Our signs. Then, look on how had been the Ultimate End of the ones who are warned! 
10|74| Again, We raised up Messengers after him to their folk. They drew near them with the clear portents. But they had not been believing in what they had denied before of it. Thus, We set a seal on the hearts of the ones who exceed the limits. 
10|75| Again, We raised up after them Moses and Aaron to Pharaoh and his Council with Our signs. Then, they grew arrogant, and they had been a folk, ones who sin. 
10|76| So when The Truth drew near them from Us, they said: Truly, this is clear sorcery! 
10|77| Moses said: Say you this about The Truth when it drew near you? Is this sorcery? And the ones who are sorcerers will not prosper. 
10|78| They said: Hadst thou drawn near to us to turn us from what we found our fathers on so that the domination on the earth might be for you two? We are not ones who believe in both of you. 
10|79| And Pharaoh said: Bring to me every one who is a knowing sorcerer. 
10|80| And when the ones who are sorcerers drew near, Moses said to them: Cast down with ones who cast. 
10|81| Then, when they cast Moses said: What you brought about is sorcery. Truly, God will render it untrue. Truly, God makes not right the actions of the ones who make corruption. 
10|82| And God will verify The Truth by His Words, although the ones who sin disliked it much! 
10|83| But none believed Moses but the offspring of his folk because of the fear of Pharaoh and his Council that he persecute them. And, truly, Pharaoh was one who exalted himself on the earth. And he was, truly, of the ones who are excessive. 
10|84| And Moses said: O my folk! If you had been believing in God, then, put your trust in Him, if you had been ones who submit to God. 
10|85| Then, they said: We put our trust in God. Our Lord! Make us not a temptation for the folk, the ones who are unjust. 
10|86| And deliver us by Thy Mercy from the folk, the ones who are ungrateful. 
10|87| And We revealed to Moses and his brother: Take as your dwellings, houses for your folk in Egypt. Make your houses a direction of formal prayer. And perform the formal prayer. And give good tidings to the ones who believe. 
10|88| And Moses said: Our Lord! Thou hadst given to Pharaoh and his Council adornment and wealth in this present life. Our Lord! Cause them to go astray from Thy way. Our Lord! Obliterate their wealth and harden their hearts so that they believe not until they consider the painful punishment. 
10|89| He said: Surely, you both were answered, so go straight both of you and follow not the way of those who know not. 
10|90| And We brought the Children of Israel over the sea. And Pharaoh and his army pursued them in insolence and acting impulsively until when, overtaken by drowning, he said: I believed that there is no god but He in Whom the Children of Israel believed and I am among ones who submit to God. 
10|91| It was said: Now, surely, thou hadst rebelled before and had been among the ones who make corruption. 
10|92| On this day We will deliver thee with thy physical form that thou be a sign to whoever is after thee. And, truly, many among humanity are ones who are heedless of Our signs. 
10|93| And, certainly, We placed the Children of Israel in a sound place of settlement and provided them with what is good. And they are not at variance until the knowledge drew near them. Truly, thy Lord will decree between them on the Day of Resurrection about what they had been at variance in it. 
10|94| So if thou hadst been in uncertainty about what We caused to descend to thee, then, ask those who recited the Book before thee. Certainly, The Truth drew near thee from thy Lord so thou hast not been among the ones who contest. 
10|95| Thou hast not been among those who denied the signs of God, for, then, thou wouldst be among the ones who are losers. 
10|96| Truly, those against whom is realized through the Word of thy Lord, will not believe 
10|97| —even if every sign drew near them—until they consider the painful punishment. 
10|98| And had there been a town that believed and profited from its belief other than the folk of Jonah? When they believed, We removed from them the punishment of degradation in this present life and gave them enjoyment for a while. 
10|99| And if thy Lord willed, all would have believed who are on the earth altogether. So wouldst thou compel humanity against their will until they become ones who believe? 
10|100| And it would not have been for any person to believe but by the permission of God. And He lays disgrace on those who are not reasonable. 
10|101| Say: Look on what is in the heavens and the earth. And neither the signs nor the warning avail a folk who believe not. 
10|102| So wait they awhile but like in the days of those who passed away before them? Say: So wait awhile. I am with you among the ones waiting awhile! 
10|103| Again, We rescue Our Messengers and those who believed. Thus, it is an obligation upon Us to deliver the ones who believe. 
10|104| Say: O humanity! If you were in uncertainty as to my way of life, then, I will not worship those whom you worship other than God. Rather, I worship only God Who will call you to Himself. And I was commanded that I be among the ones who believe 
10|105| and that: Settest thou thy face to the way of life of a monotheist. And be thou not among the ones who are polytheists. 
10|106| And call not to other than God what neither profits nor hurts thee. And if thou wert to accomplish that, truly, thou wouldst be among the ones who are unjust. 
10|107| And if God afflicts thee with harm, there is no one who removes it but He. And if He wants good for thee, there is no one who repels His grace. It lights on whomever He wills of His servants. And He is The Forgiving, The Compassionate. 
10|108| Say: O humanity! Surely, The Truth drew near you from your Lord so whoever was truly guided, then, he is only truly guided for his own self. And whoever went astray, then, he only goes astray to his own loss. And I am not a trustee over you. 
10|109| And follow thou what is revealed to thee. And have thou patience until God gives judgment. And He is Best of the ones who judge. 
11|1| Alif L[m R[. A Book, the signs in it were set clear. Again, they were explained distinctly from that which proceeds from the Presence of the Wise, Aware, 
11|2| that you not worship any but God. Truly, I am a warner to you from Him and a bearer of good tidings 
11|3| and that: Ask for forgiveness from your Lord. Again, repent to Him that He give you fairer enjoyment for a term that which is determined. He gives His grace to every possessor of grace. And if they turn away, I fear for you the punishment of a Great Day. 
11|4| To God is your return. And He is Powerful over everything. 
11|5| But they fold up their breasts that they conceal themselves from Him. No doubt at the time when they cover themselves with their garments, He knows what they keep secret and what they speak openly. Truly, He is Knowing of what is in their breasts. 
11|6| And there is no moving creature on earth but its provision is from God. And He knows its appointed time and its repository. All is in a clear Book. 
11|7| And it is He Who created the heavens and the earth in six days. And His Throne had been upon the waters that He try you—which of you is fairer in actions. And if thou wert to say to them: Truly, you are ones who will be raised up after death. Those who were ungrateful would be sure to say: This is nothing but clear sorcery. 
11|8| If We postponed the punishment for them for a period of time, that which is numbered, they will, surely, say: What detains it? Certainly, the day it approaches them, there is not of that which will be turned away from them and surrounded them was what they had been ridiculing of it. 
11|9| And if We caused the human being to experience mercy from Us, then, again, We tear it out from him, truly, he is hopeless, ungrateful. 
11|10| And if We caused him to experience favor after tribulation afflicted him, he is certain to say: Evil deeds went from me! Truly, he becomes glad, boastful. 
11|11| But those who endured patiently and did as the ones in accord with morality, those, for them is forgiveness and a great compensation. 
11|12| So wouldst thou perhaps be one who leaves some of what is revealed to thee? Or is thy breast that which is narrowed by it because they say: Why was a treasure not caused to descend to him or an angel drew near him? Truly, thou art only a warner. And God is a Trustee over everything. Or they say: He devised it. 
11|13| Say: Approach you, then, with ten chapters of the Quran like it, that which is forged, and call to whomever you were able other than God if you had been ones who are sincere. 
11|14| If they respond not to you, then, know that it was only caused to descend by the knowledge of God and that there is no god but He. Are you, you, then, ones who submit to God? 
11|15| Whoever had been wanting this present life and its adornment, We pay their account in full to them for their actions in it. And they will not be diminished in it. 
11|16| Those are those for whom there is nothing in the world to come but fire. And what they crafted here was fruitless. And what they had been doing is in vain. 
11|17| Is he, then, who had been on a clear portent from his Lord, and recounts it from Him as one who bears witness—and before it was the Book of Moses, a leader and a mercy—like them? Those believe in it. Whoever is ungrateful for it among the confederates, he is promised the fire! So be thou not hesitant about it. Truly, it is The Truth from thy Lord, except most of humanity believes not. 
11|18| Who does greater wrong than he who devised a lie against God? Those will be presented before their Lord. And the ones who bear witness will say: These are those who lied against their Lord. But the curse of God is upon the ones who are unjust— 
11|19| they who bar from the way of God and desire in it crookedness. And they, in the world to come, they are ones who disbelieve. 
11|20| Those will not be ones who frustrate Him on the earth, nor had there been for them—other than God—any protectors.• The punishment is multiplied for them. Not had they been able to have the ability to hear, nor had they been perceiving. 
11|21| Those are those who lost their souls. What they had been devising had gone astray. 
11|22| Without a doubt they in the world to come, they are the ones who are losers. 
11|23| Truly, those who believed and did as the ones in accord with morality and humbled themselves before their Lord, those will be the Companions of the Garden. They, ones who will dwell in it forever. 
11|24| The parable of the two groups of people is as the one unwilling to see, unwilling to hear and the other, seeing and hearing. They are not on the same level in likeness. Will you not, then, recollect? 
11|25| And, certainly, We sent Noah to his folk: Truly, I am a clear warner to you 
11|26| that you worship none but God. Truly, I fear for you the punishment of a painful Day. 
11|27| Then, the Council of those who were ungrateful said from among his folk: We see thee only as a mortal like us. We see none followed thee but those, they who are visibly our most wretched, simple minded. Nor we see you as having any merit above us. Nay! We think that you are ones who lie. 
11|28| He said: O my folk! Considered you that I had been with a clear portent from my Lord and that He gave me mercy from Himself but it was invisible to you? Then, will we fasten you to it when you are ones who dislike it? 
11|29| And O my folk! I ask not of you wealth for it. My compensation is but with God. And I will not be one who drives away those who believed. Truly, they are ones who will encounter their Lord while I see you a folk who are ignorant. 
11|30| And O my folk! Who would help me against God if I drove them away? Will you not, then, recollect? 
11|31| And I say not to you: The treasures of God are with me nor that I know the unseen nor I say: Truly, I am an angel nor I say of those whom your eyes look down upon: God will never give them good. God is greater in knowledge of what is within their souls for, then, I would be of the ones who are unjust. 
11|32| They said: O Noah! Surely, thou hadst disputed with us, then, made much of the dispute with us. Now approach us with what thou hast promised us if thou hadst been among the ones who are sincere. 
11|33| He said: Only God will bring it on you if He willed. And you will not be ones who frustrate Him. 
11|34| And my advice will not profit you—even if I wanted to advise you—if God hadst been wanting to lead you into error. He is your Lord and to Him you will return. 
11|35| Or they say: He devised it. Say: If I devised it, my sin is upon me and I am free of your sins. 
11|36| And it was revealed to Noah: Truly, none of thy folk will believe but who had already believed. So be thou not despondent at what they have been accomplishing. 
11|37| And craft thou the boat under Our Eyes and by Our Revelation and address Me not for those who did wrong. They are, truly, ones who are drowned. 
11|38| And he crafts the boat. Whenever the Council passed by him of his folk, they derided him. He said: If you deride us, then, we will deride you just as you deride us. 
11|39| And you will know to whom will approach a punishment covering with shame and on whom an abiding punishment will alight! 
11|40| Until when Our command drew near and the oven boiled, We said: Carry in it of every living thing, two, a pair and thy people, but him against whom the saying has preceded and who believed. And none but a few believed with him. 
11|41| And he said: Embark in it. In the Name of God will be the course of the ship and its berthing. Truly, my Lord is Forgiving, Compassionate. 
11|42| So it runs with them amidst waves like mountains. And Noah cried out to his son and he had been standing apart: O my son! Embark with us and be thou not with the ones who are ungrateful! 
11|43| He said: I will take shelter for myself on a mountain. It will be what saves me from the harm of the water. Noah said: No one saves from the harm this day from the command of God but him on whom He had mercy. And a wave came between them so he had been of the ones who are drowned. 
11|44| And it was said: O earth! Take in thy water! And O heaven: Desist! And the water was shrunken and the command of God was satisfied and it was on the same level as Al-Judi. And it was said: Away with the folk, the ones who are unjust! 
11|45| And Noah cried out to his Lord and said: My Lord! Truly, my son is of my people. And, truly, Thy promise is The Truth. And Thou art the Most Just of the ones who judge. 
11|46| He said: O Noah! Truly, he is not of thy people. Truly, he, his actions are not in accord with morality. So ask not of Me what thou hast no knowledge. Truly, I admonish thee so that thou not be of the ones who are ignorant. 
11|47| He said: My Lord! Truly, I take refuge with Thee so that I not ask Thee of what I am without knowledge. Unless Thou art to forgive me and have mercy on me, I would be of the ones who are losers. 
11|48| It was said: O Noah! Get thee down with peace from Us and blessings on thee and on communities from whoever are with thee, and communities to whom We will give enjoyment. And, again, they will be afflicted by Us with a painful punishment. 
11|49| That is of the tidings of the unseen that We reveal to thee. Thou hast not been knowing of them nor thy folk before this. So have thou patience. Truly, the Ultimate End is for the ones who are Godfearing. 
11|50| And to Ad, their brother Hud. He said: O my folk! Worship God! You have no god other than He. You are nothing but ones who devise. 
11|51| O my folk! I ask not of you any compensation. My compensation is but with Who originated me. Will you not, then, be reasonable? 
11|52| And O my folk! Ask your Lord for forgiveness. Again, repent to Him. He will send abundant rain to you from heaven and increase you, adding strength to your strength. So turn not away as ones who sin. 
11|53| They said: O Hud! Hadst thou brought about any clear portent for us? We will not be ones who leave our gods for thy saying? And we are not ones who believe in thee. 
11|54| Truly, we say nothing but that some of our gods inflicted thee with evil. He said: Truly, I call God to witness and bear you witness that I am free from partners you ascribe 
11|55| other than Him. So try to outwit me altogether. Again, give me no respite. 
11|56| Truly, I put my trust in God, my Lord and your Lord. There is not a moving creature but He is One Who Takes of its forelock. Truly, my Lord is on a straight path. 
11|57| But if you turn away, that is your decision. Then, surely, I expressed to you what I was sent with to you. And my Lord will make successors a folk other than you and you will not injure Him at all. Truly, My Lord is Guardian over everything. 
11|58| And Our command drew near. We delivered Hud and those who believed with him by a mercy from Us. And We delivered them from a harsh punishment. 
11|59| And that was Ad. They negated the signs of their Lord and rebelled against His Messengers. And they followed the command of every haughty and stubborn one. 
11|60| And they were pursued in the present life by a curse. And on the Day of Resurrection, no doubt, truly, Ad were ungrateful to their Lord. Away with Ad, a folk of Hud! 
11|61| And We sent to Thamud their brother Salih. He said: O my folk! Worship God. You have no god other than He. He caused you to grow from the earth and settled you on it. So ask for His forgiveness. Again, repent to Him. Truly, my Lord is Near, One Who Answers. 
11|62| They said: O Salih! Surely, thou hadst been one who is a source of hope to us before this. Hast thou prohibited us that we worship what our fathers worship? And, truly, we are in uncertainty about what thou hast called us to, in grave doubt. 
11|63| He said: O my folk! Considered you that I had been with a clear portent from my Lord and that He gave me a mercy from Himself so who, then, would help me against God if I rebelled against Him? Then, you would increase me not but in decline. 
11|64| And: O my folk! This is the she-camel of God, a sign for you. So let her eat on God’s earth and afflict her not with evil so that a near punishment take you. 
11|65| But they crippled her. So he said: Take joy in your abode for three days. That is a promise, one that will not be belied. 
11|66| Then, Our command drew near. We delivered Salih and those who believed with him by a mercy from Us and from the degradation of that Day. Truly, thy Lord, He is Strong, Almighty. 
11|67| The Cry took those who did wrong. It came to be in the morning in their abodes, ones who are fallen prostrate, 
11|68| as if they dwelt not in them. No doubt, truly, Thamud were ungrateful to their Lord. Away with Thamud. 
11|69| And, certainly, Our messengers drew near Abraham with good tidings. They said: Peace. He said: Peace. And he presently brought about a roasted calf. 
11|70| Then, when he saw their hands reach not out towards it, he became suspicious and sensed awe of them. They said: Fear not. We were sent to the folk of Lot. 
11|71| Abraham’s woman, one who is standing up, laughed when We gave her good tidings of Isaac and besides Isaac, Jacob. 
11|72| She said: Woe to me! Will I give birth when I am an old woman and this, my husband, is an old man? Truly, this is a strange thing! 
11|73| They said: Marvel thou at the command of God? The mercy of God and His blessings be upon you, O People of the House: Truly, He is Worthy of Praise, Glorious. 
11|74| And when the panic went from Abraham and the good tidings drew near to him, he disputes with Us for the folk of Lot. 
11|75| Truly, Abraham was forbearing, sympathetic, one who turns in repentance. 
11|76| O Abraham! Turn aside from this. Truly, the command of thy Lord drew near. And, truly, that which arrives for them is a punishment, one that is not to be repelled. 
11|77| And when Our messengers drew near Lot, he was troubled for them and was concerned for them, being distressed. And he said: This is a distressful day! 
11|78| Then, drew near his folk, running toward him because they had been doing evil deeds before. He said: O my folk! These are my daughters! They are purer for you. So be Godfearing of God. And cover me not with shame as regards my guests. Is there not among you a well-intentioned man? 
11|79| They said: Certainly, thou hadst known we have no right to thy daughters. And, truly, thou hast known well what we want. 
11|80| He said: Would that I had strength against you or take shelter with stauncher support! 
11|81| They said: O Lot! Truly, we are Messengers of thy Lord. They will not reach out to thee so set thou forth with thy people in a part of the night and let not any of you look back, but thy woman. Truly, that which lights on them will light on her. Truly, what is promised to them is in the morning. Is the morning not near? 
11|82| So when Our command drew near, We made its high part low and We rained down on it rocks of baked clay, one upon another, 
11|83| ones that are distinguished, and not far from the ones who are unjust. 
11|84| And We sent to Midian their brother Shuayb. He said: O my folk! Worship God. You have no god other than He. And reduce not the measuring vessel and balance. Truly, I consider you as good. And, truly, I fear for you the punishment of an Enclosing Day. 
11|85| And O my folk! Live up to the measuring vessel and balance in equity. And diminish not of humanity their things. And do no mischief in and on the earth as ones who make corruption. 
11|86| God’s abiding wisdom is best for you if you had been ones who believe. And I am not a Guardian over you. 
11|87| They said: O Shuayb! Is it that thy formal prayer commands thee that we leave what our fathers worship or that we accomplish not with our possibilities whatever we will? Truly, thou art the forbearing, the well-intentioned. 
11|88| He said: O my folk! Considered you that I had been with a clear portent from my Lord. He provided me fairer provision from Himself. And I want not to go against you in what I prohibit you. I want only making things right so far as I was able. And my success is not but from God. In Him I put my trust and to Him I am penitent. 
11|89| And O my folk! Let not your breach with me drive you into being lighted on by the like of what lit on a folk of Noah or a folk of Hud or a folk of Salih. And a folk of Lot are not far from you. 
11|90| And ask for forgiveness from your Lord. Again, repent to Him. Truly, my Lord is Compassionate, Loving. 
11|91| They said: O Shuayb! We understand not much of what thou sayest. And, truly, we see thee weak among us. If it had not been for thy extended family, we would have stoned thee. And thou art not mighty against us. 
11|92| He said: O my folk! Is my extended family mightier to you than God whom you took to yourselves to disregard? Truly, my Lord is One Who Encloses whatever you do. 
11|93| O my folk! Act according to your ability and, truly, I am one who acts. You will know to whom approaches a punishment covering him with shame and who, he is one who lies. And be on the watch! Truly, I am watching with you. 
11|94| And Our command drew near. We delivered Shuayb and those who believed with him by a mercy from Us. And the Cry took those who did wrong. It came to be in the morning in their abodes ones who are fallen prostrate, 
11|95| as if they had not been dwelling in them. Away with Midian just as Thamud was done away. 
11|96| And, certainly, We sent Moses with Our signs and a clear authority 
11|97| to Pharaoh and his Council but they followed the command of Pharaoh. And the command of Pharaoh was not well-intended. 
11|98| He will go before his folk on the Day of Resurrection and they will be led down into the fire. Miserable will be the watering place, that to which they are led down! 
11|99| And they were pursued by a curse in this life and on the Day of Resurrection! Miserable will be, the oblation, that which is offered! 
11|100| That is from the tidings of the towns that We relate to thee. Of them, some are ones that are standing up and some are stubble. 
11|101| And it was not that We did wrong to them. Rather, they did wrong themselves. And their gods availed them not whom they call to besides God at all. When the command of thy Lord drew near they increased them not other than in ruination. 
11|102| And, thus, is the taking of thy Lord when He took the towns while they are ones who are unjust. Truly, His taking is painful, severe. 
11|103| In that, truly, there is a sign for whoever feared the punishment of the world to come. That Day humanity will be one that is gathered together for it and that will be a witnessed Day. 
11|104| And We postpone it not but for the numbered term. 
11|105| On the Day it approaches no person will assert anything but with His permission. Then, among them will be the disappointed and the happy. 
11|106| As for those who were in despair, they will be in the fire. For them in it is sobbing and sighing, 
11|107| ones who will dwell in it for as long as the heavens and the earth continued, but what thy Lord willed. Truly, thy Lord is Achiever of what He wants. 
11|108| And as for those who were happy, they will be in the Garden, ones who will dwell in it for as long as the heavens and the earth continued, but what thy Lord willed, a gift that will not be that which is broken. 
11|109| So be thou not hesitant as to what these worship. They worship nothing but what their fathers worship before. And We are the ones who pay their share in full without being that which is reduced. 
11|110| And, certainly, We gave Moses the Book, but they were at variance about it. And if it were not for a Word that preceded from thy Lord, it would be decided between them. And, truly, they were uncertain about it, ones in grave doubt. 
11|111| And, truly, to each his account will be paid in full by thy Lord for their actions. Truly, He is Aware of what they do. 
11|112| So go thou straight as thou wert commanded and those who repented with thee and be not defiant. Truly, He is Seeing of what you do. 
11|113| Then, incline not to those who did wrong so the fire afflict you and there will not be for you any protectors other than God. Again, you will not be helped. 
11|114| And perform the formal prayer at the two ends of the daytime and at nearness of the nighttime. Truly, benevolence causes evil deeds to be put away. That is a reminder for the ones who remember. 
11|115| And have thou patience, for, truly, God wastes not the compensation of the ones who are doers of good. 
11|116| Why had there not been among the generations before you imbued with abiding wisdom, prohibiting corruption in and on the earth, but a few of those whom We rescue from among them? And those who did wrong followed what they were given ease in it. And they had been ones who sin. 
11|117| Thy Lord had not been causing the towns to perish unjustly while their people are ones who make things right. 
11|118| And if thy Lord willed, He would have made humanity one community. But they cease not to be ones who are at variance, 
11|119| but on whom thy Lord had mercy. And for that, He created them, and completed was the Word of thy Lord. Certainly, I will fill hell with genie and humanity one and all. 
11|120| And all that We relate to thee of the tidings of the Messengers is so that We make thy mind firm by it. And The Truth drew near thee in this, and an admonishment and a reminder for the ones who believe. 
11|121| And say to those who believe not: Act according to your ability. Truly, We are ones who act. 
11|122| And wait awhile. We, too, are ones who are waiting awhile. 
11|123| And to God belongs the unseen of the heavens and the earth. And to Him is the return of every command, so worship Him and put thy trust in Him. And thy Lord is not One Who is Heedless of what you do. 
12|1| Alif L[m R[. That are the signs of the clear Book. 
12|2| Truly, We caused to descend a Recitation in Arabic so that perhaps you will be reasonable. 
12|3| We relate to thee the fairer of narratives through what We revealed to thee of this, the Quran, although thou hadst been before this among the ones who are heedless. 
12|4| Mention when Joseph said to his father: O my father! Truly, I saw eleven stars and the sun and the moon. I saw them as ones prostrating themselves to me. 
12|5| He said: O my son! Relate not thy dream to thy brothers so that they contrive cunning against thee. Truly, Satan is a clear enemy to the human being. 
12|6| And, thus, thy Lord will elect thee and teach thee of the interpretation of events. And He will fulfill His divine blessing on thee and on the people of Jacob just as He fulfilled it on thy two fathers before, Abraham and Isaac. Truly, thy Lord is Knowing, Wise. 
12|7| Certainly, there had been in Joseph and his brothers signs for the ones who ask. 
12|8| When they said: Certainly, Joseph and his brother are more beloved to our father than we, although we are many. Truly, our father is clearly wandering astray. 
12|9| Kill Joseph or fling him to some other region to free the face of your father for you. You be a folk after that ones in accord with morality! 
12|10| Said one who says: Kill not Joseph, but cast him into the bottom of a well. Some company of travelers will pick him out, if you had been ones who do this. 
12|11| They said: O our father! Why wilt thou not entrust us with Joseph when we are, truly, ones who will, certainly, look after him? 
12|12| Send him with us tomorrow to frolic and play. And, truly, we are ones who guard him. 
12|13| He said: Truly, it disheartens me that you go with him. And I fear that a wolf eat him while you are ones who are heedless of him. 
12|14| They said: If a wolf ate him while we are many, truly, then, we are ones who are losers. 
12|15| So they went with him, and they agreed to lay him in the bottom of the well. And We revealed to him: Certainly, thou wilt tell them of this, their affair, when they are not aware. 
12|16| And they drew near their father in the time of night, weeping. 
12|17| They said: O our father! Truly, we went racing and we left Joseph with our sustenance and a wolf ate him and thou wilt not be one who believes us, even if we had been ones who are sincere. 
12|18| And they brought about his long shirt with false blood. He said: Nay! Your souls enticed you with a command. Having patience is graceful. And it is God, One Whose Help is being sought against what you allege. 
12|19| And there drew near a company of travelers so they sent their water-drawer to let down his bucket. He said: What good tidings! This is a boy! So they kept him secret as merchandise. And God is Knowing of what they do. 
12|20| And they sold him for a meager price of coins, ones that are numbered. And they had been of him among the ones who hold him in low esteem. 
12|21| One from Egypt who bought him said to his woman: Honor him as a guest with a place of lodging. Perhaps he will profit us or we will take him to ourselves as a son. And, thus, We established Joseph firmly in the earth that We teach him the interpretation of events. God is One Who is Victor over His command, except most of humanity knows not. 
12|22| And when he had fully grown and come of age, We gave him critical judgment and knowledge. And, thus, We give recompense to the ones who are doers of good. 
12|23| And she in whose house he was solicited him, enticing him to evil. And she shut the doors and said: Come thou! He said: God be my safe place. Truly, he, thy husband, is my master and He gave me a goodly place of lodging. Truly, the ones who are unjust will not prosper. 
12|24| She, certainly, was about to act on her desire for him and he was about to act on his desire for her, if it were not that he saw proof of his Lord. Thus, it was that We turn away from him evil and depravity. And, truly, he was among Our servants, ones who are devoted. 
12|25| So they raced to the door and she tore his long shirt from behind. And they both discovered her chief at the door. She said: What is the recompense of him who wanted evil for thy household, but that he be imprisoned or a painful punishment? 
12|26| He said: She solicited me, enticing me to evil. And one who bears witness bore witness from her household and said: If his long shirt had been torn from the front, then, she was sincere, and he was among the ones who lie. 
12|27| But if his long shirt had been torn from behind, she lied against herself; he was among ones who are sincere. 
12|28| When her husband saw his long shirt was torn from behind, he said: It is of your (f) cunning; truly, your (f) cunning is serious. 
12|29| Joseph! Turn aside from this! To his wife he said: Ask thou for forgiveness for thy (f) impiety; truly, thou (f) hadst been of the ones who are inequitable. 
12|30| And the ladies in the city said: The woman of the great one solicits her spiritual warrior, enticing him to evil. Surely, he captivated her longing. Truly, we consider her to be clearly wandering astray. 
12|31| So when she heard of their planning, she sent for them (f), and made ready for them a banquet. And she gave each one of them (f) a knife, and said to Joseph: Go forth before them (f). Then, when they saw him, they admired him and cut their hands. And they (f) said: God save us! This is not a mortal. This is nothing but a generous angel! 
12|32| She said: This is he about whom you (f) blamed me. And, certainly, I solicited him, enticing him to evil, but he preserved himself from sin. And now if he accomplishes not what I command, he will, certainly, be imprisoned and will be among the ones who are disgraced. 
12|33| He said: O my Lord! Prison is more beloved to me than what they call me to. Unless Thou hast turned away their (f) cunning from me, I will yearn towards them (f) and I will be among the ones who are ignorant. 
12|34| So his Lord responded to him and turned away their (f) cunning from him. Truly, He, He is The Hearing, The Knowing. 
12|35| Again, it showed itself to them. And after they saw the signs, it seemed that they should imprison him for a while. 
12|36| And there entered with him in the prison two male spiritual warriors. One of them said: Truly, I see myself pressing grapes in season. And the other said: Truly, I see myself carrying bread over my head from which birds are eating. They said: Tell us the interpretation of this. Truly, we consider thee among the ones who are doers of good. 
12|37| He said: The food you both are provided approaches you not, but I will tell you of its interpretation before it approaches. That is of what my Lord taught me. Truly, I left the creed of a folk who believe not in God and they, in the world to come, they are ones who disbelieve. 
12|38| And I followed the creed of my fathers, Abraham and Isaac and Jacob. It had not been for us that we ascribe anything as partners with God. That is from the grace of God to us and to humanity, except most of humanity gives not thanks. 
12|39| O my two prison companions! Are ones that are different masters better or God, The One, The Omniscient? 
12|40| Whomever you worship other than He are nothing but names that you named—you and your fathers for which God caused not to descend any authority. The determination is from God alone. He commanded that you worship none but Him. That is the truth-loving way of life, except most of humanity knows not. 
12|41| O my two prison companions! As for one of you, he will give intoxicants to drink to his master. And as for the other, he will be crucified. And birds will eat from his head. The matter was decided about which you ask for advice. 
12|42| And he said to the one of them whom he thought should be the one who is saved of the two: Remember me to thy master. Then, Satan caused him to forget the remembrance of him to his master so Joseph lingered in expectation in prison for a certain number of years. 
12|43| And the king said: Truly, I, I see seven fattened cows eating seven lean ones and seven ears of green wheat and others dry. O Council: Render an opinion to me about my dream if you had been able to expound dreams. 
12|44| They said: Jumbled nightmares. And we are not of the interpretation of nightmares ones who know. 
12|45| And said the man of the two of them who was delivered and recalled after a period of time: I will tell you its interpretation so send me. 
12|46| Joseph, O thou just person! Render an opinion to us about seven fattened cows eaten by seven lean ones and seven ears of green wheat and others dry so that perhaps I will return to the personages so that perhaps they will know about thee. 
12|47| He said: You will sow for seven years in like previous manner and of what you reaped, then, forsake ears of wheat, but a little of it that you may eat. 
12|48| Again, seven severe years will approach after that. You will eat what you put forward, but a little of what you keep in store. 
12|49| Again, after that, will approach a year in which humanity will be helped with rain and they will press in season. 
12|50| And the king said: Bring him to me. Then, when the Messenger brought about, he said: Return to thy master and ask him: What of the ladies, those who cut their hands? Truly, my Lord is Knowing of their (f) cunning. 
12|51| He said: What was your (f) business when you solicited Joseph, enticing him to evil? They (f) said: God save us! We knew not any evil against him. The woman of the great one said: Now The Truth was discovered! I sought to solicit him, enticing him to evil. And, truly, he is among the ones who are sincere. 
12|52| Joseph said: That is so that the great one know that I betray him not in his absence. And that God guides not the cunning of the ones who are traitors. 
12|53| And I declare my soul not innocent. Truly, the soul is that which incites to evil, but when my Lord had mercy. Truly, my Lord is Forgiving, Compassionate. 
12|54| And the king said: Bring him to me so that I attach him to myself. Then, when he spoke to him he said: Truly, this day thou art with us secure, trustworthy. 
12|55| Joseph said: Assign me over the storehouses of the region. Truly, I will be a knowing guardian. 
12|56| And, thus, We established Joseph firmly in the region to take his dwelling in it when or where he wills. We light Our mercy on whom We will and We waste not the compensation of ones who are doers of good. 
12|57| Truly, the compensation of the world to come is better for those who believed and had been Godfearing. 
12|58| And Joseph’s brothers drew near and they entered before him. He recognized them, but they are ones who know him not. 
12|59| And when he equipped them with their food supplies, he said: Bring me a brother of yours from your father. See you not that I live up to full measure and that I am best of the ones who host? 
12|60| Then, if you bring him not to me, there will be no full measure for you with me, nor will you come near me. 
12|61| They said: We will solicit his father for him and, truly, we are ones who do it. 
12|62| And Joseph said to his spiritual warriors: Lay their merchandise into their saddlebags so that perhaps they will recognize it when they turned about to their household so that perhaps they will return. 
12|63| So when they returned to their father, they said: O our father! The full measure was refused to us so send our brother with us that we will obtain our measure. And, truly, we will be ones who guard him. 
12|64| Jacob said: How will I entrust him to you as I entrusted you with his brother before? But, then, God is Best of One Who Guards. And He is One Who is the Most Merciful of the ones who are the most merciful. 
12|65| And when they opened their sustenance, they found their merchandise was returned to them. They said: O our father, this is what we desire. Our merchandise was returned to us and we will get provision for our household and we will keep our brother safe and add a camel’s load of full measure. That is an easy full measure. 
12|66| He said: I will not send him with you until you give me a pledge by God that you will bring him back to me, unless you are enclosed yourselves. And when they gave him their pledge, he said: God is Trustee over what we say. 
12|67| And he said: O my sons! Enter not by one door, but enter by different doors. I will not avail you against God in anything. Truly, the determination is but with God. In Him I put my trust. And in Him put their trust the ones who put their trust. 
12|68| And when they entered from where their father commanded, it had not been availing them against God in anything, but it was a need of Jacob’s inner self which he satisfied. And, truly, he was a possessor of knowledge because We taught him, except most of humanity knows not. 
12|69| And when they entered before Joseph, he himself gave refuge to his brother. He said: Truly, I am thy brother, so be not despondent for what they had been doing. 
12|70| So when he equipped them with their food supplies, he laid the drinking cup into their brother’s saddlebag. Again, one who announces announced: O you in the caravan! Truly, you are ones who are thieves. 
12|71| They said coming forward: What is it that you are missing? 
12|72| They said: We are missing the king’s drinking cup and for him who brought it about is a camel’s load and I am the guarantor for it. 
12|73| They said: By God, certainly, you knew we drew not near making corruption in the region. And we had not been ones who are thieves. 
12|74| They said: What, then, will be the recompense for him if you had been ones who lie? 
12|75| They said: The recompense for it will be that he in whose saddlebag it was located will be the recompense. Thus, we give recompense to the ones who are unjust. 
12|76| So he began with their sacks before the sack of his brother. Again, he pulled it out of his brother’s sack. Thus, We contrived for Joseph. He would not have taken his brother into the judgment of the king unless God wills it. We exalt in degree whomever We will, and above all those possessors of knowledge is One Who is Knowing. 
12|77| They said: If he steals, surely, a brother of his stole before. But Joseph kept it secret within himself, not showing it to them. He said: You are in a worse place. And God is greater in knowledge of what you allege. 
12|78| They said: O the great one! Truly, for him is an old man as his father so take one of us in his place. Truly, we consider thee among the ones who are doers of good. 
12|79| He said: God be my safe place that we take but him with Whom we found our sustenance. Truly, we, then, would be of the ones who are unjust. 
12|80| So when in regard to him they became hopeless, they conferred privately. The eldest of them said: Know you not that your father, surely, took a pledge from you by God and before that you neglected your duty with Joseph. So I will never quit this region until my father gives me permission or God gives judgment in my case. And He is Best of the ones who judge. 
12|81| Return to your father and say: O our father! Truly, thy son stole and we bore witness only to what we knew. And we had not been ones who guard the unseen. 
12|82| And ask the people of the town where we had been and the people of the caravan in which we came forward. And, truly, we are ones who are sincere. 
12|83| He said: You were enticed by your souls into an affair. So patience is graceful. Perhaps God will bring me them altogether. Truly, He, He is The Knowing, The Wise. 
12|84| And he turned away from them and said: O my bitterness for Joseph! And his eyes brightened because of the sorrow that was choking him. 
12|85| They said: By God! Thou wilt never discontinue remembering Joseph until thou hast ruined thy health. Thou wouldst be among the ones who are perishing. 
12|86| He said: I make not complaint of my anguish and sorrow but to God. And I know from God what you know not. 
12|87| O my sons! Go and search for Joseph and his brother. And give not up hope of the solace of God. Truly, no one gives up hope of the solace of God but the folk, ones who are ungrateful. 
12|88| Then, when they entered to him, they said: O the great one! Harm afflicted us and our household. We drew near merchandise of scant worth so live up to the full measure and be charitable to us. Truly, God gives recompense to the ones who give in charity. 
12|89| He said: Knew you what you accomplished with Joseph and his brother when you are ones who are ignorant? 
12|90| They said: Art thou, truly, Joseph? He said: I am Joseph and this is my brother. Surely, God showed us grace. Truly, He Who is Godfearing and endures patiently, then, surely, God will not waste the compensation of the ones who are doers of good. 
12|91| They said: By God! Certainly, God held thee in greater favor above us. And, truly, we had been ones who are inequitable. 
12|92| He said: No censure on you this day. God forgive you. And He is One Who is Most Merciful of the ones who are most merciful. 
12|93| Go with this, my long shirt and cast it over the face of my father. He will become seeing. And bring me your household one and all. 
12|94| And when they set forward with the caravan their father said: Truly, I find the scent of Joseph if you think me not weak of mind. 
12|95| They said: By God! Truly, thou art long possessed by thy wandering astray. 
12|96| Then, when the bearer of good tidings drew near, he cast it over his face and he went back, seeing. He said: Did I not say to you, truly, I know from God what you know not? 
12|97| They said: O our father! Ask forgiveness for us for our impieties. Truly, we had been ones who are inequitable. 
12|98| He said: I will ask forgiveness for you with my Lord. Truly, He, He is The Forgiving, The Compassionate. 
12|99| Then, when they entered to Joseph, he gave refuge to his parents and said: Enter Egypt, if God willed, as ones who are safe! 
12|100| And he exalted his parents to the throne. And they fell down before him as ones who prostrate themselves. And he said: O my father! This is the interpretation of my dream from before. My Lord has made it a reality. And, surely, He did good to me when He brought me out of the prison and drew you near out of the desert after Satan had sown enmity between me and between my brothers. Truly, my Lord is Subtle in what He wills. Truly, He is The Knowing, The Wise. 
12|101| My Lord! Surely, Thou hadst given me of the dominion. Thou hadst taught of the interpretation of events. One Who is Originator of the heavens and the earth, Thou art my protector in the present and in the world to come. Call me to Thyself as one who submits to Thee and cause me to join with the ones in accord with morality. 
12|102| That is of the tidings of the unseen that We reveal to thee. And thou hadst not been in their presence when they agreed to their affair. And they plan. 
12|103| And most of humanity is not ones who believe, even if thou wert eager. 
12|104| Thou hast asked them not for any compensation. It is but a Remembrance to the worlds. 
12|105| And how many signs of the heavens and the earth they pass by while they are ones who turn aside from them! 
12|106| And most of them believe not in God, but they be ones who are polytheists. 
12|107| Were they safe from the approach to them of the overwhelming event of the punishment from God or the approach on them of the Hour suddenly while they are not aware? 
12|108| Say: This is my way. I call to God. I and whoever followed me are on clear evidence. And glory be to God! And I am not among the ones who are polytheists. 
12|109| And We sent not before thee as Messengers, but men to whom We reveal from among the people of the towns. So journey they not through the earth and look on how had been the Ultimate End of those who were before them? And, truly, the abode of the world to come is better for those who were Godfearing. Will you not, then, be reasonable? 
12|110| When the Messengers became hopeless and thought that they were lied against, then, Our help drew near. So We were to deliver whomever We will. And Our Might will not be repelled from the folk, the ones who sin. 
12|111| Certainly, there had been in their narratives a lesson for those imbued with intuition. It had not been a discourse that is devised except it established as true what was before and decisively explained everything and is a guidance and a mercy for a folk who believe. 
13|1| Alif L[m M\m R[. That are the signs of the Book, and what were caused to descend to thee from thy Lord is The Truth, except most of humanity believes not. 
13|2| It is He Who exalted the heavens without any pillars so that you see them. Again, He turned his attention to above the Throne. And He caused to become subservient the sun and the moon, each run for a term, that which is determined. He manages the command. He explains distinctly the signs so that perhaps of the meeting with your Lord you would be certain. 
13|3| And it is He Who stretched out the earth and made on it firm mountains and rivers. And with all kinds of fruits, he made in it two, a pair. He covers the nighttime with the daytime. Truly, in that are signs for a folk who reflect. 
13|4| And in the earth there are strips, that which neighbor one another and gardens of grapevines and plowed lands and date palm trees coming from the same root and not coming from the same root that are given to drink from one water. And We give advantage to some of them over some others in produce. Truly, in these things there are signs for a folk who are reasonable. 
13|5| And if thou hast marveled, then, wonder at their saying: When we had been earth dust, will we, truly, be in a new creation? And those are those who were ungrateful to their Lord. Those will have yokes around their necks. And those will be the Companions of the Fire. They, ones who will dwell in it forever. 
13|6| And they seek thee to hasten on evil deeds before the benevolence. And, surely, passed away before them exemplary punishments. But, truly, thy Lord is certainly, The Possessor of Forgiveness for humanity in spite of their injustice. And, truly, thy Lord is Severe in repayment. 
13|7| And those who were ungrateful say: Why was a sign not caused to descend to him from his Lord? Thou art only one who warns, and one who guides every folk. 
13|8| God knows what every female carries and how much her womb absorbs and what they add. And everything with Him is in proportion. 
13|9| He is One Who Knows the unseen and the visible, The Great, The One Who is Raised High. 
13|10| It is equal to Him whether you kept secret his saying or you published it. Or whoever he be, one who conceals himself by nighttime or one who goes about carelessly in the daytime. 
13|11| For him there are Ones Who Postpone from before him and from behind him to keep him safe by the command of God. Truly, God alters not a folk until they alter what is within themselves. And when God wanted evil for a folk, then, there is no turning it back. And there is not for them other than He anyone who is a safeguarder. 
13|12| It is He Who causes you to see the lightning in fear and in hope. And it is He Who causes the clouds to grow heavy, 
13|13| and thunder glorifies His praise and the angels, because of their awe of Him. And He sends thunderbolts and He lights on whom He wills. And they dispute about God, and He is a Severe Force. 
13|14| For Him is the call of The Truth. And those whom they call to other than Him, they respond not to them at all, but like one who stretches out the palms of his hands for water so that it should reach his mouth, but it is not that which reaches it. And supplication of the ones who are ungrateful is only wandering astray. 
13|15| And to God prostrates whatever is in the heavens and the earth, willingly or unwillingly as does their shade at the first part of the day and the eventide.‡ 
13|16| Say: Who is the Lord of the heavens and the earth? Say: God! Say: Took you to yourselves other than Him protectors? They control not themselves, neither profiting nor hurting. Say: Are the unwilling to see on the same level as the seeing? Are the shadows on the same level as the light? Made they ascribed associates with God who created as His creation so that creation resembled one another to them? Say: God is One Who is Creator of everything. And He is The One, The Omniscient. 
13|17| He caused water to descend from heaven and it flowed into valleys according to their measure. Then, the flood bears away the froth. And from what they kindle in a fire, looking for glitter or sustenance, there is a froth the like of it. Thus, God compares The Truth and falsehood. Then, as for the froth, it goes as swelling scum while what profits humanity abides on the earth. Thus, God propounds parables. 
13|18| For those who responded to their Lord there is the fairer. And for those who respond not to Him, if they had all that is in and on the earth and its like with it, they would offer it as ransom. Those, for them will be a dire reckoning and their place of shelter will be hell. Miserable will be the cradling! 
13|19| Then, is he who knows what was caused to descend to thee from thy Lord to be The Truth like he who is unwilling to see? It is only those imbued with intuition who recollect. 
13|20| Those who live up to their compact with God and break not their solemn promise 
13|21| and those who reach out to what God commanded be joined and dread their Lord and they fear the dire reckoning 
13|22| and those who endured patiently, looking for the Countenance of their Lord and who performed the formal prayer and spent out of what We have provided them in secret and in public, and they drive off the evil deed with benevolence—those, for them is the Ultimate Abode: 
13|23| Gardens of Eden which they will enter along with whoever was in accord with morality from among their fathers and their spouses and their offspring. And angels will enter to them from every door saying: 
13|24| Peace be to you for what you endured patiently. How excellent is the Ultimate Abode! 
13|25| But those who break the compact of God after its solemn promise and sever what God commanded to be joined and make corruption in and on the earth, those, for them is the curse and for them is the Dire Abode. 
13|26| God extends the provision for whom He wills and measures it. They were glad in this present life. And there is nothing in this present life like the world to come but a brief enjoyment. 
13|27| And those who were ungrateful say: Why was a sign not caused to descend to him from his Lord? Say: Truly, God causes to go astray whom He wills and guides to Himself whomever was penitent, 
13|28| those who believed and their hearts are at rest in the remembrance of God, no doubt in the remembrance of God hearts are at rest. 
13|29| Those who believed and did as the ones in accord with morality, there is joy for them and a goodness of destination. 
13|30| Thus, We sent thee to a community. Surely, passed away other communities before it so that thou wouldst recount to them what We revealed to thee and they are ungrateful to The Merciful. Say: He is my Lord. There is no god but He. In Him I put my trust and to Him I am turning in repentance. 
13|31| If there were a Recitation that would have set mountains in motion with it, or the earth would be cut off with it or the dead would be spoken to with it, nay! The command is altogether with God. Do those who believed not have knowledge that if God wills He would have guided humanity altogether. Will cease not to light on those who were ungrateful disaster because of what they crafted? Or will it alight close to their abode until the promise of God approaches? Truly, God breaks not His solemn declaration. 
13|32| And, certainly, Messengers were ridiculed before thee, but I granted indulgence to those who were ungrateful. Again, I took them. How had been My repayment! 
13|33| Is He, then, One Who Sustains Every Soul for what it earned? And yet they ascribe associates with God! Say: Name them! Or will you tell Him of what He knows not in the earth? Or name you only them in the manifest sayings? Nay! Made to appear pleasing to those who were ungrateful was their planning and they were barred from the way. And whomever God causes to go astray, for him there is no one who guides. 
13|34| For them is a punishment in this present life and, certainly, punishment in the world to come will be one that presses hard. And for them is no one who is a defender against God. 
13|35| A parable of the Garden which was promised to the ones who are Godfearing; beneath it rivers run. Its produce is one that continues as is its shade. That is the Ultimate End of those who were Godfearing; and the Ultimate End of the ones who are ungrateful is the fire. 
13|36| And those to whom We gave the Book are glad at what was caused to descend to thee. And there are among the confederates some who reject some of it. Say: I was commanded to worship only God and not to ascribe partners with Him. I call to Him and to Him is my destination. 
13|37| And, thus, We caused to descend an Arabic determination. If thou hadst followed their desires after what drew near thee of the knowledge, thou wouldst not have against God either a protector or one who is a defender. 
13|38| And, certainly, We sent Messengers before thee and We assigned for them spouses and offspring. And it had not been for a Messenger to bring a sign but with the permission of God. For every term there is a Book. 
13|39| God blots out what He wills and brings to a standstill what He wills; and with Him is the essence of the Book. 
13|40| And whether We cause thee to see some of what We have promised them or call thee to Ourselves, on thee is delivering the message and on Us is the reckoning. 
13|41| Consider they not that We approach the earth, reducing it from its outlying parts? And God gives judgment. There is no one who postpones His determination. And He is Swift in reckoning. 
13|42| And, surely, those who were before them planned, but to God is the plan altogether. He knows what every person earns. And the ones who are ungrateful will know for whom will be the Ultimate Abode. 
13|43| And those who were ungrateful say: Thou art not one who is sent. Say: God sufficed as a witness between me and between you and whoever has knowledge of the Book. 
14|1| Alif L[m R[. This is a Book We caused to descend to thee so that thou hast brought humanity out from the shadows into the light with the permission of their Lord to the path of The Almighty, The Worthy of Praise. 
14|2| God! To Him belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in and on the earth, and woe to the ones who are ungrateful. For them is the severe punishment, 
14|3| those who embrace this present life instead of the world to come and bar from the way of God, and desire in it crookedness. Those are wandering far astray. 
14|4| We sent not any Messenger but with the tongue of his folk in order that he make it manifest for them. Then, God causes to go astray whom He wills and guides whom He wills. And He is The Almighty, The Wise. 
14|5| And, certainly, We sent Moses with Our signs saying: Bring out thy folk from the shadows into the light and remind them of the Days of God. Truly, in that are signs for every enduring, grateful one. 
14|6| And mention when Moses said to his folk: Remember the divine blessing of God to you when He rescued you from the people of Pharaoh who cause an affliction to befall you—a dire punishment—and slaughter your children and save alive your women. And in it was a serious trial from your Lord. 
14|7| And mention when your Lord caused to be proclaimed: If you gave thanks, I will increase your blessings. And if you were ungrateful, truly, My punishment will be severe. 
14|8| And Moses said: Even if you are ungrateful, you and what is in and on the earth altogether, then, truly, God is Sufficient, Worthy of Praise. 
14|9| Approach not to you the tidings of those before you: The folk of Noah and Ad and Thamud and of those after them. None knows them but God. Their Messengers drew near them with the clear portents, but they shoved their hands into their mouths in denial. Then, they said: Truly, we disbelieved in what you were sent and we are in uncertainty about that to which you call us. We are in grave doubt. 
14|10| Their Messengers said: Is there any uncertainty about God, One Who is Originator of the heavens and the earth? He calls you so that He would forgive you your impieties and postpone for you a term, that which is determined. They said: You are only mortal like us. You want to bar us from what our fathers had been worshipping. Then, bring us a clear authority. 
14|11| Their Messengers said to them: We are only mortals like you except God shows His grace on whom He wills of His servants. And it had not been for us that we bring you an authority, but by the permission of God. And in God let the ones who believe put their trust. 
14|12| And why should we not put our trust in God while, surely, He guided us to our ways? And we will endure patiently however you maligned us. And in God let the ones who trust, put their trust. 
14|13| And those who were ungrateful said to their Messengers: Certainly, we will drive you out of our region unless you revert to our creed. So their Lord revealed to them: Truly, We will cause to perish the ones who are unjust. 
14|14| Certainly, We will cause you to dwell in the region after them. This is for whoever feared My station and feared My threat. 
14|15| And the Messengers sought judgment and frustrated was every haughty, stubborn one. 
14|16| And hell is ahead of him. He will be given to drink of watery pus. 
14|17| He will gulp it and he will be about to swallow it easily when death will approach him from every place, yet he will not be dead. And ahead of him will be a harsh punishment. 
14|18| A parable of those who were ungrateful to their Lord, their actions are as ashes over which the wind blew strongly on a tempestuous day. They will have no power over anything they earned. That is the wandering far away, astray. 
14|19| Hast thou not considered that God created the heavens and the earth in Truth? If He wills, He will cause you to be put away and bring a new creation. 
14|20| And that is not a great matter for God. 
14|21| And they will depart to God altogether. Then, the weak would say to those who grew arrogant: Truly, we had been followers of yours. Have you ones who avail us at all against the punishment of God? They would say: If God would have guided us, we would have guided you. It is equal to us whether we were patientless or endured patiently. There is no asylum for us. 
14|22| Satan would say when the command would be decided: Truly, God promised you a promise of the Truth. And I promised you, but I broke it. And I had been no authority over you, but that I called to you and you responded to me. So blame me not, but blame yourselves. I am not one who assists you nor are you one who assists me. Truly, I was ungrateful for your ascribing me as partner with God before. Truly, the ones who are unjust, for them is a painful punishment. 
14|23| And will be caused to enter those who believed and did as the ones in accord with morality into Gardens beneath which rivers run. They, ones who will dwell in them forever with the permission of their Lord. And their greeting in it will be: Peace! 
14|24| Hast thou not considered how God propounded a parable? What is like a good word is what is like a good tree. Its root is one that is firm and its branches are in heaven. 
14|25| It gives all its produce for a while with the permission of its Lord. And God propounds parables for humanity so that perhaps they will recollect. 
14|26| And the parable of a bad word is that of a bad tree, that was uprooted from above the earth, so it has no stability. 
14|27| God makes firm those who believed with the saying, one that is firm in this present life and in the world to come. And God will cause to go astray the ones who are unjust. And God accomplishes what He wills. 
14|28| Hast thou not considered those who substituted ingratitude for the divine blessing of God and caused their folk to live in abodes of nothingness? 
14|29| They will roast in hell. Miserable will be the stopping place! 
14|30| And they made rivals with God, causing others to go astray from His way. Say: Take joy, but, truly, your homecoming is the fire! 
14|31| Say to My servants who believed that they should perform the formal prayer and spend from what We provided them secretly and in public before a Day approaches in which there is neither trading nor befriending. 
14|32| God is He Who created the heavens and the earth and caused water to descend from heaven and brought out thereby fruits as provision for you. And He caused boats to be subservient to you that they run through the sea by His command. And He caused rivers to be subservient to you. 
14|33| And He caused the sun to be subservient to you and the moon, both, ones that are constant in their work. And He caused the nighttime to be subservient to you and the daytime. 
14|34| And He gave you all that you asked of Him. And if you were to number the divine blessing of God, you would not count them, truly, the human being is wrongdoing and an ingrate. 
14|35| And when Abraham said: My Lord! Make this land that which is safe and cause me and my children to turn away from worshipping idols. 
14|36| My Lord! Truly, they caused to go astray many among humanity; so whoever heeded me, truly, he is of me. And whoever rebelled against me, then Thou art, truly, Forgiving, Compassionate. 
14|37| Our Lord! Truly, I caused to dwell some of my offspring in an unsown valley by Thy Holy House, O our Lord, they, certainly, perform the formal prayer. So make the minds among humanity yearn for them and provide them with fruits so that perhaps they will give thanks. 
14|38| Our Lord! Truly, Thou hast known what we conceal and what we speak openly. And nothing is hidden from God in or on the earth or in heaven. 
14|39| The Praise belongs to God Who bestowed on me in my old age Ishmael and Isaac. And, truly, my Lord is Hearing the supplication. 
14|40| My Lord! Make me one who performs the formal prayer and from my offspring also. Our Lord! Receive my supplication. 
14|41| Our Lord! Forgive Thou me and the ones who are my parents and the ones who believe on the Day the reckoning arises. 
14|42| And assume not that God is One Who is Heedless of what the ones who are unjust do. He only postpones their reckoning to a Day when their sight will be fixed in horror, 
14|43| ones who run forward with eyes fixed in horror, ones who lift up their heads. Their glance goes not back to them. And their minds are void. 
14|44| And warn humanity of a Day the punishment will approach them. So those who did wrong will say: Our Lord! Postpone for us a near term so that we answer Thy call and follow the Messengers. Yet swore you not an oath before that there would be no ceasing for you? 
14|45| And you inhabited the dwellings of those who did wrong to themselves. And it became clear to you how We accomplished against them and We propounded for you parables. 
14|46| And, surely, they planned their plan and their plan was with God, even if their plan had been to displace mountains. 
14|47| So assume not that God will be one who breaks His promise to His Messengers. Truly, God is Almighty, Possessor of Requital. 
14|48| On a Day when the earth will be substituted for other than this earth and the heavens, they will depart to God, The One, The Omniscient God, 
14|49| and thou wilt consider the ones who sin that Day, ones who are chained in bonds, 
14|50| their tunics are made of pitch and the fire will overcome their faces 
14|51| so that God would give recompense to every soul for what it earned. Truly, God is Swift in reckoning. 
14|52| This is the delivering of the message to humanity so that they be warned by it and that they know that He is One God so that those imbued with intuition recollect. 
15|1| Alif L[m R[. That are the signs of the Book and of a clear Recitation. 
15|2| It may be those who were ungrateful would wish that they had been ones who submit to God. 
15|3| Forsake them to eat and let them take joy and be diverted with hopefulness. Then, they will know. 
15|4| And We caused not a town to perish but there was for it a known prescription. 
15|5| No community precedes its term nor delays it. 
15|6| And they say: O thou to whom was sent down the Remembrance, truly, thou art one who is possessed. 
15|7| Why hast thou not brought angels to us if thou hadst been the ones who are sincere? 
15|8| We send angels down not but with The Truth. If they come to the ungrateful, they would not have been ones who are given respite. 
15|9| Truly, We, We sent down the Remembrance and, truly, We are ones who guard it. 
15|10| And, certainly, We sent Messengers before thee to partisans of the ancient ones. 
15|11| And approach them not any Messenger but they had been ridiculing him. 
15|12| Thus, We thrust it into the hearts of the ones who sin. 
15|13| They believe not in it. Surely, passed away before them a custom of the ancient ones. 
15|14| And even if We opened for them a door from heaven and they continued going up to it, 
15|15| they would say: Truly, our sight was dazzled. Nay! We were a bewitched folk. 
15|16| And, certainly, We made constellations in the heavens and We made them appear pleasing to the ones who look. 
15|17| And We kept them safe from every accursed satan, 
15|18| but he who had the ability to hear by eavesdropping. Then, a clear flame pursued him. 
15|19| And We stretched out the earth and We cast on it firm mountains and We caused to develop on it that which was well-balanced of everything. 
15|20| And We made on it for you a livelihood and for whomever you are not ones who provide. 
15|21| And there is not a thing, but its treasures are with Us and We send it down not but in a known measure. 
15|22| And We sent fertilizing winds. Then, We caused water to descend from heaven, then, We satiated you, and you are not ones who are its keepers. 
15|23| And, truly, it is We Who give life and cause to die and We are the ones who inherit. 
15|24| And, certainly, We knew the ones who precede among you and, certainly, We knew the ones who come later. 
15|25| And, truly, thy Lord is He Who assembles. Truly, He is Wise, Knowing. 
15|26| And, certainly, We created the human being out of earth-mud of soft wet earth. 
15|27| And We created the ones who are spirits before from the fire of a burning wind. 
15|28| And mention when thy Lord said to the angels: Truly, I am One Who is Creator of mortals out of earth-mud of soft wet earth. 
15|29| That is when I shaped him and breathed into him of My Spirit. So fall down before him as ones who prostrate themselves. 
15|30| The angels prostrated themselves, one and all, 
15|31| but Iblis. He refused to be with the ones who prostrate themselves. 
15|32| He said: O Iblis! What is with thee that thou be not with the ones who prostrate themselves? 
15|33| Iblis said: I will not be prostrating myself before a mortal whom Thou hadst created out of earth-mud of soft wet earth. 
15|34| It was said: Go thou forth from here, for, truly, thou art accursed! 
15|35| And, truly, a curse will be upon thee until the Day of Judgment. 
15|36| Iblis said: O my Lord! Give me respite until the Day they are raised up. 
15|37| He said: Then, truly, thou art among the ones who are given respite 
15|38| until the Day of the known time. 
15|39| Iblis said: My Lord! Because Thou hadst led me into error I will, certainly, make the earth appear pleasing to them and I will lead them one and all into error, 
15|40| but Thy servants among them, the ones who are devoted. 
15|41| He said: This is the straight path to Me. 
15|42| Truly, as for My servants there is no authority for thee over them, but ones who are in error followed thee. 
15|43| And, truly, hell is promised to them one and all. 
15|44| It has seven doors. Then, for every one, a door set apart, is for them. 
15|45| Truly, the ones who are Godfearing will be amidst gardens and springs. 
15|46| Enter them in peace as ones who are safe! 
15|47| And We will tear out any grudges from their breasts. They will be as brothers/sisters on couches, one facing the other. 
15|48| In it neither fatigue will afflict them nor will they be ones who are driven out. 
15|49| Tell My servants that I am The Forgiving, The Compassionate 
15|50| and that My punishment, it is a painful punishment. 
15|51| And tell them about the guests of Abraham 
15|52| when they entered upon him and said: Peace! He said: Truly, we are afraid of you. 
15|53| They said: Take no notice. Truly, we give thee good tidings of a knowing boy. 
15|54| He said: Gave you good tidings to me even though old age afflicted me? So of what give you good tidings? 
15|55| They said: We gave thee good tidings of The Truth, so thou art not of the ones who despair. 
15|56| He said: Who despairs of the mercy of his Lord, but the ones who go astray? 
15|57| He said: Then, what is your business, O the ones who are sent? 
15|58| They said: We were sent to a folk, ones who sin, 
15|59| but the family of Lot. Truly, we are ones who will deliver them one and all, 
15|60| but his woman. We ordained that she be of the ones who stay behind. 
15|61| Then, when the ones who are sent drew near the people of Lot, 
15|62| he said: Truly, you are folk, ones unlawful to me. 
15|63| They said: Nay! We drew near thee with what they had been contesting in it. 
15|64| We approached thee with The Truth and, truly, we are ones who are sincere. 
15|65| Then, set forth with thy family in a part of the night and follow thou their backs and look not back any of you, but pass on to where you are commanded. 
15|66| And We decreed the command to him that the last remnant of these would be that which is severed, in that which is morning. 
15|67| The people of the city drew near rejoicing at the good tidings. 
15|68| Lot said: Truly, these are my guests, so put me not to shame. 
15|69| Be Godfearing of God and cover me not with shame. 
15|70| They said: Prohibit we thee not from some beings? 
15|71| Lot said: These are my daughters if you hadst been ones who do something. 
15|72| By thy life, truly, they were in a daze, wandering unwilling to see. 
15|73| So the Cry took them at sunrise. 
15|74| And We made its high part low and We rained down on them rocks of baked clay. 
15|75| Truly, in this are signs for the ones who read marks. 
15|76| And, truly, they are ones who are on an abiding way. 
15|77| Truly, in it is a sign for the ones who believe. 
15|78| And, truly, the Companions of the Thicket had been ones who are unjust 
15|79| so We requited them and they were both on a clear high road. 
15|80| Certainly, the Companions of the Rocky Tract denied the ones who are sent. 
15|81| And We gave them Our signs. Then, they had been ones who turn aside from them. 
15|82| And they had been carving out safe houses from mountains, 
15|83| but the Cry took them in that which is morning. 
15|84| And availed them not what they had been earning. 
15|85| And We created not the heavens and the earth and whatever is in between them but with The Truth. And, truly, the Hour is one that arrives. So overlook with a graceful overlooking. 
15|86| Truly, thy Lord is The Knowing Creator. 
15|87| And, certainly, We gave thee seven often repeated parts of the sublime Quran. 
15|88| And stretch not out thy eyes for what We gave of enjoyment in this life to spouses among them, nor feel remorse for them, but make low thy wing in kindness to the ones who believe. 
15|89| And say: Truly, I am a clear warner, 
15|90| even as We caused to descend on the ones who are partitioners, 
15|91| those who made the Quran into fragments. 
15|92| So by thy Lord, We will, certainly, ask them one and all 
15|93| about what they had been doing. 
15|94| So call aloud what thou art commanded: Turn aside from the ones who are polytheists! 
15|95| Truly, We sufficed thee against the ones who ridicule, 
15|96| those who make with God another god. But they will know. 
15|97| And, certainly, We know that thy breast became narrowed, injured in spirit, because of what they say. 
15|98| So glorify the praises of thy Lord and be among the ones who prostrate themselves 
15|99| and worship thy Lord until the certainty approaches thee. 
16|1| Approached the command of God? Seek not to hasten it. Glory be to Him and exalted is He above partners they ascribe with God. 
16|2| He sends down the angels with the Spirit of His command on whom He wills of His servants to warn that there is no god but I, so be Godfearing of Me. 
16|3| He created the heavens and the earth with The Truth. Exalted is He above partners they ascribe. 
16|4| He created the human being from seminal fluid. That is when he is a clear adversary. 
16|5| And He created the flocks, for you in which there is warmth and profits and of them you eat 
16|6| and in them is a beauty for you when you give them rest and when you drive forth flocks to pasture. 
16|7| And they carry your lading to a land, being that which reaches you not but under adverse circumstances to yourselves. Truly, your Lord is Gentle, Compassionate. 
16|8| And He creates horses, mules and donkeys for you to ride and as an adornment. And He creates what you know not. 
16|9| And with God is showing of the way yet some of them are ones who swerve. If He willed, He would have guided you one and all. 
16|10| It is He Who caused water to descend from heaven for you to drink from it and from it, trees wherein you pasture your herds. 
16|11| He caused crops to develop for you with it, and the olives and the date palms and the grapevines, and all kinds of fruits. Truly, in that is a sign for a folk who reflect. 
16|12| And He caused to be subservient to you the nighttime and the daytime and the sun and the moon, and the stars, ones caused to be subservient by His command. Truly, in that are signs for a folk who are reasonable. 
16|13| And whatever He made numerous for you in and on the earth of hues, ones that are at variance, truly, in that is a sign for a folk who recollect. 
16|14| And He it is Who caused the sea to be subservient to you so that you eat from it succulent flesh and pull out of it glitter to wear and thou seest the boats, ones that plow through the waves, that you be looking for His grace and so that perhaps you will give thanks. 
16|15| And He cast on to the earth firm mountains so that it not vibrate with you and rivers and roads so that perhaps you will be truly guided 
16|16| and landmarks. And they are truly guided by the stars. 
16|17| Is, then, He Who creates as he who creates not? Will you not, then, recollect? 
16|18| And if you try to number the divine blessing of God, you will not be able to count it. Truly, God is Forgiving, Compassionate. 
16|19| And God knows what you keep secret and what you speak openly. 
16|20| And those whom you call to other than God, they created not anything but they are themselves created. 
16|21| They are lifeless, not living. And they are not aware when they will be raised up. 
16|22| Your God is One God. But for those who believe not in the world to come, their hearts are ones that know not and they are ones who grow arrogant. 
16|23| Without a doubt God knows what they keep secret and what they speak openly. Truly, He loves not the ones who grow arrogant. 
16|24| And when it is said to them: What is that your Lord caused to descend, they would say: Fables of the ancient ones! 
16|25| They will carry their own heavy loads, that which is complete, on the Day of Resurrection, and of the heavy loads of whomever they cause to go astray without knowledge. How evil is what they will bear! 
16|26| Surely, those who were before them planned, then, God approached their structures from the foundations and the roof fell down upon them from above and the punishment approached them from where they are not aware. 
16|27| Again, on the Day of Resurrection He will cover them with shame and will say: Where are My ascribed associates with whom you had been making a breach with them? Those who were given the knowledge will say: Truly, degradation this Day and evil upon the ones who are ungrateful. 
16|28| Those whom the angels call to themselves while they are ones who are unjust to themselves. Then, they will give a proposal of surrender: We had not been doing any evil. Yea! Truly, God is Knowing of what you had been doing. 
16|29| So enter the doors of hell—ones who will dwell in it forever; and, certainly, it will be a miserable place of lodging. It is for the ones who increase in pride! 
16|30| And when it was said to those who were Godfearing: What is it that your Lord caused to descend? They will say: Good or for those who did good in the present, there is benevolence. And the abode of the world to come is better. And how excellent will be the abode of the ones who are Godfearing! 
16|31| Gardens of Eden which they will enter beneath which rivers run. They have in them all that they will. Thus, God gives recompense to the ones who are Godfearing. 
16|32| Those whom the angels call to themselves while they are ones who are good. They say to them: Peace be unto you! Enter the Garden because of what you had been doing. 
16|33| Look they not on but that the angels approach them or the command of thy Lord approach? Thus, accomplished those before them. And God did not wrong them. Rather, they had been doing wrong to themselves. 
16|34| Then, their evil deeds lit on them for what their hands did. And surrounded them is what they had been ridiculing. 
16|35| And those who ascribed partners with God said: If God willed neither would we have worshiped other than Him anything, we nor our fathers, nor would we have held sacred anything other than what He forbade. Thus, accomplished those who were before them. Then, what is upon the Messengers, but the delivering of the clear message? 
16|36| And, certainly, We raised up in every community a Messenger saying that: Worship God and avoid false deities. Then, of them were some whom God guided and of them were some upon whom their fallacy was realized. So journey through the earth; then, look on how had been the Ultimate End of the ones who deny. 
16|37| If thou be eager for their guidance, then, truly, God will not guide whom He causes to go astray. And they will have no ones who help. 
16|38| And they swore by God their most earnest oaths: God will not raise up him who dies. Yea! It is a promised obligation upon Him—except most of humanity knows not— 
16|39| in order to make manifest for them about what they are at variance in it and so that those who were ungrateful know that they had been ones who lie. 
16|40| Our saying to a thing when We wanted it is that We say to it: Be! Then, it is! 
16|41| As for those who emigrated for God after they were wronged, We will, certainly, have a place of settlement for them with benevolence in the present. And the compensation of the world to come will be greater, if they had been knowing. 
16|42| Those who endured patiently, they put their trust in their Lord. 
16|43| And We sent not before thee but men to whom We reveal revelation. So ask the People of Remembrance if you had not been knowing. 
16|44| With the clear portents and the ancient scrolls, We caused to descend the Remembrance to thee that thou wilt make manifest to humanity what was sent down to them and so that perhaps they will reflect. 
16|45| Were those who planned evil deeds safe that God will not cause the earth to swallow them or that the punishment will not approach them from where they are not aware? 
16|46| Or that He take them in their going to and fro where they will not be ones who frustrate Him? 
16|47| Or that He take them, destroying them little by little? Truly, thy Lord is Gentle, Compassionate. 
16|48| Consider they not that whatever things God created casts its shadow to the right and to the left, ones who prostrate themselves to God. And they are ones in a state of lowliness? 
16|49| And to God prostrates whatever is in the heavens and all that is in and on the earth of moving creatures and the angels and they grow not arrogant. 
16|50| They fear their Lord above them and accomplish what they are commanded.‡ 
16|51| And God said: Take not two gods to yourselves. Truly, He is One God. Then, have reverence for Me. 
16|52| And to Him belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth and His is the way of life, that which is forever. Are you Godfearing of other than God? 
16|53| And whatever you have of divine blessing is from God. After that when harm afflicted you, you make entreaties to Him. 
16|54| Again, when He removed the harm from you, that is when a group of people among you ascribe partners with their Lord. 
16|55| They are ungrateful for what We gave them. So let them take joy. They will know. 
16|56| And they assign to what they know not a share from what We provided them. By God! You will, certainly, be asked about what you had been devising. 
16|57| And they assign daughters to God! Glory be to Him! And for themselves, that for which they lust. 
16|58| And when any of them was given good tidings of a female, his face stayed one that is clouded over and he chokes. 
16|59| He is secluded from the folk because of the dire tidings he was given. Will he hold it back with humiliation or will he trample it in the earth dust? Truly, how evil is the judgment they give! 
16|60| For those who believe not in the world to come there is the reprehensible evil description while the loftiest description belongs to God. And He is The Almighty, The Wise. 
16|61| And if God were to take humanity to task for their injustice, He would not leave on it a moving creature. Rather, He postpones them for a term, that is determined. And when their term drew near, neither will they delay it an hour, nor press it forward. 
16|62| And they assign to God what they dislike. Their tongues allege the lie that the fairer things will be theirs. Without a doubt, for them is the fire, and they will be ones made to hasten to it. 
16|63| By God! We, certainly, sent Messengers to communities before thee. Satan made their actions appear pleasing to them. So he is their protector on this Day and theirs will be a painful punishment. 
16|64| And We caused the Book to descend to thee, but that thou wilt make manifest to them those things in which they were at variance in it and as a guidance and a mercy for a folk who believe. 
16|65| And God caused water to descend from heaven and from it gave life to the earth after its death. Truly, in this is a sign for a folk who hear. 
16|66| And, truly, for you in the flocks is a lesson. We satiate you from what is in their bellies—between waste and blood—exclusively milk, that which is delicious to the ones who drink. 
16|67| From fruits of the date palm trees and grapevines you take to yourselves of it what obscures the mind and fairer provisions. Truly, in it is a sign for a folk who be reasonable. 
16|68| And thy Lord revealed to thee the bee: Take to thyself houses from the mountains and in the trees and in what they construct. 
16|69| Again, eat of all the fruits and insert thyself submissively into the ways of thy Lord. Drink goes forth from their bellies in hues, ones that are at variance, wherein is healing for humanity. Truly, in this is, certainly, a sign for a folk who reflect. 
16|70| And God created you. Again, He calls you to Himself. And of you there are some who are returned to the most wretched of lifetimes so that he knows nothing after having knowledge of something. Truly, God is Knowing, Powerful. 
16|71| God gave advantage to some of you over some others in provision. But those who were given advantage are not ones who give over their provision to what their right hands possessed so that they are equal in it. Why negate they the divine blessing of God? 
16|72| And God assigned to you spouses (f) of your own kind and has assigned you from your spouses (f), children and grandchildren and provided you with what is good. Believe they, then, in falsehood and are ungrateful for the divine blessing of God? 
16|73| They worship other than God what has no sway, no power to provide for them anything from the heavens and the earth, nor are they able to do so. 
16|74| So propound not parables for God. Truly, God Knows and you know not. 
16|75| God propounded a parable of a chattel servant who has no power over anything and one to whom We provided from Us a fairer provision. And he spends from it secretly and openly publishing it. Are they on the same level? The Praise belongs to God. Nay! Most of them know not! 
16|76| And God propounded a parable of two men, one of them unwilling to speak. He has no power over anything and he is a heavy burden to his defender. Whichever way he turns his face, he brings no good. Is he on the same level as the one who commands justice and he who is on a straight path? 
16|77| And to God belongs the unseen of the heavens and the earth. And the command of the Hour is not but the twinkling of an eye to one’s sight or it is nearer. Truly, God is Powerful over everything. 
16|78| And God brought you out from the wombs of your mothers and you know nothing. And He assigned to you the ability to hear and sight and mind so that perhaps you will give thanks. 
16|79| Consider you not the birds, the ones caused to be subservient in the firmament of the heavens? None holds them back but God. Truly, in this are the signs for a folk who believe. 
16|80| And God assigned for you your houses as places of comfort and rest and assigned for you the hides of flocks for your houses which you find light on the day of your departure and the day of your halting and of their wool and furs and hair— furnishing and enjoyment for a while. 
16|81| And God made for you shade out of what He created and made for you the mountains as a refuges in the time of need and has made for you tunics to protect you from the heat and tunics to protect you from your violence. Thus, He fulfills His divine blessing to you so that perhaps you will submit to God. 
16|82| Then, if they turned away, for thee is only the delivering of the clear message. 
16|83| They recognize the divine blessing of God. Again, they reject it and most of them are the ones who are ungrateful. 
16|84| On the Day We will raise up from every community a witness again, no permission will be given to those who are ungrateful nor will they ask to be favored. 
16|85| And when those who did wrong consider the punishment, then, it will not be lightened for them nor will they be given respite. 
16|86| And when those who ascribed partners saw their ascribed associates with God, they will say: Our Lord, these are our ascribed associates whom we had been calling to other than Thee. Then, they will cast their saying back to them: Truly, you are ones who lie! 
16|87| They will give a proposal to God on that day of surrender. Gone astray from them will be what they had been devising. 
16|88| Those who were ungrateful and barred from the way of God, We increased them in punishment above their punishment because they had been making corruption. 
16|89| On the Day We raise up in every community a witness against them from among themselves and We will bring thee about as a witness against these. And We sent down to thee the Book as an exposition that makes everything clear and as a guidance and as a mercy and as good tidings for the ones who submit to God. 
16|90| Truly, God commands justice and kindness and giving to one who is a possessor of kinship and He prohibits depravity and ones who are unlawful and insolent. He admonishes you so that perhaps you will recollect. 
16|91| And live up to the compact of God when you have made a contract. And break not the oaths after ratification. And, surely, you made God surety over you. Truly, God knows what you accomplish. 
16|92| And be not like she who would break what she spun after firming its fibers by taking to yourselves your oaths in mutual deceit among yourselves so that one community be one that is swelling more than another community. God tries you but by this. And He will make manifest to you on the Day of Resurrection about what you had been at variance in it. 
16|93| If God willed, He would have made you one community, but He causes to go astray whom He wills and guides whom He wills. And, certainly, you will be asked about what you had been doing. 
16|94| Take not your oaths to yourselves in mutual deceit among yourselves, that your footing should not backslide after standing firm and you experience the evil of having barred from the way of God. And for you will be a serious punishment. 
16|95| And exchange not the compact for a little price. Truly, what is with God is better for you if you had been knowing. 
16|96| Whatever is with you will come to an end. And whatever is with God is that which endures. And We will, certainly, give recompense to those who endured patiently their fairer compensation for what they had been doing. 
16|97| Whoever does as one in accord with morality, whether male or female, while being one who believes, We will give life—this good life. And We will give recompense to them—their compensation—for the fairer for what they had been doing. 
16|98| So when thou hadst recited the Quran, seek refuge with God from the accursed Satan. 
16|99| Truly, he is not an authority over those who believed and in their Lord they put their trust. 
16|100| His authority is only over those who turn away to him and they, those are ones who are polytheists. 
16|101| And when We substituted a sign in place of another sign—and God is greater in knowledge of what He sends down—they said: Thou art only one who devises! But most of them know not. 
16|102| Say: The hallowed Spirit sent it down from thy Lord with The Truth to make firm those who believed and as a guidance and good tidings to the ones who submit to God. 
16|103| And, certainly, We know that they say: It is only a mortal who teaches him. The tongue of him whom they hint at is non-Arab, while this is in a clear Arabic tongue. 
16|104| Truly, those who believe not in the signs of God, God will not guide them and for them is a painful punishment. 
16|105| Devising falsity is only by those who believe not in the signs of God. And those, they are the ones who lie. 
16|106| Whoever disbelieved in God after his belief—other than whoever was compelled to do it against his will while his heart is one that is at peace in belief—but whoever’s breast is expanded to disbelief, on them is the anger of God and for them is a serious punishment. 
16|107| That is because they embraced this present life instead of the world to come. And God guides not the folk, the ones who disbelieve, 
16|108| those are those who God set a seal upon their hearts and upon their ability to hear and their sight. And those, they are the ones who are heedless. 
16|109| Without a doubt they will be in the world to come, the ones who are losers. 
16|110| Again, truly, thy Lord, for those who emigrated after they were persecuted and, again, struggled and endured patiently. Truly, after that, thy Lord is Forgiving, Compassionate. 
16|111| On a Day every soul will approach, disputing for itself and for every soul, its account will be paid in full for what it did they will not be wronged. 
16|112| And God propounded a parable of a town—that which had been safe, one that is at peace, its provision approaches it freely from every place. Then, it was ungrateful for the divine blessings of God and so God caused it to experience extreme hunger and fear because of what they had been crafting. 
16|113| And, certainly, drew near them a Messenger from among them, but they denied him, so the punishment took them while they are ones who are unjust. 
16|114| So eat of what God provided you as lawful, what is good and give thanks for the divine blessing of God if it had been Him that you worship. 
16|115| He only forbade to you carrion and blood and flesh of swine and what was hallowed to other than God. But if one was compelled, without being one who is willfully disobedient, nor one who turns away, then, truly, God is Forgiving, Compassionate. 
16|116| And say not to what your lying tongues allege: This is lawful and this is unlawful so as to devise lies against God. Truly, those who devise against God lies will not prosper, 
16|117| but a little enjoyment and for them is a painful punishment. 
16|118| We forbade those who became Jews what We related to thee before and We did not wrong them, except they had been doing wrong to themselves. 
16|119| Again, truly, thy Lord—to those who did evil in ignorance, again, repented after that and made things right—truly, thy Lord after that is Forgiving, Compassionate. 
16|120| Abraham had been a community obedient to God—a monotheist—he is not among the ones who are polytheists. 
16|121| He was one who is thankful for His divine blessings. He elected him and guided him to a straight path. 
16|122| And We gave him in the present benevolence. And, truly, in the world to come he will be among the ones in accord with morality. 
16|123| Again, we revealed to thee that thou follow the creed of Abraham—a monotheist. And he had not been among the ones who are polytheists. 
16|124| Truly, the Sabbath was made for those who are at variance about it. Truly, thy Lord will give judgment between them on the Day of Resurrection about what they had been at variance in it. 
16|125| Call thou to the way of thy Lord with wisdom and fairer admonishment. And dispute with them in a way that is fairer. Truly, thy Lord is He Who is greater in knowledge of whoever went astray from His way. And He is greater in knowledge of the ones who are truly guided. 
16|126| And if you chastised, then, chastise with the like of that with which you were chastised. But if you endured patiently, certainly, it is better for the ones who remain steadfast. 
16|127| And have thou patience and thy patience is only from God. And feel not remorse over them, nor be thee troubled about what they plan. 
16|128| Truly, God is with those who were Godfearing and those, they are ones who are doers of good. 
17|1| Glory be to Him Who caused His servant to set forth night from the Masjid al-Haram to the Masjid al-Aqsa around which We blessed so that We cause him to see Our signs. Truly, He, He is The Hearing, The Seeing. 
17|2| And We gave Moses the Book and made it a guidance for the Children of Israel: Take not to yourselves a Trustee other than Me. 
17|3| O offspring of whomever We carried with Noah: Truly, he had been a grateful servant. 
17|4| And We decreed for the Children of Israel in the Book: Certainly, you will make corruption in and on the earth two times. And, certainly, you will exalt yourselves in a great self-exaltation. 
17|5| So when the promise drew near for the first of the two, We raised up against you servants of Ours imbued with severe might. They ransacked in the midst of your abodes. And the promise had been one that is accomplished. 
17|6| Again, We returned to you a turn of luck over them and We furnished you relief with children and wealth and made you more in soldiery: 
17|7| If you did good, you would be doing good for yourselves. And if you did evil, then, it is against yourselves. Then, when the last promise drew near, We sent your enemies; they raise anger on your faces and they enter the place of prostration just as they entered it the first time, to shatter all that they ascended to with a shattering. 
17|8| Perhaps your Lord will have mercy on you. But if you reverted, We will revert.• And We made hell a jail for the ones who are ungrateful. 
17|9| Truly, this, the Quran, guides to what is upright and gives good tidings to the ones who believe, those who are as the ones in accord with morality, that they will have a great compensation. 
17|10| And as for those who believe not in the world to come, We made ready for them a painful punishment. 
17|11| And the human being calls to worse as much as he supplicates for good. And the human being had been hasty. 
17|12| We made the nighttime and the daytime as two signs. Then, We blotted out the sign of nighttime and We made the sign of daytime for one who perceives that you be looking for grace from your Lord and that you know the number of years and the reckoning. And We explained everything distinctly, with a decisive explanation. 
17|13| For every human being We fastened his omen to his neck and We will bring out for him on the Day of Resurrection a book in which he will meet that which unfolded. 
17|14| Recite thy book! This day thy soul sufficed thee as thy reckoner against thee. 
17|15| Whoever was truly guided is truly guided only for his own soul. And whoever went astray, then, only goes astray against it. And no burdened soul bears the heavy load of another, nor would We have been ones who punish until We raised up a Messenger. 
17|16| And when We wanted to cause a town to perish, We commanded ones who are given ease, but they disobeyed therein. So the saying was realized against it. Then, We destroyed it with utter destruction. 
17|17| How many generations have We caused to perish after Noah? And thy Lord sufficed as Aware, Seeing the impieties of His servants. 
17|18| Whoever had been wanting that which hastens away, We quicken it for him, whatever We will to whomever We want. Again, We assigned hell for him. He will roast in it, one who is condemned, one who is rejected. 
17|19| And whoever wanted the world to come and endeavored for it, endeavoring, while he is one who believes, then, those, their endeavoring had been appreciated. 
17|20| To each We furnish relief, these and these, with the gift of thy Lord. And this gift of thy Lord has not been that which is confined. 
17|21| Look on how We gave advantage to some of them over some others. And, certainly, the world to come will be greater in degrees and greater in excellence. 
17|22| Assign not another god with God for, then, thou wilt be put as one who is condemned, one who is damned. 
17|23| And thy Lord decreed that you worship none but Him! And kindness to the ones who are one’s parents. If they reach old age with thee—one of them or both of them—then, thou wilt not say to them a word of disrespect nor scold them, but say a generous saying to them. 
17|24| And make thyself low to them, the wing of the sense of humility through mercy. And say: O my Lord! Have mercy on them even as they raised me when I was small. 
17|25| Your Lord is greater in knowledge of what is within yourselves. If you be ones in accord with morality, truly, He is Forgiving to those who had been penitent. 
17|26| And give to the possessor of kinship his right and to the needy and to the traveler of the way. And spend not extravagantly an extravagant spending. 
17|27| Truly, the ones who spend extravagantly had been brothers/sisters of the satans and Satan had been ungrateful to his Lord. 
17|28| And if thou hast turned aside from them, looking for mercy from thy Lord for which thou hast hoped, then, say to them a saying softly. 
17|29| And make not thy hand be one that is restricted to thy neck as a miser nor extend it to its utmost expansion as a prodigal so that thou wilt sit as one who is reproached, one who is denuded. 
17|30| Truly, thy Lord extends the provision for whom He wills and He tightens for whom He wills. Truly, He, He had been Aware, Seeing of His servants. 
17|31| And kill not your children dreading want. We will provide for them and for you. Truly, the killing of them had been a grave inequity. 
17|32| And come not near committing adultery. Truly, it had been a great indecency! How evil a way! 
17|33| And kill not a soul that God forbade, but rightfully. And whoever was slain as one who is treated unjustly, surely, We assigned for his protector, authority, but he should not exceed all bounds in killing. Truly, he would be one who is helped by the Law. 
17|34| And come not near the property of the orphan, but with what is fairer until he reaches the coming of age. And live up to the compact. Truly, the compact had been that which will be asked about. 
17|35| And live up to the full measure when you wanted to measure. And weigh with a scale, one that is straight. That is best and fairer in interpretation. 
17|36| And follow up not of what there is not for thee knowledge of it. Truly, having the ability to hear and sight and mind, each of those will have been that which is asked. 
17|37| And walk not on the earth exultantly. Truly, thou wilt never make a hole in the earth and wilt never reach the mountains in height. 
17|38| All of that had been bad deeds, ones that are disliked by thy Lord. 
17|39| That is of what thy Lord revealed to thee of wisdom. So make not up with God another god that thou wouldst be cast down into hell as one who is reproached, as one who is rejected. 
17|40| Selected your Lord for you sons and taken for Himself females from among the angels? Truly, you, you say a serious saying! 
17|41| And, certainly, We diversified in this, the Quran, that they recollect. And it increases them only in aversion. 
17|42| Say: If there had been gods along with Him as they say, then, they would, certainly, be looking for a way to the Possessor of the Throne. 
17|43| Glory be to Him! And exalted is He above what they say, greatly exalted. 
17|44| The seven heavens glorify Him and the earth and whatever is in and on them. There is not a thing but it glorifies His praise, except you understand not their glorification. Truly, He had been Forbearing, Forgiving. 
17|45| And when thou hadst recited the Quran, We made between thee and between those who believe not in the world to come a partition obstructing their vision. 
17|46| And We laid sheaths on their hearts so that they not understand it and heaviness in their ears. And when thou hadst remembered thy Lord in the Quran that He is One, they turned their backs in aversion. 
17|47| We are greater in knowledge of what they listen for when they listen to thee. And when they conspire secretly, when the ones who are unjust say: You follow but a bewitched man. 
17|48| Look on how they propounded parables for thee. So they went astray and they are not able to be on a way. 
17|49| And they say: When we had been bones and broken bits will we be ones who are raised up in a new creation? 
17|50| Say: Should you be rocks or iron, 
17|51| or any creation that is more troublesome in your breasts to raise up? Then, they will say: Who will cause us to return? Say: He Who originated you the first time. Then, they will nod their heads at thee and say: When will it be? Say: Perhaps it is near. 
17|52| It will be a Day when He will call to you and you will respond to Him with His praise and you will think that you lingered in expectation but a little. 
17|53| And say to My servants they should say what is fairer. Truly, Satan sows enmity among them. Truly, Satan had been to the human being, a clear enemy. 
17|54| Your Lord is greater in knowledge of you. If He wills, He will have mercy on you. And if He wills, He will punish you. And We sent thee not as a trustee over them. 
17|55| And thy Lord is greater in knowledge of whoever are in the heavens and in and on the earth. And, certainly, We gave advantage to some of the Prophets over others. And to David We gave Psalms. 
17|56| Say: Call to those whom you claimed other than Him. Then, they are neither in control to remove harm from you nor revise it. 
17|57| Those are those to whom they call to, they are looking for an approach to their Lord—whoever is nearer—and they hope for His mercy and they fear His punishment. Truly, the punishment of thy Lord had been one to beware. 
17|58| And there is not a town but We will be ones who cause it to perish before the Day of Resurrection, or We will be ones who punish it with a severe punishment— that which had been inscribed in the Book. 
17|59| And nothing prevented Us from sending the signs, but that the ancient ones denied them. And We gave to Thamud the she-camel—the one who perceives—but they did wrong to her. And We send not the signs, but as a deterrence. 
17|60| And mention when We said to thee: Truly, thy Lord enclosed humanity. And We made not the dream that We caused thee to see, but as a test for humanity—and the tree—one that was cursed in the Quran. And We frighten them, but it only increases them in great defiance. 
17|61| And mention when We said to the angels: Prostrate yourselves to Adam! so they prostrated themselves, but Iblis. He said: Will I prostrate myself to one whom Thou hadst created from clay? 
17|62| He said: Hadst Thou considered this whom Thou hadst held in esteem above me? If Thou hadst postponed for me to the Day of Resurrection, I will, certainly, bring under full control his offspring, but a few. 
17|63| He said: Go thou! And whoever of them heeded thee, then, truly, hell will be your recompense, an ample recompense. 
17|64| And hound whom thou wert able to of them with thy voice and rally against them with thy horses and thy foot soldiers and share with them in their wealth and children and promise them. And Satan promises them nothing but delusion. 
17|65| Truly, My servants, over them there is no authority for thee. And thy Lord sufficed as a Trustee. 
17|66| Your Lord is He Who propels for you the boats on the sea so that you be looking for His grace. Truly, He had been Compassionate towards you. 
17|67| And when harm afflicted you upon the sea, whomever you call to besides Him went astray. But when He delivered you to dry land, you turned aside. And the human being had been ungrateful. 
17|68| Were you safe that He causes not the shore of dry land to swallow you up or send a sand storm against you? Again, you will find no trustee for you. 
17|69| Or were you safe that He will not cause you to return to it another time and send against you a hurricane of wind and drown you because you were ungrateful? Again, you will not find for yourselves an advocate against Us in it. 
17|70| And, certainly, We held the Children of Adam in esteem. And We carried them on dry land and on the sea and provided them with what is good. And We gave them advantage over many of whomever We created with excellence. 
17|71| On a Day when We will call to every clan with their leader, then, whoever was given his book in his right hand, those will recite their book and they will not be wronged in the least. 
17|72| And whoever had been unwilling to see here will be unseeing in the world to come and one who goes astray from the way. 
17|73| And, truly, they were about to persecute thee for what We revealed to thee so that thou wouldst devise against Us other than it. And, then, they would take thee to themselves as a friend. 
17|74| And if We made thee not firm, certainly, thou wast about to incline to them a little. 
17|75| And, then, We would have caused thee to experience a double of this life and a double after dying. Again, thou wouldst find for thyself no helper against Us. 
17|76| They were about to hound thee from the region that they drive thee out of it. Then, they would not linger in expectation behind thee but for a little while. 
17|77| This is, surely, a custom with whomever We sent before thee of Our Messengers. And thou wilt not find in Our custom any revision. 
17|78| Perform the formal prayer from the sinking sun until the darkening of the night and the recital at dawn. Truly, the dawn recital had been one that is witnessed. 
17|79| And keep vigil with it in the night as a work of supererogation for thee. Perhaps thy Lord will raise thee up to a station of one who is praised. 
17|80| And say: My Lord! Cause me to enter a gate in sincerity. And bring me out as one who is brought out in sincerity. And assign me from that which proceeds from Thy Presence a helping authority. 
17|81| And say: The Truth drew near and falsehood is vanishing! Truly, falsehood had been made to vanish away. 
17|82| We send down in the Quran what is a healing and a mercy for the ones who believe. And it increases not the ones who are unjust, but in a loss. 
17|83| And when We were gracious to the human being, he turned aside and withdrew aside. And when worse afflicted him, he had been hopeless. 
17|84| Say: Each does according to his same manner. And thy Lord is greater in knowledge of him who is better guided on the way. 
17|85| And they will ask thee about the spirit. Say: The spirit is of the command of my Lord. And you were not given the knowledge but a little. 
17|86| And if We willed, We would, certainly, take away what We revealed to thee. Again, thou wouldst not find for thee in that any trustee against Us, 
17|87| but a mercy from thy Lord. Truly, His grace had been great upon thee. 
17|88| Say: If humankind were gathered together and jinn to bring the like of this Quran, they would not approach the like of it even if some of them had been sustainers of some others. 
17|89| And, certainly, We diversified for humanity in this, the Quran, every kind of parable, but most of humanity refused all but disbelief. 
17|90| And they would say: We will never believe in thee until thou hast a fountain gush out of the earth for us. 
17|91| Or will there be a garden for thee of date palms and grapevines and Thou hast caused rivers to gush forth in its midst with a gushing forth? 
17|92| Or hast thou caused heaven to drop on us in pieces as thou hadst claimed? Or hast thou brought God and the angels as a warranty? 
17|93| Or is there a house of ornament for thee? Or hast thou ascended up into heaven? And we will not believe in thy ascension until thou hast sent down for us a Book that we recite. Say: Glory be to my Lord! Had I been but a mortal Messenger? 
17|94| And nothing prevented humanity from believing when the guidance drew near them, but that they said: Raised God up a mortal as a Messenger? 
17|95| Say: If there had been angels on earth walking around, ones who are at peace, then, We would certainly have sent down for them from heaven an angel as a Messenger. 
17|96| Say: God sufficed as a Witness between me and between you. Truly, He had been of His servants Aware, Seeing. 
17|97| And he whom God guides is one who is truly guided. And whomever He causes to go astray, thou wilt never find for them protectors other than Him. And We will assemble them on the Day of Resurrection on their faces, unseeing and unspeaking and unhearing. Their place of shelter will be hell. Whenever it declined, We will increase the blaze for them. 
17|98| That is their recompense because they were ungrateful for Our signs. And they said: When we had been bones and broken bits, will we be ones who are raised up as a new creation? 
17|99| Consider they not God Who created the heavens and the earth is One Who Has Power to create the like of them? And He assigned a term for them whereof there is no doubt in it, but the ones who are unjust refused all but disbelief. 
17|100| Say: If you possessed the treasures of the mercy of my Lord, then, you would hold back for dread of spending. And the human being had been ever stingy. 
17|101| And, certainly, We gave Moses nine signs, clear portents. Then, ask the Children of Israel when he drew near them. Then Pharaoh said to him: Truly, O Moses, I think that thou art one who is bewitched. 
17|102| He said: Certainly, thou knewest no one caused these to descend but the Lord of the heavens and the earth as clear evidence. And, truly, O Pharaoh, I think that thou be one who is accursed. 
17|103| So he wanted to hound them in the region, but We drowned him and those who were with him altogether. 
17|104| And We said to the Children of Israel after him: Inhabit the region. So when drew near the promise of the world to come, We will bring you about a mixed group. 
17|105| And We caused it to descend with The Truth. And it came down with the Truth. And We sent it not to thee, but as one who gives good tidings and as a warner. 
17|106| And it is a Recitation. We separated it in order that thou recitest it to humanity at intervals. And We sent it down a sending successively down. 
17|107| Say: Believe in it, or believe not. Truly, those who were given the knowledge before it, when it is recounted to them, they fall down on their visages, ones who prostrate. 
17|108| And they say: Glory be to our Lord! Truly, the promise of our Lord had been one that is accomplished. 
17|109| And they fall down on their visage weeping. And it increases them in humility.‡ 
17|110| Say: Call to God or call to the Merciful. By whatever you call Him, to Him are the Fairer Names. And be thou not loud in thy formal prayer nor speak in a low tone and look for a way between. 
17|111| And say: The Praise belongs to God Who takes not a son to Himself and there be no associates ascribed with Him in the dominion nor there be for Him need for a protector from humility. And magnify Him a magnification! 
18|1| The Praise belongs to God Who caused the Book to descend to His servant and makes not for it any crookedness, 
18|2| truth-loving, to warn of severe violence from that which proceeds from His Presence and to give good tidings to the ones who believe, those who do as the ones in accord with morality, that they will have a fairer compensation, 
18|3| ones who will abide in it eternally 
18|4| and to warn those who said: God took to Himself a son. 
18|5| They have no knowledge about it, nor had their fathers. Troublesome is a word that goes forth from their mouths. And they say nothing but a lie 
18|6| so that perhaps thou wilt be one who consumes thyself with grief for their sake if they believe not in this discourse out of bitterness. 
18|7| Truly, We assigned whatever is in and on the earth as adornment for it so that We try them with it as to which of them are fairer in actions. 
18|8| And, truly, We are ones who make whatever is on it, barren dust, dry earth. 
18|9| Hast thou assumed that the Companions of the Cave and the Bearers of Inscription had been a wonder among Our signs? 
18|10| And when the spiritual warriors took shelter in the Cave, then, they said: Our Lord! Give us mercy from Thy Presence and furnish us with right mindedness in our affair. 
18|11| So We sealed their ears in the Cave for a number of years. 
18|12| Again, We raised them up so that We might know which of the two confederates was better in calculating the space of time they lingered in expectation. 
18|13| We relate this tiding to thee with The Truth. Truly, they were male spiritual warriors who believed in their Lord and We increased them in guidance. 
18|14| And We invigorated their hearts when they stood up and said: Our Lord is Lord of the heavens and the earth. We will never call to any god other than He. Certainly, we would have said an outrageous thing. 
18|15| These, our folk, took to themselves gods other than Him. Why bring they not a clear portent of authority with them? And who does greater wrong than he who devised a lie against God? 
18|16| And when you withdrew from them and from what they worship but God, then, take shelter in the cave. Your Lord will unfold for you from His mercy and will furnish you with a gentle issue in your affair. 
18|17| Thou wouldst have seen the sun when it came up. It inclines from their cave towards the right and when it began to set, it passed them towards the left while they were in a fissure. That is of the signs of God. He whom God guides, he is one who is truly guided. And he whom He causes to go astray, thou wilt never find for him a protector or one who will show him the way. 
18|18| Thou wouldst assume them to be awake while they are ones who are sleeping. We turn them around and around towards the right and towards the left and their dog, one who stretches out its paws at the threshold. And if thou wert to peruse them, thou wouldst have turned from them, running away, and wouldst, certainly, be filled with alarm of them. 
18|19| And, thus, it was that We raised them up that they might demand of one another. Said one who speaks among them: How long lingered you in expectation? They said: We lingered in expectation a day or a part of a day. They said: Your Lord is greater in knowledge of how long you lingered in expectation. So raise up one of you and with this, your money, send him to the city and let him look on which is the purest food. Then, let him bring you provision from there. And let him be courteous and cause not anyone to realize. 
18|20| Truly, if you become manifest to them, they will stone you, or they will cause you to return to their creed and you would not ever prosper. 
18|21| And, thus, We made their case known that they know that the promise of God is true and that, as for the Hour, there is no doubt about it. Mention when they contend with one another about their affair. They said: Build over them a structure. Their Lord is greater in knowledge about them. Those who prevailed over their affair said: We, certainly, will take to ourselves over them a place of prostration. 
18|22| They will say: They were three, the fourth of them being their dog. And they will say: They were five, the sixth of them being their dog, guessing at the unseen. And they will say: They were seven, the eighth of them being their dog. Say: My Lord is greater in knowledge of their amount. No one knows them but a few, so altercate not about them but with a manifest argumentation and ask not for advice about them of anyone of them. 
18|23| And, surely, he will not say about something: Truly, I will be one who does that tomorrow, 
18|24| but that you add: If God wills. And remember thy Lord when thou hadst forgotten. And say: Perhaps my Lord will guide me nearer to right mindedness than this. 
18|25| And they lingered in expectation in their cave three hundred years, and they added nine. 
18|26| Say: God is greater in knowledge of how long they lingered in expectation. And to Him belongs the unseen of the heavens and the earth. How well He perceives and how well He hears! Other than him, they have no protector and He ascribes no one partners in His determination. 
18|27| And recount what was revealed to thee from the Book of Thy Lord. There is no one who changes His Words. And thou wilt never find other than Him, that which is a haven. 
18|28| And have thou patience thyself with those who call to their Lord in the morning and the evening, wanting His Countenance. And let not thy eyes pass over them wanting the adornment of this present life. And obey not him whose heart We made neglectful of Our Remembrance and who followed his own desires and whose affair had been excess. 
18|29| And say: The Truth is from your Lord. Then, let whoever willed, believe, and let whoever willed, disbelieve. Truly, We made ready a fire for the ones who are unjust. They will be enclosed by its large tent. And if they cry for help, they will be helped with rain, water like molten copper that will scald their faces. Miserable was the drink and how evil a place of rest! 
18|30| Truly, those who believed and did as the ones in accord with morality, truly, We will not waste the compensation of him who did good actions. 
18|31| Those, for them are Gardens of Eden beneath which rivers run. They will be adorned in them with bracelets of gold and they will wear green garments of fine silk and brocade. They will be ones who are reclining in it on raised benches. Excellent is the reward for good deeds and how excellent a place of rest! 
18|32| And propound to them the parable of two men: We assigned to one of them two gardens of grapevines and We encircled them with date palm trees and We made crops between them. 
18|33| Both the gardens gave their produce and fail nothing at all. We caused a river to gush forth in the midst of them. 
18|34| And there had been fruit for him. Then, he said to his companion while he converses with him: I have more wealth than thee and am mightier than a group of men or jinn. 
18|35| And he entered his garden while he is one who is unjust to himself. He said: I think that this will not be destroyed ever. 
18|36| And I think that the Hour will not be one that arises. And if I would be returned to my Lord, I would, surely, find better than this as an overturning. 
18|37| And his companion said to him while he converses with him: Wert thou ungrateful to Him Who created thee out of earth dust, again, out of seminal fluid and, again, shaped thee into a man? 
18|38| Certainly, He is God, my Lord, and I will not ascribe partners with my Lord anyone. 
18|39| Would that when thou hadst entered thy garden thou hadst said: What God willed! There is no strength but with God! If thou hast seen I am less than you in wealth and children. 
18|40| Then, perhaps my Lord will give me better than thy garden and will send on it a thunderclap from heaven. And it will come to be in the morning a place of slippery earth. 
18|41| Or it will come to be in the morning that its water will be sinking into the ground so that thou wilt never be able to seek it out. 
18|42| And its fruit was enclosed. It came to be in the morning he turns around and around the palms of his hands in wretchedness for what he spent on it while it was one that has fallen down in ruins. And he says: Would that I not ascribe partners with my Lord anyone! 
18|43| And there is no faction to help him other than God. And he had been one who is helpless. 
18|44| All protection there belongs to God, The Truth. He is Best in rewarding for good deeds and Best in consequence. 
18|45| And propound for them the parable of this present life: It is like water that We caused to descend from heaven. Then, plants of the earth mingled with it and it becomes straw in the morning that winnows in the winds. And God had been over everything One Who is Omnipotent. 
18|46| Wealth and children are the adornment of this present life. But that which endures are ones in accord with morality. These are better with thy Lord in reward for good deeds and better for hopefulness. 
18|47| And on a Day We will set in motion the mountains and thou wilt see the earth as that which will depart. And We will assemble them and not leave out anyone of them. 
18|48| And they were presented before thy Lord ranged in rows. Certainly, you drew near Us as We created you the first time. Nay! You claimed that We never assign for you something that is promised. 
18|49| And the Book was set in place and thou wilt see the ones who sin being ones who are apprehensive as to what is in it. And they will say: Woe to us! What is this Book? It neither leaves out anything small or great, but counted everything. They will find present what their hands had done. And thy Lord does not wrong anyone. 
18|50| And mention when We said to the angels: Prostrate yourselves to Adam! So they prostrated themselves but Iblis. He had been among the jinn and he disobeyed the command of His Lord. Will you, then, take him to yourselves and his offspring to be protectors other than Me while they are an enemy to you? Miserable was it to give in place ones who are unjust! 
18|51| I called them not to witness the creation of the heavens and the earth nor to their own creation of themselves nor took I to myself the ones who are led astray as assistants. 
18|52| And on a Day when He will say: Cry out to My associates, those who you claimed. Then, they will call out to them, but they will not respond to them and We will make a gulf of doom between them. 
18|53| And the unjust will see the ones who sin in the fire. They thought that they are ones who are about to fall in it and they will not find a place to turn from it. 
18|54| And, certainly, We diversified in this, the Quran, every kind of example for humanity. And the human being had been more than anything argumentative. 
18|55| Nothing prevented humanity from believing when the guidance drew near to them or from asking forgiveness of their Lord, but that approaches them a custom of the ancient ones or approaches them the punishment face to face. 
18|56| We send not the ones who are sent, but as ones who give good tidings and as ones who warn. And those who were ungrateful dispute with falsehood in order to refute The Truth by it. And they took My signs to themselves—and what they were warned of—in mockery. 
18|57| And who does greater wrong than he who was reminded of the signs of his Lord, then, turned aside from them and forgot what his hands put forward? Truly, We laid sheathes on their hearts so that they should not understand it and heaviness in their ears. And if thou hast called them to the guidance, yet they will not be truly guided ever. 
18|58| And thy Lord is Forgiving, Possessor of Mercy. If He were to take them to task for what they earned, He will quicken the punishment for them. But for them is what they are promised, from which they will never find a way to elude it. 
18|59| And these towns, We caused them to perish when they did wrong and We assigned for their destruction what is promised. 
18|60| Mention when Moses said to his spiritual warrior: I will not quit until I reach the place of meeting of the two seas even if I will go on for many years. 
18|61| But when they reached the place of the meeting between them, then, they both forgot their great fish and it took to itself a way through the sea, burrowing. 
18|62| Then, when they crossed, he said to his spiritual warrior: Give us our breakfast. Certainly, we met fatigue from our journey. 
18|63| He said: Hadst thou considered? When we took shelter at the rock, truly, I forgot the great fish. And none but Satan caused me to forget to remember it. And it took to itself to a way into the sea in a wondrous way. 
18|64| He said: That is what we had been looking for! So they went back following their footsteps. 
18|65| Then, they found a servant among Our servants to whom We gave mercy from Us and We taught him knowledge which proceeds from Our Presence. 
18|66| Moses said to him: May I follow thee so that thou wilt teach me something of what thou wert taught of right judgment? 
18|67| He said: Truly, thou wilt never be able to have patience with me. 
18|68| And how wilt thou endure a thing patiently when thou hast not comprehended any awareness of it? 
18|69| Moses said: Thou wilt find me, if God willed, one who remains steadfast and I will not rebel against thy command. 
18|70| He said: Then, if thou hadst followed me, ask me not about anything until I cause to be evoked in thee a remembrance of it. 
18|71| So they both set out until when they embarked in a vessel. He made a hole in it. Moses said: Hadst thou made a hole in it in order to drown the people? Certainly, thou hadst brought about a dreadful thing! 
18|72| He said: Said I not that thou wilt never be able to have patience with me? 
18|73| Moses said: Take me not to task for what I forgot and constrain me not with hardship for my affair. 
18|74| Then, they both set out until when they met a boy; then, he killed him. Moses said: Hadst thou killed a pure soul without his having slain a soul? Certainly, thou hadst brought about a horrible thing! 
18|75| He said: Said I not that thou wilt never be able to have patience with me? 
18|76| Moses said: If I asked thee about anything after this, then, keep not company with me, surely, thou hadst reached enough of excusing from my presence! 
18|77| Then, they both set out until when they approached a people of a town. They asked its people for food. But they refused to receive them as guests. Then, they found in it a wall that wants to tumble down, so he repaired it. Moses said: If thou hadst willed, certainly, thou wouldst have taken compensation to thyself for it. 
18|78| He said: This is the parting between me and between thee! I will tell thee the interpretation of what thou wert not able to have patience for it. 
18|79| As for the vessel, it had been of some needy people who toil in the sea, so I wanted to mar it as there had been a king behind them taking every vessel forcefully. 
18|80| And as for the boy, both his parents had been ones who believe, and we dreaded that he should constrain them with defiance and ingratitude, 
18|81| so we wanted their Lord to cause for them in exchange one better than he in purity and nearer in sympathy. 
18|82| As for the wall, it had been that of two orphan boys in the city and beneath it had been a treasure for them. The father of both of them had been one in accord with morality so thy Lord wanted they be fully grown, having come of age, and pull out their treasure as a mercy from thy Lord. And I accomplished that not of my own command. This is the interpretation of what thou wert not able to have patience for it. 
18|83| And they will ask thee about Dhu-l Qarnayn. Say: I will recount to you a remembrance of him. 
18|84| Truly, We established him firmly on the earth and gave him a route to everything. 
18|85| So he pursued a route 
18|86| until when he reached the setting of the sun. He found it beginning to set in a spring of muddy water. And he found near it a folk. We said: O Dhu-l Qarnayn! Either thou wilt punish them or thou wilt take them to thyself with goodness. 
18|87| He said: As for him who did wrong, we will punish him. Again, he will be returned to his Lord Who will punish him with a horrible punishment. 
18|88| But as for him who believed and did as one in accord with morality, he will have the fairer recompense. And we will say to him of our command with ease. 
18|89| Again, he pursued a route 
18|90| until when he reached the rising place of the sun. He found it coming up on a folk for whom We make not any obstruction against it. 
18|91| Thus, We, surely, enclosed whatever was near him through awareness. 
18|92| Again, he pursued a route 
18|93| until when he reached between two embankments. He found behind them a folk who would almost not understand any saying. 
18|94| They said: O Dhu-l Qarnayn! Truly, Gog and Magog are ones who make corruption in and on the earth. Will we assign to thee payment if thou hast made an embankment between us and between them? 
18|95| He said: What my Lord established firmly for me is better, so assist me with strength. I will make a fortification between you and between them. 
18|96| Give me ingots of iron, until when he made level between the two cliffs. He said: Blow, until when he made it a fire. He said: Give me molten brass to pour out over it. 
18|97| So they were not able to scale it nor were they able to dig through it. 
18|98| He said: This is a mercy from my Lord. So when the promise of my Lord drew near, He will made it powder. And the promise of my Lord had been true. 
18|99| And that Day We will leave some of them to surge like waves on some others. And the trumpet will be blown, then, We will gather them altogether. 
18|100| We will present the depths of hell on that Day in plain view to ones who are ungrateful, 
18|101| to those whose eyes had been screened from My Remembrance and who had not been able to hear. 
18|102| Assumed ones who were ungrateful that they take My servants to themselves as protectors instead of Me? Truly, We made hell ready with hospitality for ones who are ungrateful. 
18|103| Say: Shall We tell you who will be ones who are losers by their actions? 
18|104| It is those whose endeavoring went astray in this present life while they assume that they are doing good by their handiwork. 
18|105| Those were those who were ungrateful for the signs of their Lord and the meeting with Him so their actions were fruitless. And so We will not perform for them on the Day of Resurrection, any weighing. 
18|106| That will be their recompense—hell—because they were ungrateful and took to themselves My signs and My Messengers in mockery. 
18|107| Truly, those who believed and did as ones in accord with morality, their hospitality had been in the Gardens of Paradise, 
18|108| ones who will dwell in them forever. They will have no desire for relocation from there. 
18|109| Say: If the sea had been ink for the Words of my Lord, the sea would come to an end before the Words of my Lord came to an end even if We brought about replenishment the like of it. 
18|110| Say: I am only a mortal like you. It is revealed to me that your God is One, so whoever had been hoping for the meeting with his Lord, let him do with his actions as one in accord with morality and ascribe no partners—in the worship of his Lord, ever. 
19|1| K[f H[ Y[ <A  @[d. 
19|2| A remembrance of the mercy of thy Lord to His servant Zechariah 
19|3| when he cried out to his Lord, secretively crying out. 
19|4| He said: My Lord! Truly, I—my bones became feeble and my head became studded with grayness of hair and I be not disappointed in my supplication to Thee, O my Lord. 
19|5| And, truly, I feared for my defenders after me. And my woman had been a barren woman. So bestow on me from that which proceeds from Thy Presence a protector. 
19|6| He will inherit from me and inherit from the family of Jacob. And make him, my Lord, pleasing. 
19|7| O Zechariah! Truly, We give thee the good tidings of a boy. His name will be Yahya and We assigned it not as a namesake for anyone before. 
19|8| He said: My Lord! How will I have a boy while my woman had been a barren woman and, surely, I reached an advanced old age? 
19|9| He said: It is about to be! Thy Lord said: It is insignificant for Me and, surely, I created thee before when thou wast nothing. 
19|10| Zechariah said: My Lord! Assign for me a sign. He said: Thy sign is that thou wilt not speak to humanity for three nights, although being without fault. 
19|11| So he went forth to his folk from the sanctuary. Then, he revealed to them: Glorify in the early morning dawn and evening. 
19|12| O Yahya! Take the Book with strength. And We gave him critical judgment while a lad, 
19|13| and Our continuous mercy from that which proceeds from Our Presence and purity and he had been devout 
19|14| and pious to ones who are his parents and be not haughty nor rebellious. 
19|15| And peace be on him the day on which he was given birth and the day he dies and the day he is raised up, living. 
19|16| And remember Mary in the Book when she went apart from her people to an eastern place. 
19|17| Then, she took to herself a partition away from them, so We sent Our Spirit to her and he presented himself before her as a mortal without fault. 
19|18| She said: Truly, I take refuge in The Merciful from thee; come not near me if thou hadst been devout. 
19|19| He said: I am only a messenger from thy Lord that I bestow on thee (f) a pure boy. 
19|20| She said: How will I have a boy when no mortal touches me, nor am I an unchaste woman? 
19|21| He said: Thus, it will be. Thy Lord said: It is for Me insignificant. And: We will assign him as a sign for humanity and as a mercy from Us. And it had been that which is a decreed command. 
19|22| So she conceived him and she went apart with him to a farther place. 
19|23| And the birth pangs surprised her at the trunk of a date palm tree. She said: O would that I had died before this and I had been one who is forgotten, a forgotten thing! 
19|24| So he cried out to her from beneath her: Feel not remorse! Surely, thy Lord made under thee (f) a brook. 
19|25| And shake towards thee (f) the trunk of the date palm tree. It will cause ripe, fresh dates to fall on thee. 
19|26| So eat and drink and thy eyes be refreshed. If thou hast seen any mortal, say: I vowed formal fasting to The Merciful so I will never speak to any human being this day. 
19|27| Then, she approached her folk with him, carrying him. They said: O Mary! Surely, thou hadst drawn near a monstrous thing! 
19|28| O sister of Aaron! Thy father had not been a reprehensible man nor was thy mother an unchaste woman. 
19|29| Then, she pointed to him. They said: How speak we to one who had been in the cradle, a lad? 
19|30| Jesus said: Truly, I am a servant of God. He gave me the Book and He made me a Prophet. 
19|31| And He made me one who is blessed wherever I had been and He bequeathed to me the formal prayer and the purifying alms as long as I continue living, 
19|32| and He makes me pious toward one who is my mother and He makes me not haughty nor disappointed. 
19|33| And peace be on me the day I was given birth and the day I die and the day I am raised up, living. 
19|34| That is Jesus son of Mary, a saying of The Truth. They contest what is in it. 
19|35| It had not been for God that He takes to Himself a son. Glory be to Him! When He decreed a command, He not but says to it: Be! Then, it is! 
19|36| And, truly, God is my Lord and your Lord, so worship Him. This is a straight path. 
19|37| There was variance among the confederates, so woe to those who were ungrateful from the scene of a tremendous Day! 
19|38| Hear well and perceive well. On that Day they will approach Us, but today the ones who are unjust are in a clear wandering astray! 
19|39| And warn thou them of the Day of Regret when the command would be decided. Yet they are heedless and they believe not. 
19|40| Truly, We will inherit the earth and whatever is in and on it and to Us they will be returned. 
19|41| And remember Abraham in the Book. Truly, he had been a just person, a Prophet. 
19|42| That is when he said to his father: O my father! Why wilt thou worship what hears not, and perceives not, and avails thee not anything? 
19|43| O my father! Truly, I, there drew near me of the knowledge of what approaches thee not. So follow me and I will guide thee to a path without fault. 
19|44| O my father! Worship not Satan. Truly, Satan had been rebellious towards The Merciful! 
19|45| O my father! Truly, I fear that a punishment should afflict thee from The Merciful so that thou become a protector of Satan. 
19|46| He said: Art thou one who shrinks from my gods, O Abraham? If thou wilt not refrain thyself, certainly, I will stone thee, so abandon me for some while. 
19|47| He said: Peace be to thee. I will ask for forgiveness from my Lord for thee. Truly, He had been One Who is Gracious to me. 
19|48| And I will withdraw from you and what you call to other than God and I will call to my Lord. Perhaps I will not be disappointed in my supplication to my Lord. 
19|49| So he withdrew from them and what they worship other than God. And We bestowed on him Isaac and Jacob. And each of them We made a Prophet. 
19|50| And We bestowed on them from Our mercy and We assigned them the tongue of lofty sincerity. 
19|51| And remember Moses in the Book. Truly, he had been one who was devoted and he had been a Messenger, a Prophet. 
19|52| And We proclaimed to him from the right edge of the mount and We brought him near privately. 
19|53| And We bestowed on him out of Our mercy his brother Aaron, a Prophet. 
19|54| And remember Ishmael in the Book. Truly, he had been one who is sincere in his promise, and he had been a Messenger, a Prophet. 
19|55| He had been commanding his people to formal prayer and the purifying alms and he had been with His Lord one who is well-pleasing. 
19|56| And remember Enoch in the Book. Truly, he had been a just person, a Prophet. 
19|57| And We exalted him to a lofty place. 
19|58| Those are those to whom God was gracious from among the Prophets of the offspring of Adam and whomever We carried with Noah and of the offspring of Abraham and Israel, Jacob, from among whomever We guided and elected. When are recounted to them the signs of the Merciful they fell down, crying, ones who prostrate themselves.‡ 
19|59| Then, after them succeeded a succession who wasted the formal prayer and followed their lusts. So they will meet error, 
19|60| but the ones who repented and believed and did as ones in accord with morality. For those will enter the Garden and they will not be wronged at all, 
19|61| Gardens of Eden which The Merciful promised His servants in the unseen. Truly, He, His promise had been that which is kept. 
19|62| They will not hear in them idle talk, nothing but: Peace. And they will have their provision in them in the early morning dawn and evening. 
19|63| This is the Garden which We will give as inheritance to whomever of Our servants who had been devout. 
19|64| And we come forth not but by the command of thy Lord. To Him belongs whatever is in advance of us and whatever is behind us and whatever is in between that. And thy Lord had not been forgetful, 
19|65| the Lord of the heavens and the earth, and what is between them! So worship Him and maintain thou patience in His worship. Hast thou known any namesake for Him? 
19|66| And the human being says: When I am dead, will I be brought out living? 
19|67| Will the human being not remember that We created him before when he be of nothing? 
19|68| So by thy Lord, certainly, We will assemble them and the satans. Again, We will parade them around hell, ones who crawl on their knees. 
19|69| Again, We will tear out every partisan, whoever of them was more severe in stubborn rebellion against The Merciful. 
19|70| After that We are greater in knowledge of those, they who are most deserving of roasting in it. 
19|71| There is none of you, but ones who go down to it. This had been a thing decreed, that decreed by thy Lord. 
19|72| Again, We will deliver those who were Godfearing and We will forsake the ones who are unjust, in it, ones who crawl on their knees. 
19|73| And when are recounted to them Our signs, clear portents, those who were ungrateful would say to those who believed: Which of the two groups of people is best in station and fairer in alliance? 
19|74| How many before them We caused to perish whose generation was fairer in furnishing and outward show? 
19|75| Say: Whoever had been in fallacy, The Merciful will prolong his prolonging for him. Until when they would see what they are promised, either the punishment or the Hour, then, they will know whose place is worse and whose army is weak. 
19|76| And God increases in guidance those who were truly guided and endure in accord with morality. They are better with thy Lord in reward for good deeds and better for turning back. 
19|77| Hadst thou seen him who was ungrateful for Our signs, who said: Will I be given wealth and children? 
19|78| Perused he the unseen or took he to himself a compact from The Merciful? 
19|79| No indeed! We will write down what he says. We will cause the punishment to increase for him, prolonging it. 
19|80| And We will inherit from him all that he says and he will approach Us individually. 
19|81| And they took to themselves gods other than God that there be a triumph for them. 
19|82| No indeed! They will disbelieve in what they worship and they will be taking a stand against them. 
19|83| Hast thou not considered that We sent the satans against the ones who were ungrateful to confound them with confusion? 
19|84| So hasten thou not against them. We only number for them a sum. 
19|85| On the Day We will assemble the ones who are Godfearing to The Merciful like an entourage. 
19|86| And We will drive the ones who sin to hell, herding them. 
19|87| None of them will possess the power of intercession but such a one who took to himself a compact with The Merciful. 
19|88| And they said: The Merciful took to Himself a son! 
19|89| Certainly, you brought about a disastrous thing 
19|90| whereby the heavens are almost split asunder and the earth is split and the mountains fall crashing down 
19|91| that they attributed a son to The Merciful. 
19|92| It is not fit and proper for The Merciful that He should take a son to Himself! 
19|93| There is none at all in the heavens and the earth but he be one who arrives to The Merciful as a servant. 
19|94| Certainly, He counted for them and numbered up a sum! 
19|95| And every one of them will be ones who arrive to Him individually on the Day of Resurrection. 
19|96| Truly, those who believed and did as the ones in accord with morality, The Merciful will assign ardor for them. 
19|97| So, truly, We made this easy on thy tongue. Certainly, thou wilt give good tidings with it to the ones who are Godfearing and thou wilt warn a most stubborn folk with it. 
19|98| How many a generation caused We to perish before them? Art thou conscious of anyone of them or hear you so much as a whisper from them? 
20|1| ^[ H[. 
20|2| We caused not the Quran to descend to thee that thee be in despair, 
20|3| but as an admonition to him who dreads 
20|4| a sending down successively from Him Who created the earth and the lofty heavens. 
20|5| The Merciful turned His attention to the Throne. 
20|6| To Him belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth and whatever is between them and whatever is beneath the soil. 
20|7| And if thou art to publish a saying, yet, truly, He knows the secret and what is more secret. 
20|8| God, there is no god but He. To Him belongs the Fairer Names. 
20|9| Has the conversation of Moses approached thee? 
20|10| When he saw a fire, he said to his people: Abide! Truly, I observed a fire so that perhaps I will bring you some firebrand from it or I find guidance at the fire. 
20|11| When he approached it, it was proclaimed: O Moses! 
20|12| Truly, I—I am thy Lord! So take off thy shoes; truly, thou art one who is in the sanctified valley of Tuwa. 
20|13| And I chose thee so listen to what is revealed: 
20|14| Truly, I—I am God. There is no god but Me. So worship Me and perform the formal prayer of My Remembrance. 
20|15| Truly, the Hour is that which arrives. I am about to conceal it so that every soul is given recompense for what it endeavors. 
20|16| So let none bar thee from it—whoever believes not in it and followed his own desires—so that thee not survive. 
20|17| And what is that in thy right hand O Moses? 
20|18| Moses said: This is my staff. I lean on it, and beat down leaves from a tree with it for my herd of sheep and for me in it are other uses. 
20|19| He said: Cast it, O Moses! 
20|20| So he cast it. That is when it was a viper sliding. 
20|21| He said: Take it and fear not. We will cause it to return to its first state. 
20|22| And clasp thy hand to thy armpit. It will go forth shimmering white without any evil as another sign 
20|23| that We cause thee to see of Our greater signs. 
20|24| Go thou to Pharaoh! Truly, he was defiant. 
20|25| Moses said: My Lord! 
20|26| Expand my breast for me and make Thou my affair easy for me 
20|27| and untie the knot from my tongue 
20|28| so they understand my saying 
20|29| and assign to me a minister from my people— 
20|30| —Aaron, my brother. 
20|31| Strengthen my vigor with him 
20|32| and ascribe him as a partner in my affair 
20|33| that we glorify Thee much 
20|34| and we remember Thee frequently. 
20|35| Truly, Thou, Thou alone hadst been seeing of us. 
20|36| He said: Surely, thou wert given thy petition, O Moses! 
20|37| Certainly, We showed grace on thee another time 
20|38| when We revealed to thy mother what is revealed: 
20|39| Cast him adrift in the ark. Then, cast it adrift into the water of the sea. Then, the water of the sea will cast him up on the bank and he will be taken by an enemy of Mine and an enemy of his. And I cast on thee fondness from Me that thou be trained under My Eye. 
20|40| Mention when thy sister walks saying: Shall I point you to one who will take control of him? So We returned thee to thy mother that her eyes settle down and she not feel remorse. And thou hast killed a soul, but We delivered thee from lament and We tried thee with an ordeal. Then, thou hadst lingered in expectation years among the people of Midian. Again, thou hadst drawn near according to a measure, O Moses! 
20|41| And I chose thee for service for Myself. 
20|42| Go thou and thy brother with My signs and you both not be inattentive in My Remembrance. 
20|43| So go both of you to Pharaoh. Truly, he had become defiant. 
20|44| And both say to him a saying gently, so that perhaps he will recollect or dread. 
20|45| They both said: Our Lord! Truly, we fear that he should exceed against us or that he be defiant. 
20|46| He said: Fear not. Truly, I am with both of you. I hear and I see. 
20|47| So approach you both to him and say: Truly, we are Messengers of thy Lord. So send the Children of Israel with us and punish them not. Surely, we drew near thee with a sign from thy Lord. And peace be to him who followed the guidance. 
20|48| Surely, it was revealed to us that the punishment is on him who denied and turned away. 
20|49| He said: Then, who is the Lord of you two, O Moses? 
20|50| He said: Our Lord is He Who gave everything its creation; again, He guided it. 
20|51| Pharaoh said: Then, what of the first generations? 
20|52| Moses said: The knowledge of them is with my Lord in a Book. My Lord neither goes astray nor forgets. 
20|53| He it is Who assigned for you the earth as a cradle and threaded ways for you in it and caused water to descend from heaven. And We brought out from it diverse pairs of plants: 
20|54| Eat and give attention to your flocks. Truly, in this are signs for the people imbued with sense. 
20|55| We created you from it and into it We will cause you to return and from it We will bring you out another time. 
20|56| And, certainly, We caused Pharaoh to see Our signs—all of them—but he denied and refused. 
20|57| He said: Hast thou drawn near us to drive us out of our region with thy sorcery, O Moses? 
20|58| Then, truly, we will bring for thee sorcery like it. So make something that is promised between us and thee—neither we nor thou will break it—at a mutually agreeable place. 
20|59| Moses said: That promised will be for the Day of Adornment and let humanity be assembled in the forenoon. 
20|60| So Pharaoh turned away. Then, he gathered his cunning. After that he approached. 
20|61| Moses said to them: Woe to you! Devise you not a lie against God so that He put an end to you with a punishment. And, surely, he who devised will be frustrated. 
20|62| So they contended between each other about their affair and they kept secret, conspiring secretly. 
20|63| They said: Truly, these two are the ones who are sorcerers who want to drive you out from your region with their sorcery and take away your most ideal behavior. 
20|64| So summon up your cunning. Again, approach ranged in rows. And, truly, he who prospered this day is whoever gained the upper hand. 
20|65| They said: O Moses! Either thou wilt cast or let us be the first to cast. 
20|66| He said: Nay! You cast. That is when their ropes and their staffs seem to him to be, by their sorcery, as though they are sliding. 
20|67| So Moses sensed awe in himself. 
20|68| We said: Fear not! Truly, thou, thou art lofty! 
20|69| And cast what is in thy right hand. It will swallow what they crafted. What they crafted is not but the cunning of one who is a sorcerer. And the one who is a sorcerer will not prosper in whatever he approached. 
20|70| Then, the ones who are sorcerers were cast down, ones who prostrate themselves. They said: We believed in the Lord of Aaron and Moses. 
20|71| Pharaoh said: Believed you in Him before I give you permission? Truly, he is your teacher who taught you the sorcery. So, certainly, I will cut off your hands and your feet on opposite sides and, certainly, I will cause you to be crucified on the trunks of date palm trees, and, certainly, you will know which of us is more severe in punishment and one who endures. 
20|72| They said: We will never hold thee in greater favor over the clear portents that drew near us nor over Who originated us. So decide whatever thou wilt as one who decides. Thou wilt decide not but about this present life. 
20|73| For us, truly, we believed in our Lord that He forgive us our transgressions and what thou hadst compelled us to do because of the sorcery. And God is Best of one who endures. 
20|74| Truly, whoever approaches his Lord as one who sins, then, truly, for him is hell. Neither will he die in it nor will he live. 
20|75| And whoever approaches Him as one who believes, who, surely, did as the one in accord with morality, then, for those, they are of lofty degrees, 
20|76| Gardens of Eden, beneath which rivers run, ones who will dwell in them forever. And that is the recompense of whoever purified himself. 
20|77| And, certainly, We revealed to Moses that set thou forth with My servants. Then, strike for them a dry road in the sea, neither fearing to be overtaken, nor dreading that. 
20|78| Then, Pharaoh and his army pursued them. Then, overcame them the water of the sea by what overcame. 
20|79| And Pharaoh caused his folk to go astray and he guided them not. 
20|80| O Children of Israel! Surely, We rescued you from your enemy and We appointed someone with you on the right edge of the mount and We sent down to you the manna and the quails. 
20|81| Eat from what is good that We provided you, and be not defiant in it so that My anger not alight on you. And he on whom My anger alights surely, will be hurled to ruin. 
20|82| And, truly, I am a Forgiver of whoever repented and believed and did as one in accord with morality. Again, he was truly guided. 
20|83| And what caused thee to hasten from thy folk, O Moses? 
20|84| Moses said: They are those who are close on my footsteps and I hastened to Thee, my Lord that I please thee. 
20|85| He said: Then, truly, We tried thy folk after thee and the Samaritan caused them to go astray. 
20|86| Then, Moses returned to his folk enraged, grieved. He said: O my folk! Promise you not with your Lord a fairer promise? Was the compact too long for you to wait? Or wanted you that the anger of your Lord alight on you, so you broke what you were to have promised me? 
20|87| They said: We broke not what was promised to thee from what is within our power, but we were charged with a heavy load of the adornments of the folk. Surely, we hurled them because the Samaritan cast. 
20|88| Then, he brought out for them a calf, a lifeless body that had the lowing sound of flocks. Then, they said: This is your god and the God of Moses whom he forgot. 
20|89| Then, see they not that it returns not to them a saying and it possesses for them neither hurt nor profit? 
20|90| And, certainly, Aaron said to them before: O my folk! You were only tempted by it. And, truly, your Lord is The Merciful. So follow me and obey my command. 
20|91| They said: We will never quit it as ones who give ourselves up until Moses returns to us. 
20|92| He said: O Aaron! What prevented thee when thou hadst seen them going astray 
20|93| that thou hast followed me not? Hast thou, then, rebelled against my command? 
20|94| Aaron said: O son of my mother! Take me not by my beard nor by my head. Truly, I dreaded that thou hast said: Thou hadst separated and divided between the Children of Israel and thou hast not regarded my saying. 
20|95| Moses said: Then, what is thy business O Samaritan? 
20|96| He said: I kept watch over what they keep not watch, so I seized a handful of dust from the foot prints of the Messenger and cast it forth. And thus my soul enticed me. 
20|97| Moses said: Then go off! Truly for thee in this life is that thou mayest say: Untouchable; there is for thee something promised that thou shalt never break; and look on thy god that thou hast stayed with and given thyself up to; certainly we will burn it. After that we will certainly scatter it in the water of the sea in a scattering. 
20|98| Your God is only God Whom there is no god but He. He encompassed everything in His knowledge. 
20|99| Thus We relate to thee some tiding of what preceded. And surely We gave thee from that which proceeds from Our Presence a Remembrance. 
20|100| Whoever turned aside from it, then truly he will carry a heavy load on the Day of Resurrection, 
20|101| ones who will dwell in it forever; how evil for them on the Day of Resurrection will be the load 
20|102| on the Day the trumpet will be blown. We will assemble the ones who sin, white eyed on that Day. 
20|103| They will whisper among themselves: You lingered in expectation but ten days. 
20|104| We are greater in knowledge of what they will say when the most ideal of them in tradition says: You lingered in expectation not but a day! 
20|105| And they will ask thee about the mountains. Then, say: My Lord will scatter them a scattering. 
20|106| Then, He will forsake it as a leveled spacious plain. 
20|107| Then, thou wilt see not in it any crookedness nor unevenness. 
20|108| On that Day they will follow one who calls. There will be no crookedness in him. And voices will be hushed for The Merciful so thou wilt hear nothing but a murmuring. 
20|109| On a Day intercession will not profit anyone but him to whom gave permission The Merciful and with whose saying He was well-pleased. 
20|110| He knows what is in advance of them and what is behind them and they will not comprehend Him in knowledge. 
20|111| And faces will be humbled before The Living, The Eternal while, surely, will be frustrated whoever was burdened by doing injustice. 
20|112| Whoever does as the one in accord with morality and he is one who believes, then, he will neither fear injustice nor unfairness. 
20|113| And, thus, We caused it to descend as an Arabic Recitation. And We diversified the threats in it so that perhaps they will be Godfearing or cause the Remembrance to be evoked by them. 
20|114| Then, exalted be God, The True King, and hasten not the Recitation before its revelation is decreed to thee. And say: My Lord! Increase me in knowledge! 
20|115| And, certainly, We made a compact with Adam before. Then, he forgot and We find no constancy in him. 
20|116| And when We said to the angels: Prostrate yourselves to Adam! They prostrated themselves, but Iblis who refused. 
20|117| Then, We said: O Adam! Truly, this is an enemy to thee and to thy spouse, so let him not drive you both out from the Garden so that thou wouldst be in despair. 
20|118| Truly, it is not for thee that thou hunger in it nor to be naked. 
20|119| And, truly, thou wilt not thirst in it nor suffer the heat of the sun. 
20|120| Then, Satan whispered evil to him. He said: O Adam! Will I point thee to the Tree of Infinity and a dominion that will not decay? 
20|121| Then, they both ate from that so the intimate parts of both showed to both themselves. Both of them took to doing stitching together over both from the leaves of the Garden. And Adam rebelled against his Lord and he erred. 
20|122| Again, his Lord elected him. Then, He turned in forgiveness to him and guided him. 
20|123| He said: Get you both down from here altogether, some of you an enemy to some others. Then, if guidance approaches you from Me, then, whoever followed My Guidance, neither will he go astray, nor will he be in despair. 
20|124| And whoever turned aside from My Remembrance, then, truly, for him is a livelihood of narrowness. And We will assemble him on the Day of Resurrection unseeing. 
20|125| He would say: My Lord! Why hadst Thou assembled me with the unseeing when, surely, I had been seeing? 
20|126| He would say: It is thus: Our signs approached thee, but thou hadst forgotten them and, thus, this Day thou wilt be forgotten. 
20|127| And, thus, We give recompense to him who exceeded all bounds and believes not in signs of his Lord. And, surely, punishment in the world to come is more severe and one that endures. 
20|128| Guide He not them? How many generations We caused to perish before them amidst whose dwellings they walk. Truly, in this are signs for the people imbued with sense. 
20|129| And if a Word preceded not from thy Lord for a term that was determined, it would be close at hand. 
20|130| So have thou patience with what they say and glorify the praises of thy Lord before the coming up of the sun and before sunset and during the nighttime night watch and glorify at the end of the daytime, so that perhaps thou wilt be well-pleased. 
20|131| And stretch not out thy eyes for what We gave of enjoyment in this life to spouses among them as the luster of this present life so that We try them by it. And provision of thy Lord is Best and that which endures. 
20|132| And command thy people to the formal prayer, and to maintain patience in it. We ask not of thee for any provision. We provide for thee and the Ultimate End will be for the God-conscious. 
20|133| And they said: Why brings he not to us a sign from his Lord? Approaches them not clear portents that were in the first scrolls? 
20|134| And if We caused them to perish with a punishment before this, certainly, they would have said: Our Lord! Why hadst Thou not sent to us a Messenger so that we follow Thy signs before we are degraded and humiliated! 
20|135| Say: Each is one who is waiting so watch. Then, you will know who are the Companions of the Path without fault and who were truly guided. 
21|1| The reckoning for humanity was near while they are ones who turn aside in heedlessness. 
21|2| Approaches them not a remembrance from their Lord, that which is renewed, but they listened to it while they play 
21|3| being ones whose hearts are ones that are diverted, and they kept secret, conspiring secretly those who did wrong? Is this other than a mortal like you? Then, will you approach sorcery while you perceive? 
21|4| He said: My Lord knows The Word of the heavens and the earth. And He is The Hearing, The Knowing. 
21|5| Nay! They said: Jumbled nightmares! Nay! He but devised it! Nay! He is but a poet! Let him bring us a sign as the ancient ones were sent! 
21|6| No town believed before them of whom We caused to perish. Will they, then, believe? 
21|7| And We sent not before thee but men to whom We reveal. So ask the People of the Remembrance if you had not been knowing. 
21|8| And We made them not lifeless bodies that eat not food nor had they been ones who will dwell forever. 
21|9| Again, We were sincere in the promise. So We rescued them and whom We will. We caused the ones who are excessive to perish. 
21|10| Surely, We caused a Book to descend to you in which is your Remembrance. Will you not, then, be reasonable? 
21|11| How many a town We damaged that had been one that is unjust and caused to grow after them another folk? 
21|12| Then, when they were conscious of Our might, that is when they make haste from it! 
21|13| Make not haste, but return to what you were given of ease in it and to your dwellings, so that perhaps you will be asked. 
21|14| They said: O woe to us! Truly, we had been ones who are unjust! 
21|15| Then, truly, they ceased not calling that out until We made them as stubble, ones silent and stilled. 
21|16| And We created not the heavens and the earth and what is between them as ones in play. 
21|17| If We wanted We would have taken some diversion. We would take it to Ourselves from that which proceeds from Our Presence if We had been ones who do so. 
21|18| Nay! We hurl The Truth against falsehood so it prevails over it. That is when falsehood is that which vanishes away. And woe to you for what you allege. 
21|19| And to Him belongs whoever is in the heavens and the earth. And whoever is near Him, they grow not arrogant to worship Him, nor they be weary. 
21|20| They glorify Him nighttime and daytime. They never decrease. 
21|21| Or took they gods to themselves from the earth, they, ones who revive the dead? 
21|22| If there had been gods in it—other than God— certainly, both would have gone to ruin. Then, glory be to God! Lord of the Throne! High above what they allege. 
21|23| He will not be asked as to what He accomplishes, but they will be asked. 
21|24| Or took they gods to themselves other than He? Say: Prepare your proof. This is a Remembrance for him who is with me and a Remembrance of him before me. Nay! Most of them know not The Truth, so they are ones who turn aside. 
21|25| And We sent not before thee any Messenger, but We reveal to him that there is no god but I, so worship Me. 
21|26| And they said: The Merciful took to Himself a son. Glory be to Him! Nay! Honored servants! 
21|27| They precede Him not in saying and they act by His command. 
21|28| He knows what is in advance of them and what is behind them and they intercede not but for him with whom He was content. And they are dreading Him, ones who are apprehensive. 
21|29| And whoever says of them: Truly, I am a god other than He, then, We will give recompense to him with hell. Thus, We give recompense to the ones who are unjust. 
21|30| Consider not those who were ungrateful that the heavens and the earth had been interwoven and We unstitched them? And We made every living thing of water. Will they, then, not believe? 
21|31| And We made firm mountains on the earth so that it should not vibrate with them. And We made in it ravines as ways, so that perhaps they will be truly guided. 
21|32| And We made heaven as a guarded roof. Yet they are ones who turn aside from its signs. 
21|33| And it is He Who created the nighttime and the daytime, the sun and the moon, each swimming in orbit. 
21|34| And We assigned not to any mortal before thee immortality. If thou wert to die will they be ones who dwell forever? 
21|35| Every soul is one that experiences death. And We will try you with the worst and good as a test. And to Us you will be returned. 
21|36| And when those who were ungrateful saw thee, they take thee to themselves not but in mockery: Ha! Is this he who mentions your gods? And they, for Remembrance of The Merciful, they are ones who are ungrateful. 
21|37| The human being was created of haste. I will cause you to see My signs, so seek not to hasten! 
21|38| And they say: When will this promise be if you had been ones who are sincere? 
21|39| If those who were ungrateful but know at the time when they will not limit the fire from their faces, nor from their backs and they will not be helped! 
21|40| Nay! It will approach them suddenly. Then, it will dumfound them so they will not be able to come back nor will they be given respite. 
21|41| And, certainly, Messengers were ridiculed before thee. Then, those who derided them were surrounded by what they had been ridiculing. 
21|42| Say: Who will guard you in the nighttime and the daytime from The Merciful? Nay! They, from the Remembrance of their Lord, are ones who turn aside. 
21|43| Or secure them their gods from Us? They are not able to help themselves, nor will they be rendered safe from Us. 
21|44| Nay! We gave enjoyment to these, their fathers until their lifetime was long for them. Consider they not that We approach the earth? We reduce it of its outlying parts. Or will they be the ones who are the victors? 
21|45| Say: I warn you only by the revelation. But hear not the unwilling to hear, the calling to them when they are warned. 
21|46| And if a breath afflicted them of punishment of thy Lord, they would, surely, say: O woe to us! Truly, we had been ones who are unjust. 
21|47| And We will lay down the balances of equity on the Day of Resurrection. Then, no soul will be wronged at all. And even if it had been the weight of a grain of a mustard seed We will bring it. And We sufficed as Ones Who Reckon. 
21|48| And, certainly, We gave Moses and Aaron the Criterion between right and wrong and an illumination and a Remembrance for the ones who are Godfearing, 
21|49| those who dread their Lord in the unseen while they are ones who are apprehensive of the Hour. 
21|50| This is a blessed Remembrance We caused to descend. Are you, then, ones who know not of it? 
21|51| Certainly, We gave Abraham his right judgment before. And We had been ones who know of him 
21|52| when he said to his father and his folk: What are these images to which you be ones who give yourselves up to? 
21|53| They said: We found our fathers as ones who are worshippers of them. 
21|54| He said: Certainly, you and your fathers had been in a clear wandering astray. 
21|55| They said: Hadst thou drawn near The Truth or art thou of the ones who play? 
21|56| He said: Nay! Your Lord is the Lord of the heavens and the earth, Who originated them. And I am of the ones who bear witness to this: 
21|57| And by God, I will contrive against your idols after you turn as ones who draw back. 
21|58| So he made them broken pieces—but the greatest of them—so that perhaps they will return to it. 
21|59| They said: Who accomplished this with our gods? Truly, he is of the ones who are unjust! 
21|60| They said: We heard a spiritual warrior (m) mention them. It is said he is Abraham. 
21|61| They said: Then, approach with him before the eyes of personages so that perhaps they will bear witness. 
21|62| They said: Hast thou accomplished this with our gods O Abraham? 
21|63| He said: Nay! It was accomplished by the greatest of them—this. So ask them if they had been able to speak for themselves. 
21|64| Then, they returned to one another. Then, they said: Truly, you, you are the ones who are unjust. 
21|65| Again, they were put into confusion: Certainly, thou hadst known that these speak not for themselves! 
21|66| He said: Worship you, then, other than God what neither profits you nor hurts you at all? 
21|67| Fie on you on what you worship other than God. Will you not, then, be reasonable? 
21|68| They said: Burn him and help your gods if you had been ones who do so! 
21|69| We said: O fire! Be coolness and peace for Abraham! 
21|70| And they wanted to use cunning against him, but We made them the ones who are losers. 
21|71| And We delivered him and Lot to the region which We blessed for the worlds. 
21|72| And We bestowed Isaac on him and Jacob as an unexpected gift. And We made both of them ones in accord with morality. 
21|73| And We made them leaders, guiding by Our command. And We revealed to them the accomplishing of good deeds and the performing of the formal prayer and the giving of the purifying alms. And they had been ones who worship Us. 
21|74| And to Lot We gave him critical judgment and knowledge and We delivered him from the town which had been doing deeds of corruption. Truly, they had been a reprehensible folk, ones who disobey. 
21|75| And We caused him to enter into Our Mercy. Truly, he was among the ones in accord with morality. 
21|76| And mention Noah, when he cried out before and We responded to him. And We delivered him and his people from the tremendous distress. 
21|77| And We helped him against the folk who denied Our signs. Truly, they had been a reprehensible folk. So We drowned them one and all. 
21|78| And mention David and Solomon, when they give judgment about cultivation when a herd of the sheep of his folk strayed. And to their critical judgment We had been ones who bear witness. 
21|79| So We caused Solomon to understand it. And We gave each of them critical judgment and knowledge. And We caused to become subservient to David, the mountains and the birds to glorify God. And We had been ones who do such things. 
21|80| We taught him the art of making garments of chain mail for you to fortify you from your violence. Will you, then, be ones who are thankful? 
21|81| And to Solomon, the wind tempest runs by His command toward the earth which We blessed. We had been ones who know everything. 
21|82| Among the satans are some who dive for him and do actions other than that. And We had been ones who guard over them. 
21|83| And Job, when he cried out to his Lord: Truly, harm afflicted me and Thou art One Who is Most Merciful of the ones who are merciful. 
21|84| So We responded to him. Then, We removed his harm. And We gave him back his people and the like of others with them as a mercy from Us and as a reminder of ones who worship. 
21|85| And Ishmael and Enoch and Dhul-Kifl, all were of the ones who remain steadfast. 
21|86| And We caused them to enter into Our mercy. They are the ones in accord with morality. 
21|87| And Jonah, when he went as one who is enraged, and thought that We would never have power over him. And, then, he cried out through the shadows that: There is no god, but Thou! Glory be to Thee! Truly, I had been of the ones who are unjust. 
21|88| So We responded to him. And We delivered him from the lament. And, thus, We rescue the ones who believe. 
21|89| And mention Zechariah when he cried out to his Lord: My Lord! Forsake me not unassisted and Thou art Best of the ones who inherit. 
21|90| So We responded to him and We bestowed Yahya on him. And We made things right for his spouse and for him. Truly, they had been competing with one another in good deeds and they would call to Us with yearning and reverence. And they had been ones who are humbled before Us. 
21|91| And she who guarded her private parts, then, We breathed into her Our Spirit and We made her and her son a sign for the worlds. 
21|92| Truly, this, your community, is one community and I am your Lord so worship Me. 
21|93| But they cut asunder their affair between them. Yet all of them are ones who return to Us. 
21|94| So whoever does as the ones in accord with morality and he is one who believes, then, his endeavoring will not be rejected. And, truly, We will be One Who Inscribes it for him. 
21|95| And there is a ban on the town that We caused to perish. They will not return 
21|96| until Gog and Magog are let loose and they slide down from every slope. 
21|97| And the true promise will be near. That is when the sight will be that which fixed in horror of those who were ungrateful! O woe to us. Surely, we had been in heedlessness of this. Nay! We had been ones who were unjust. 
21|98| Truly, you and what you worship other than God are fuel material for hell. You are the ones who go down to it. 
21|99| If these had been gods, they would never have gone down to it. All are ones who will dwell in it forever. 
21|100| There will be sobbing in it for them and they, their gods, will not hear in it. 
21|101| Truly, those to whom there has preceded the fairer from Us, those are ones who are far removed from it. 
21|102| They will not hear even the low sound of it. And they, in that for which their souls lusted, will be ones who will dwell in it forever. 
21|103| The greater terror will not dishearten them and the angels will admit them: This is your day that you had been promised! 
21|104| On a Day when We roll up the heavens like the rolling up of the written scroll of manuscripts, as We began the first creation, We will cause it to return. It is a promise from Us. Truly, We had been ones who do. 
21|105| And, certainly, We wrote down in the Psalms after the Remembrance that the earth will be inherited by My servants—the ones who are in accord with morality. 
21|106| Truly, in this is the delivering of this message for the folk, ones who worship. 
21|107| And We sent thee not but as a mercy for the worlds. 
21|108| Say: It is only revealed to me that your god is One God. Will you, then, be ones who submit to God? 
21|109| But if they turned away, then, say: I proclaimed to you all equally. And I am not informed whether what you are promised is near or far. 
21|110| Truly, He knows the openly published saying and He knows what you keep back. 
21|111| And I am not informed so that perhaps it will be a test for you and an enjoyment for a while. 
21|112| He said: My Lord! Give Thou judgment between us with The Truth. And our Lord is The Merciful, He Whose help is being sought against what you allege. 
22|1| O humanity! Be Godfearing of your Lord. Truly, the earthquake of the Hour is a tremendous thing. On a Day you will see it, 
22|2| every one who is breast feeding will be negligent of whoever she breast fed. And every pregnant woman will bring forth a foetus and thou wilt see humanity intoxicated yet they will not be intoxicated. But the punishment of God will be severe. 
22|3| And among humanity is he who disputes about God without knowledge and follows every rebel satan. 
22|4| It was written down about him that whoever turned away to him as a friend, truly, he will cause him to go astray and will guide him to the punishment of the blaze. 
22|5| O humanity! If you had been in doubt about the Upraising, truly, We created you from earth dust and, again, from seminal fluid and, again, from a clot and, again, from tissue that was formed and that was not formed so that we make it manifest to you. We establish in the wombs whom We will for a term, that which is determined. And, again, We bring you out as infant children and, again, you may reach the coming of age. And among you there is he whom death will call to itself. And among you there is he who is returned to the most wretched lifetime so that he knows not anything after some knowledge. And thou hast seen the earth as that which is lifeless. Yet when We caused water to descend on it, it quivered and it swelled and put forth every lovely pair. 
22|6| That is because God, He is The Truth, and it is He Who gives life to the dead and He is Powerful over everything. 
22|7| And, truly, the Hour is that which arrives. There is no doubt about it and that God will raise up whoever is in the graves. 
22|8| And among humanity is such a one who disputes about God without knowledge nor guidance nor an illuminating Book, 
22|9| turning to his side as one who turns away to cause to go astray from the way of God. For him in the present is degradation. And We will cause him to experience—on the Day of Resurrection— the punishment of the burning. 
22|10| That is because of what thy two hands put forward! And, truly, God is not unjust to His servants. 
22|11| And among humanity is he who worships God on the fringes. If good lit on him, he is at rest with it. And if a test lit on him, he turned completely about. He lost the present and the world to come. That, it is the clear loss. 
22|12| He calls to other than God what neither hurts him nor profits him. That, it is a far wandering astray. 
22|13| He calls to him whose hurting is nearer than his profiting. Miserable was the defender and miserable was the acquaintance. 
22|14| Truly, God will cause to enter those who have believed and did as the ones accord with morality, Gardens beneath which rivers run. Truly, God accomplishes what He wants. 
22|15| Whoever had been thinking that God will never help him, in the present and in the world to come, let him stretch out a cord to heaven. Again, let him sever it. Then, let him look on whether his cunning causes to put away what enrages him. 
22|16| And, thus, We caused signs to descend, clear portents. And that God guides whom He wants. 
22|17| Truly, those who believed and those who became Jews and the Sabeans and the Christians and the Zoroastrians and those who ascribed partners—truly, God will distinguish between them on the Day of Resurrection. Truly, God over everything is a Witness. 
22|18| Hast thou not considered that to God prostrates to Him whoever is in the heavens and whoever is in and on the earth and the sun and the moon and the stars, the mountains, the trees and the moving creatures, and many of humanity while there are many on whom the punishment will be realized. And He whom God despises, then, there is no one who honors him. Truly, God accomplishes whatever He wills.‡ 
22|19| These two disputants strove against one another about their Lord. Then, for those who were ungrateful garments of fire will be cut out for them. Over their heads, scalding water will be unloosed 
22|20| whereby what is in their bellies will be dissolved and their skins. 
22|21| And for them are maces of iron. 
22|22| Whenever they wanted to go forth from there because of lament, they will be caused to return to it and experience the punishment of the burning. 
22|23| Truly, God will cause to enter those who believed and did as ones in accord with morality, Gardens beneath which rivers run. They are adorned in them with bracelets of gold and pearls. And their garments in it will be of silk. 
22|24| And they were guided to what is good of the saying and they were guided to the Path of Him Who is Worthy of Praise. 
22|25| Truly, those who were ungrateful and bar from the way of God and from the Masjid al-Haram that We made for humanity—equal for the ones who give themselves up and the ones who are desert dwellers—and whoever wants to violate it with injustice, We will cause him to experience a painful punishment. 
22|26| And mention when We placed Abraham in the place of the House that: Thou wilt ascribe nothing as partners with Me. And Thou purify My House for the ones who circumambulate it and the ones who are standing up, and the ones who bow down and the ones who prostrate themselves. 
22|27| Announce to humanity the pilgrimage to Makkah. They will approach thee on foot and on every thin camel. They will approach from every deep ravine 
22|28| that they bear witness to what profits them and remember the Name of God on known days over whatever He provided them from flocks of animals. Then, eat of it and feed the ones who are in misery and the poor. 
22|29| Again, let them finish their ritual cleanliness and live up to their vows and circumambulate the Ancient House. 
22|30| That was commanded! Whoever holds the sacred things of God in honor, then, that is better for him with his Lord. And permitted to you were the flocks, but what will be recounted to you. So avoid the disgrace of graven images and avoid saying the untruth. 
22|31| Turn to God as monotheists not with Him as ones who are polytheists. And whoever ascribes partners with God, it is as if he fell down from heaven and the birds snatch him or the wind hurled him to ruin in a place far away. 
22|32| That was commanded! Whoever holds the waymarks of God in honor, then, it is, truly, from hearts filled with God-consciousness. 
22|33| For you in that is what profits for a term, that which is determined. Again, their place of sacrifice is at the Ancient House. 
22|34| And for every community We assigned devotional acts that they may remember the Name of God over what We provided them of flocks of animals. And your God is One God. Submit to Him, and give thou good tidings to the ones who humble themselves, 
22|35| those who, when God was remembered, their hearts took notice and the ones who remain steadfast against whatever lit on them and the ones who perform the formal prayer and who spends out of what We provided them. 
22|36| We made for you the beasts of sacrifice among the waymarks of God. You have in them much good so remember the Name of God over them, ones who are standing in ranks. Then, when they collapsed on their sides, eat from them and feed the ones who are paupers and the ones who are poor persons who beg not. Thus, We caused them to be subservient to you so that perhaps you will give thanks. 
22|37| Neither their flesh nor their blood attains to God, rather, God-consciousness from you attains Him. Thus, He caused them to be subservient to you that you magnify God in that He guided you. And give thou good tidings to the ones who are doers of good. 
22|38| Truly, God defends those who believed. Truly, God loves not any who is an ungrateful betrayer. 
22|39| Permission was given to those who are fought against because they, they were wronged. And, truly, Powerful is God to help them, 
22|40| those who were driven out from their abodes without right because they say: Our Lord is God! If not for God driving back humanity, some by some other, cloisters would be demolished and churches and synagogues and mosques in which is remembered in it the Name of God frequently. Truly, God will help whoever helps Him. Truly, God is Strong, Almighty. 
22|41| Those who, if We established them firmly on the earth, they performed the formal prayer and they gave the purifying alms and they commanded to that which is honorable and they prohibited that which is unlawful. And with God is the Ultimate End of the command. 
22|42| And if they deny thee, surely, the folk of Noah denied before thee and Ad and Thamud 
22|43| and the folk of Abraham and the folk of Lot 
22|44| and the companions of Midian. And Moses was denied, but I granted indulgence to the ones who are ungrateful. Again, I took them and how had been My disapproval! 
22|45| And how many a town We caused to perish while they are ones who are unjust so that it be one that had fallen down in ruins and how much well water ignored and a tall palace! 
22|46| Journey they not through the earth? Have they not hearts with which to be reasonable or ears with which to hear? Truly, it is not their sight that is in darkness, but their hearts that are within their breasts that are in darkness! 
22|47| And seek they that thee hasten the punishment? And God never breaks His Promise. And, truly, a day with thy Lord is as a thousand years of what you number. 
22|48| How many a town I granted indulgence while it is one that is unjust. Again, I took it and to Me was the Homecoming. 
22|49| Say: O humanity! Truly, I am only a clear warner to you. 
22|50| So those who believed and did as ones in accord with morality, for them is forgiveness and a generous provision. 
22|51| And those who endeavored against Our signs, ones who strive to thwart, those are the Companions of Hellfire. 
22|52| And We sent not before thee any Messenger nor Prophet, but when he fantasized, Satan cast fantasies into him. But God nullifies what Satan casts. Again, God set clear His signs. And God is Knowing, Wise, 
22|53| for He makes what Satan casts a test for those who in their hearts is a sickness and their hearts, ones that harden. And, truly, the ones who are unjust are in a wide breach. 
22|54| And those who were given the knowledge know that it is The Truth from thy Lord, so that they believe in it and humble their hearts to Him. And, truly, God is One Who Guides those who believed to a straight path. 
22|55| And those who were ungrateful cease not to be hesitant about it until the Hour approaches them suddenly or the punishment approaches them on a withering Day. 
22|56| On that Day the dominion will belong to God. He will give judgment between them. So those who believed and did as the ones accord with morality will be in Gardens of Bliss. 
22|57| And those who were ungrateful and denied Our signs, for them will be a despised punishment. 
22|58| And those who emigrated in the way of God, then, they were slain or died, certainly, God will provide them a fairer provision. And, truly, God, certainly, He is Best of the ones who provide. 
22|59| Certainly, He will cause them to enter a gate with which they will be well-pleased. And, truly, God is, certainly, Knowing, Forbearing. 
22|60| That is so! And whoever chastises for injustice with the like of what he was chastised, and, again, suffered an injustice, God will, certainly, help him. Truly, God is Pardoning, Forgiving. 
22|61| That is because God causes the nighttime to be interposed into the daytime and He causes the daytime to be interposed into the nighttime. And, truly, God is Hearing, Seeing. 
22|62| That is because God, He is The Truth. And what they call to other than Him, it is falsehood. And that God, He is The Lofty, The Great. 
22|63| Hast thou not considered that God caused water to descend from heaven? Then, in the morning, the earth becomes green. Truly, God is Subtle, Aware. 
22|64| To Him belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in and on the earth. And, truly, God, He is The Sufficient, The Worthy of Praise. 
22|65| Hast thou not considered that God caused to be subservient to you what is in and on the earth? And the boats run through the sea by His command. And He holds back the heaven so that it not fall on the earth, but by His permission. Truly, to humanity God is Gentle, Compassionate. 
22|66| And it is He Who gave you life and, again, He will cause you to die and, again, He will give you life. Truly, the human being is ungrateful. 
22|67| For every community We assigned devotional acts so that they be ones who perform rites. So let them not bicker with thee in the command. And call thou to thy Lord. Truly, Thou art on a guidance, that which is straight. 
22|68| And if they disputed with thee, then, thou say: God is greater in knowledge about what you do. 
22|69| God will give judgment among you on the Day of Resurrection about what you had been at variance in it. 
22|70| Hast thou not known that God knows what is in the heaven and the earth? Truly, that is in a Book. Truly, that is easy for God. 
22|71| And they worship other than God, that for which He sent not down any authority and of what they have no knowledge. And there is no helper for the ones who are unjust. 
22|72| And when Our signs are recounted to them, clear portents, thou wilt recognize on the faces of those who were ungrateful, that they are the ones who are rejected. They are about to rush upon those who recount Our signs to them. Say: Shall I tell you of worse than that? God promised the fire to those who were ungrateful. And miserable will be the Homecoming! 
22|73| O humanity! A parable was propounded, so listen to it. Truly, those whom you call to other than God will never create a fly, even if they were gathered together for it. And when the fly is to rob them of something, they would never seek to deliver it from the fly. Weak were the ones who are seekers and the ones who are sought. 
22|74| They duly measured not the measure of God. Truly, God is Strong, Almighty. 
22|75| God favors from the angels messengers and from humanity. Truly, God is Hearing, Seeing. 
22|76| He knows what is in advance of them, and what is behind them, and to God all matters are returned. 
22|77| O those who believed! Bow down and prostrate yourselves, and worship your Lord, and accomplish good so that perhaps you will prosper.‡ 
22|78| And struggle for God in a true struggling. He elected you and made not for you in your way of life any impediment. It is the creed of your father Abraham. He named you the ones who submit to God before and in this Recitation that the Messenger be a witness over you and you are witnesses over humanity. So perform the formal prayer and give the purifying alms and cleave firmly to God. He is your Defender. How excellent a Defender and how excellent a Helper! 
23|1| Surely, the ones who believe prospered, 
23|2| those, they, who in their formal prayers are ones who are humble 
23|3| and they, those who from idle talk, are ones who turn aside 
23|4| and they, those who the purifying alms are ones who do give 
23|5| and they, those who of their private parts, are ones who guard, 
23|6| but from their spouses or from what their right hands possessed. Truly, they are ones who are irreproachable. 
23|7| Whoever was looking for something beyond that, then, those, they are the ones who turn away. 
23|8| And those, they who their trusts and their compacts are ones who shepherd 
23|9| and those, they who over their formal prayers are watchful, 
23|10| those, they are ones who will inherit, 
23|11| those who will inherit Paradise, they are ones who will dwell in it forever. 
23|12| And, certainly, We created the human being from an extraction of clay. 
23|13| Again, We made him into seminal fluid in a stopping place, secure. 
23|14| Again, We created a clot from seminal fluids. Then, We created tissue from the clot. Then, We created bones from tissue. Then, We clothed the bones with flesh. Again, We caused another creation to grow. So blessed be God, the Fairer of the ones who are creators! 
23|15| Again, truly, after that, you will die. 
23|16| Again, truly, you will be raised up on the Day of Resurrection. 
23|17| Certainly, We created above you seven tiers. We had not been ones who are heedless of the creation. 
23|18| We caused water to descend from heaven in measure and We ceased it to dwell in the earth. And We certainly are ones who have power to take away. 
23|19| And We caused to grow for you gardens of date palm trees and grapevines where there is much sweet fruit for you and you eat of it 
23|20| and a tree that goes forth from Mount Sinai that bears oil and a seasoning for the ones who eat it. 
23|21| And, truly, for you in the flocks there is a lesson. We satiate you with what is in their bellies. In them are many profits and of them you eat 
23|22| and on them and on boats you are carried. 
23|23| And, certainly, We sent Noah to his folk. And he said: O my folk! Worship God! You have no other god but Him. Will you not, then, be Godfearing? 
23|24| But said the Council who were ungrateful among his folk: This is nothing but a mortal like you. He wants to gain superiority over you. If God willed He would have caused angels to descend. We heard not such a thing from our fathers, the ancient ones. 
23|25| He is nothing but a man in whom there is madness. So watch him for a while. 
23|26| He said: My Lord! Help me because they denied me. 
23|27| So We revealed to him: Craft thou the boat under Our eyes and by Our revelation. Then, when Our command drew near and the oven boiled, then, insert two pairs of each kind and thy people, but whomever against whom the saying has preceded. And address Me not for those who did wrong. Truly, they are ones who are drowned. 
23|28| When thou and whoever is with thee art seated in the boat, then, say: All Praise belongs to God Who delivered us from the folk, the ones who are unjust. 
23|29| And say: My Lord! Land Thou me with a blessed landing for Thou art Best of the landing-places. 
23|30| Truly, in this there are signs and, truly, We had been ones who test. 
23|31| Again, We caused to grow another generation after them. 
23|32| We sent a Messenger to them from among them saying that: Worship God! You have no god other than Him. Will you, then, not be Godfearing? 
23|33| And said the Council of his folk to those who were ungrateful and denied the meeting in the world to come, and to whom We gave ease in this present life: This is nothing but a mortal like you. He eats of what you eat and he drinks of what you drink. 
23|34| And if you obeyed a mortal like yourselves, truly, then, you are ones who are losers. 
23|35| Promises He that when you died and had been earth dust and bones, that you will be ones who are brought out? 
23|36| Begone! Begone with what you are promised! 
23|37| There is nothing but this present life. We die and we live and we shall not be ones who are raised up. 
23|38| He is nothing but a man. He devised a lie against God and we are not ones who will believe in him. 
23|39| He said: My Lord! Help me because they denied me. 
23|40| He said: In a little while they will become ones who are remorseful. 
23|41| Then, a Cry duly took them so We made them into refuse. So away with the folk, the ones who are unjust! 
23|42| Again, We caused to grow after them other generations. 
23|43| No community precedes its term, nor delays it. 
23|44| Again, We sent Our Messengers one after another. Whenever drew near a community a Messenger to them, they denied him. So We caused some of them to pursue others and We made them tales. So away with the folk who believe not! 
23|45| Again, We sent Moses and his brother Aaron with Our signs and clear authority 
23|46| to Pharaoh and his Council. Then, they grew arrogant and they had been a folk, ones who exalt themselves. 
23|47| Then, they said: Will we believe in two mortals like ourselves while their folk are ones who worship us? 
23|48| So they denied both of them. They had been among the ones who are caused to perish. 
23|49| And, certainly, We gave Moses the Book so that perhaps they will be truly guided. 
23|50| And We made the son of Mary and his mother a sign, and We gave them refuge on a hillside, a stopping place, and a spring of water. 
23|51| O you Messengers! Eat of what is good and do as one in accord with morality. Truly, I am Knowing of what you do. 
23|52| And, truly, this, your community is one community and I am your Lord so be Godfearing. 
23|53| Then, they cut their affair of unity asunder into sects among them, each party glad with what was with them. 
23|54| So forsake thou them for a while in their obstinacy. 
23|55| Assume they that with the relief We furnish them of wealth and children 
23|56| We compete for good deeds for them? Nay! They are not aware. 
23|57| Truly, those, they are dreading their Lord, ones who are apprehensive. 
23|58| And those, they who believe in the signs of their Lord 
23|59| and those, they who ascribe nothing as partners with their Lord, 
23|60| and those who give what they gave with their hearts afraid because they are ones who will return to their Lord, 
23|61| are those who compete with one another in good deeds and they, in them, are ones who take the lead. 
23|62| And We place not a burden on any soul but to its capacity. And from Us is a Book that speaks The Truth for itself. And they will not be wronged. 
23|63| Nay! Their hearts are in obstinacy towards this Quran and they have other actions besides as they are ones who act 
23|64| until, when We took ones who are given ease with the punishment. That is when they make entreaties. 
23|65| Make not entreaties this Day. Truly, you will not be helped from Us. 
23|66| Surely, My signs had been recounted to you, but you had been receding on your heels 
23|67| as ones who grow arrogant regarding it and ones who nightly talk nonsense, talking foolishly. 
23|68| Meditate they not on the saying or drew not near them anything that approaches not their fathers, the ancient ones? 
23|69| Or is it they recognize not their Messenger so that they are ones who reject him? 
23|70| Or say they: There is madness in him? Nay! He drew near them with The Truth, but most of them are ones who dislike The Truth. 
23|71| And if The Truth followed their desires, the heavens and the earth would have gone to ruin and whoever is in it. Nay! We brought them their Remembrance, but they, from their Remembrance, are ones who turn aside. 
23|72| Or is it that thou hast asked them for payment? Yet the revenue from thy Lord is better. And He is Best of the ones who provide. 
23|73| And, truly, thou hast called them to a straight path. 
23|74| And, truly, those who believe not in the world to come are ones who move away from the path. 
23|75| And even if We had mercy on them and removed the harm which is on them, they would still be resolute in their defiance, wandering unwilling to see. 
23|76| And, certainly, We took them with the punishment. Then, they gave not into their Lord nor lower themselves 
23|77| until, when we opened a door for them of a severe punishment. That is when they were ones who are seized with despair! 
23|78| And He it is Who caused you to grow, have the ability to hear and sight and mind. But you give little thanks! 
23|79| It is He Who made you numerous on the earth and to Him you will be assembled. 
23|80| And it is He Who gives life and causes to die and His is the alteration of nighttime and daytime. Will you not, then, be reasonable? 
23|81| Nay! They said the like of what the ancient ones said. 
23|82| They said: When we are dead and had been earth dust and bones, will we be ones who are raised up? 
23|83| Certainly, we were promised this—we and our fathers—before this. This is nothing but the fables of the ancient ones. 
23|84| Say: To whom belongs the earth and whoever is in it if you had been knowing? 
23|85| They will say: To God! Say: Then, will you not recollect? 
23|86| Say: Who is the Lord of the seven heavens and Lord of the Sublime Throne? 
23|87| They will say: It belongs to God! Say: Then, will you not be Godfearing? 
23|88| Say: In whose hand is the kingdom of everything and He grants protection? No one is granted protection against Him if you had been knowing. 
23|89| They will say: It belongs to God! Say: How, then, are you under a spell! 
23|90| Nay! We brought them The Truth and, truly, they are ones who lie. 
23|91| God took not to Himself any son, nor had there been any god with Him. For, then, each god would have taken away what he created. And some of them would have ascended over some others. Glory be to God above all that they allege! 
23|92| He is the One Who Knows the unseen and the visible. Exalted be He above partners they ascribe. 
23|93| Say: My Lord! If Thou wilt cause me to see what they are promised, 
23|94| then, assign me not, my Lord, to the folk, the ones who are unjust. 
23|95| And, truly, We cause thee to see what We promise them as certainly ones who have power. 
23|96| Drive thou back evil deeds with what is fairer. We are greater in knowledge of what they allege. 
23|97| And say: My Lord! I take refuge with Thee from the evil suggestions of the satans. 
23|98| And my Lord, I take refuge with Thee so that they not attend me. 
23|99| Until when death drew near one of them, he said: My Lord! Return me 
23|100| so that perhaps I will do as one in accord with morality in what I left behind. No indeed! Truly, it is only a word that one who converses says. And ahead of them is a barrier until the Day they are raised up. 
23|101| When the trumpet will be blown, there will be no talk of kindred among them that Day nor will they demand anything of one another. 
23|102| Then, whose balance was heavy with good deeds, those, they are the ones who prosper. 
23|103| And among ones whose balance was made light, then, those are those who lost themselves. They will be ones who will dwell in hell forever. 
23|104| Their faces will fry in the fire. And they will be ones who are morose in it. 
23|105| Be not My signs recounted to you, yet you had been denying them? 
23|106| They will say: Our Lord! Our misgiving prevailed over us. We had been a folk, ones who go astray. 
23|107| Our Lord! Bring us out of this. Then, if ever we reverted, truly, we will be ones who are unjust. 
23|108| He would say: Be driven away in it and speak not to Me. 
23|109| Truly, there had been a group of people of My servants who say: Our Lord! We believed, so forgive us and have mercy on us for Thou art Best of the ones who are most merciful. 
23|110| But you took them to yourselves as a laughing-stock until they caused you to forget My Remembrance and you had been laughing at them. 
23|111| Truly, I gave recompense this Day for what they endured patiently. Truly, they, they are the ones who are victorious! 
23|112| He said: Lingered you in expectation on the earth for what number of years? 
23|113| They said: We lingered in expectation a day or some of a day. So ask the ones who count. 
23|114| He said: You lingered in expectation not but a little. If you had but been knowing. 
23|115| Assumed you that We created you in amusement and that to Us you would not be returned? 
23|116| So exalted be God! The King, The Truth. There is no god but He, the Lord of the Generous Throne! 
23|117| And whoever calls to another god with God of which he has no proof, then, truly, his reckoning is with his Lord. Truly, the ones who are ungrateful will not prosper. 
23|118| And say: My Lord! Forgive and have mercy and Thou art Best of the ones who are most merciful. 
24|1| This is a Chapter of the Quran that We caused to descend and We imposed laws in it. We caused to descend signs, clear portents, so that perhaps you will recollect. 
24|2| The one who is an adulteress and the one who is an adulterer, scourge each one of them one hundred strokes. And let not tenderness for them take you from the judgment of God, if you had been believing in God and the Last Day. And let them bear witness to their punishment by a section of the ones who believe. 
24|3| The one who is an adulterer will not marry but one who is an adulteress, or one who is a female polytheist. And the one who is an adulteress will not marry but one who is an adulterer, or one who is a male polytheist. All that was forbidden to the ones who believe. 
24|4| And those who accuse the ones who are free, chaste (f) and, again, bring not four witnesses, then, scourge them eighty strokes and never accept their testimony. And those, they are the ones who disobey. 
24|5| But those who repented after that and made things right, so, truly, God is Forgiving, Compassionate. 
24|6| And those who accuse their spouses—and there be no witnesses but themselves—let the testimony of one of them be four testimonies sworn to God that he is among the ones who are sincere 
24|7| and a fifth that the curse of God be on him, if he had been among the ones who lie. 
24|8| And it will drive off the punishment from her if she bears witness with four testimonies sworn to God that he is among the ones who lie 
24|9| and the fifth, that the anger of God be on her if he had been among the ones who are sincere. 
24|10| And if it were not for the grace of God on you and His mercy and that God is Accepter of Repentance, Wise— 
24|11| truly, those who drew near with the calumny are many among you. Assume it not worse for you. Nay! It is good for you. To every man of them is what he deserved of sin. And as for those who turned away towards the greater part from among them, there will be a tremendous punishment for him. 
24|12| Why not when you heard about it, thought not the ones who are male believers and the ones who are female believers the better of themselves and have said: This is a clear calumny? 
24|13| Why brought they not about four witnesses for it? As they bring not about witnesses, then, with God, those, they are the ones who lie. 
24|14| If it not were for the grace of God on you and His mercy in the present and in the world to come, certainly, would have afflicted you a tremendous punishment for what you muttered. 
24|15| When you received it on your tongues and said with your mouths of what there is no knowledge, you assume it insignificant while it is serious with God. 
24|16| And why, when you heard it, said you not: It will not be for us to assert this. Glory be to Thee! This is a serious false charge to harm the reputation of another. 
24|17| God admonishes you that you shall never revert to the like of it, if you had been ones who believe. 
24|18| And He makes manifest for you the signs. And God is Knowing, Wise. 
24|19| Truly, those who love that indecency be spread about those who believed, they will have a painful punishment in the present and in the world to come. And God knows and you know not. 
24|20| And if it were not for the grace of God on you and His mercy, you would be ruined, and that God is Gentle, Compassionate. 
24|21| O those who believed! Follow not in the steps of Satan. And whoever follows in the steps of Satan, then, truly, he commands depravity, and that which is unlawful. And if it were not for the grace of God on you and His mercy, none of you would ever be pure in heart, but God makes pure whom He wills. And God is Hearing, Knowing. 
24|22| Let those imbued with grace not forswear—and those with plenty among you—to give to those imbued with kinship and to the needy and the ones who emigrate in the way of God. And let them pardon and let them overlook. Love you not that God should forgive you? And God is Forgiving, Compassionate. 
24|23| Truly, those who accuse the ones who are free, unwary, chaste female believers were cursed in the present and the world to come and for them will be a serious punishment 
24|24| on a Day when their tongues bear witness against them and their hands and their feet as to what they had been doing. 
24|25| On that Day God will pay them their account in full, what is their just due. And they will know that God, He is The Clear Truth. 
24|26| The bad females are for the bad males and the bad males are for the bad females. And who are good females are for who are good males and who are good males are for who are good females. Those are ones declared innocent of what others say. For them is forgiveness and generous provision. 
24|27| O those who believed! Enter not houses other than your houses until you announced your presence and greeted the people within. That is better for you so that perhaps you will recollect. 
24|28| And if you find not in it anyone, then, enter them not until permission be given to you. And if it was said to you: Return, then, return. It is purer for you. And God is Knowing of what you do. 
24|29| There is no blame on you in entering houses without ones who are inhabitants wherein you have enjoyment. And God knows what you show and what you keep back. 
24|30| Say to the males, ones who believe, to lower their sight and keep their private parts safe. That is purer for them. Truly God is Aware of what they craft. 
24|31| And say to the females, ones who believe to lower their (f) sight and keep their (f) private parts safe and show not their (f) adornment but what is manifest of it. And let them (f) draw their head coverings over their (f) bosoms; and not show their (f) adornment but to their (f) husbands or their (f) fathers or the fathers of their (f) husbands or their sons or the sons of their (f) husbands or their (f) brothers or the sons of their (f) brothers or the sons of their (f) sisters or their (f) women, or what their (f) right hands possessed, or the ones who heed, imbued with no sexual desire among the men or small male children to whom was not manifest nakedness of women. And let them (f) not stomp their feet so as to be known what they (f) conceal of their adornment. And turn to God altogether for forgiveness. O the ones who believe, so that perhaps you will prosper. 
24|32| And wed the single among you to the ones in accord with morality of your male bond servants and your female bond servants. If they be poor, God will enrich them of His grace. And God is One Who is Extensive, Knowing. 
24|33| Let those who find not the means for marriage have restraint until God enriches them of His grace. And for those who are looking for emancipation from among what your right hands possessed, contract with them if you knew good in them. And give them of the wealth of God which He gave you. Compel not your spiritual warriors (f) against their will to prostitution when they (f) wanted chastity, that you be looking for the advantage of this present life. And whoever compels them (f) to it against their (f) will, yet after their (f) compulsion, God will be of them (f), the female, Forgiving, Compassionate. 
24|34| And, certainly, We caused to descend to you manifest signs and a parable of those who passed away before you and an admonishment for ones who are Godfearing. 
24|35| God is the Light of the heavens and the earth. The parable of His Light is as a niche in which there is a lamp. The lamp is in a glass. The glass is as if it had been a glittering star, kindled from a blessed olive tree, neither eastern nor western, whose oil of the olive is about to illuminate although no fire touches it. Light on light, God guides to His Light whom He wills! And God propounds parables for humanity, and God is Knowing of everything. 
24|36| The Light is lit in houses God gave permission to be lifted up and that His Name be remembered in it. Glorifying Him at the first part of the day and the eventide 
24|37| are men whom neither trade nor trading diverts from the remembrance of God and the performing the formal prayer and the giving of purifying alms for they fear a Day when the hearts will go to and fro and their sight, 
24|38| that God gives recompense to them according to the fairer of what they did and increases even more for them from His grace. And God provides to whom He wills without reckoning. 
24|39| As for those who were ungrateful, their actions are like a mirage in a spacious plain. The thirsty one assumes it to be water until he drew near it. He finds it to be nothing. Instead, he found God with him Who paid his account in full, reckoning and God is Swift at reckoning. 
24|40| Or they are like the shadows in an obscure sea, overcome by a wave, above which is a wave, above which are clouds, shadows, some above some others. When he brought out his hand he almost sees it not. And whomever God assigns no light for him, there is no light for him. 
24|41| Hast thou not considered that glorifies God whatever is in the heavens and the earth and the birds, ones standing in ranks? Each knew its formal prayer and its glorification. And God is Knowing of what they accomplish. 
24|42| And to God belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth. And to God is the Homecoming. 
24|43| Hast thou not considered how God propels clouds and, again, brings what is between them together? Again, He lays them into a heap. Thou hast seen the rain drops go forth in the midst. And He sends down from the heaven mountains of rain in which there is hail. And He lights it on whom He wills and turns away from it whom He wills. The gleams of His lightning almost take away the sight. 
24|44| God turns around and around the nighttime and the daytime. Truly, in this is a lesson for those imbued with insight. 
24|45| God created every moving creature from water. Among them there is what walks on its belly and of them there is what walks on two feet and of them there is what walks on four. God creates what He wills. Truly, God is Powerful over everything. 
24|46| Certainly, We caused manifest signs to descend. And God guides whom He wills to a straight path. 
24|47| And they say: We believed in God and the Messenger, and we obeyed. Again, a group of people among them turn away after this. And those are not of the ones who believe. 
24|48| And when they were called to God and His Messenger to give judgment among them, then, a group of people among them are ones who turn aside. 
24|49| But if they would be in the right, they would approach him as ones who are yielding. 
24|50| Is there a sickness in their hearts? Or were they in doubt? Or be they fearful that God and His Messenger will be unjust to them? Nay! Those, they are the ones who are unjust. 
24|51| The only saying of the ones who believe had been—when they were called to God and His Messenger that He give judgment between them—to say: We heard and obeyed. And those, they are the ones who prosper. 
24|52| And whoever obeys God and His Messenger and dreads God and is Godfearing, those, they are the ones who are victorious. 
24|53| And they swore by God their most earnest oaths that if thou wouldst command them, they would go forth. Say: Swear not; honorable obedience is better. Truly God is Aware of what you do. 
24|54| Say: Obey God and obey the Messenger. But if you turn away, then, on him was only what was loaded on him, and on you was only what was loaded on you. And if you obey him, you will be truly guided. And there is not a duty on the Messenger but the delivering of the clear message. 
24|55| God promised those who have believed among you and did as the ones in accord with morality, that He will make them successors in the earth, even as He made of those before them successors and He will establish for them their way of life firmly by which He was content with them and He will substitute a place of sanctuary in place of their fear: They shall worship Me—ascribe nothing as partners with Me. And whoever was ungrateful after that, then, those, they are the ones who disobey. 
24|56| And perform the formal prayer and give the purifying alms and obey the Messenger so that perhaps you will find mercy. 
24|57| Assume not those who were ungrateful that they are ones who will frustrate Him in the region. Their place of shelter will be the fire and how miserable the Homecoming! 
24|58| O those who believed! Let them ask permission—those whom your right hands possessed (f) and those who reach not puberty—three times: Before the dawn formal prayer, when you lay down your garments at the time of noon and after the time of night formal prayer. These are the three times of privacy for you. There is not on you nor on them blame after these. Other than these, go about some of you with some others. Thus, God makes manifest to you the signs. And God is Knowing, Wise. 
24|59| When infant children were fully grown among you, then, let them ask permission as asked permission those who were before them. Thus, God makes manifest for you His signs. And God is Knowing, Wise. 
24|60| And women who are past child-bearing, those who hope not for marriage, there is no blame on them (f) if they lay down their (f) garments, not as ones who flaunt themselves and their (f) adornment. And that they have restraint is better for them (f), and God is Hearing, Knowing. 
24|61| There is no fault on the blind nor fault on the lame nor fault on the sick nor on yourselves that you eat from your houses or the houses of your fathers or the houses of your mothers or the houses of your brothers or the houses of your sisters or the houses of your paternal uncles or the houses of your paternal aunts or the houses of your maternal uncles or the houses of your maternal aunts or of that for which you possess its keys or your ardent friend. There is no blame on you that you eat altogether or separately. But when you entered houses, then, greet one another with a greeting from God, one that is blessed and what is good. Thus, God makes manifest for you the signs so that perhaps you will be reasonable. 
24|62| The ones who believe are only those who believe in God and His Messenger. And when they had been with him on a collective matter, they go not until they asked his permission. Truly, those who ask thy permission, those are those who believed in God and His Messenger. So when they ask thy permission for some of their affairs, give permission to whom thou hadst willed of them, and ask God for forgiveness for them. Truly, God is Forgiving, Compassionate. 
24|63| The supplication of the Messenger among you is not as the supplication of some of you on some other. Surely, God knows those who slip away under cover. And let those who go against his command beware so that a test should not light on them or a painful punishment not light on them. 
24|64| Surely, to God belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth. Surely, He knows what you did. And on the Day when they are returned to Him, then, He will tell them what their hands did, and God is Knowing of everything. 
25|1| Blessed be He Who sent down the Criterion between right and wrong to His servant so that he be a warner to the worlds, 
25|2| He to Whom belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth, and Who takes not to Himself a son. There be no ascribed associate with Him in the dominion. And He created everything and ordained it a foreordaining. 
25|3| Yet they took gods to themselves other than Him who create nothing and are themselves created. And they neither possess for themselves hurt nor profit nor have they dominion over death, nor this life, nor rising up. 
25|4| And those who were ungrateful said: This is nothing but a calumny he devised and other folk assisted him. So, surely, they brought about injustice and untruth. 
25|5| And they said: Fables of the ancient ones that he caused to be written down! And they are to be related from memory to him at early morning dawn and eventide. 
25|6| Say: It was caused to descend by He who knows the secret in the heavens and the earth. Truly, He had been Forgiving, Compassionate. 
25|7| And they said: What Messenger is this that he eats food and walks in the markets? Why was an angel not caused to descend to him to be a warner with him? 
25|8| Or why is not a treasure cast down to him or why is there not a garden for him so that he may eat from it? And the ones who are unjust said: You follow nothing but a bewitched man. 
25|9| Look on how they propounded for thee parables for they went astray and are not able to find a way. 
25|10| Blessed be He Who, had He willed, assigned for thee better than that, Gardens beneath which rivers run and He will assign for thee palaces. 
25|11| Nay! They denied the Hour. And We made ready a blaze for whoever denied the Hour. 
25|12| When it saw them from a far place, they heard it raging furiously and roaring. 
25|13| And when they were cast down into it, a troubling place, ones who are chained, they called for damnation. 
25|14| It will be said to them: Call not today for a single damnation, but call for many damnations! 
25|15| Say: Is that better or the Garden of Infinity that was promised the ones who are Godfearing? It had been a recompense for them and a Homecoming. 
25|16| For them in it will be whatever they will, ones who will dwell in it forever. That had been from thy Lord a promise, one that is besought. 
25|17| And on the Day He will assemble them and what they worship other than God. To them He will say: Was it you who caused these My servants to go astray? Or went they astray from the way? 
25|18| They would say: Glory be to Thee! It had not been fit and proper for us to take to ourselves any protectors other than Thee. But Thou hadst given them enjoyment and their fathers until they forgot the Remembrance and had been a lost folk. 
25|19| So, surely, they denied you in what you say. Then, you will neither be able to turn away from it, nor help. And whoever does wrong among you, We will cause him to experience the great punishment. 
25|20| And We sent not before thee any ones who are sent but that, truly, they eat food and walk in the markets. And We made some of you as a test for some others. Will you endure patiently, and thy Lord had been Seeing. 
25|21| Those who hope not for a meeting with Us said: Why were angels not caused to descend to us and why see we not our Lord? Surely, they grew arrogant among themselves, defiant, turning in great disdain. 
25|22| On a Day they will see the angels there will be no good tidings for the ones who sin. And they will say: Unapproachable! Banned! 
25|23| We will advance on whatever actions they did. We will make them as scattered dust. 
25|24| The Companions of the Garden on that Day will have the best resting place and the fairer place of noonday rest. 
25|25| On a Day when heaven will be split open with the cloud shadows and the angels were sent down, a sending down successively, 
25|26| on that Day the true dominion will belong to The Merciful. And it will be a Day difficult for the ones who are ungrateful. 
25|27| And on a Day when one who is unjust will bite his hands, he will say: Would that I took myself to a way with the Messenger! 
25|28| Ah! Woe is me! Would that I take not to myself so-and-so as a friend! 
25|29| Certainly, he caused me to go astray from the Remembrance after it drew near me. And Satan had been a betrayer of the human being. 
25|30| And the Messenger said: O my Lord! Truly, my folk took this, the Quran to themselves, as that which is to be abandoned! 
25|31| And, thus, We assigned for every Prophet an enemy of the ones who sin. And thy Lord sufficed as one who guides and as a helper. 
25|32| And those who were ungrateful said: Why was the Quran not sent down to him all at once? Thus, We will make firm thy mind by it. And We chanted a chanting. 
25|33| And they bring thee no parable. We brought about The Truth to thee and fairer exposition. 
25|34| Those who will be assembled on their faces in hell, those are worse placed, ones who go astray from the way. 
25|35| And, certainly, We gave Moses the Book and assigned his brother Aaron to him as a minister. 
25|36| And We said: You both go to the folk who denied Our signs. Then, We destroyed them, an utter destruction. 
25|37| And the folk of Noah when they denied the Messengers, We drowned them. And We made them as a sign for humanity. And We made ready for the ones who are unjust a painful punishment, 
25|38| and Ad and Thamud and the Companions of Rass and many generations in between that. 
25|39| And We propounded parables for each of them. And We shattered each a shattering. 
25|40| And, certainly, they approached the town where the reprehensible rain was rained down on them. Is it that they see it not? Nay! They had been not hoping for any rising up. 
25|41| And when they saw thee, they take thee to themselves but in mockery: Is this the one whom God raised up as a Messenger? 
25|42| He was about to cause us to go astray from our gods, if it were not that we endured patiently in them! And they will know at the time when they see the punishment, who is one who goes astray from the way. 
25|43| Hadst thou considered him who took to himself his own desires as his god? Wouldst thou, then, be over him a trustee? 
25|44| Or assume thou that most of them hear or are reasonable? They are not but as flocks. Nay! They are ones who go astray from a way. 
25|45| Hast thou not considered how thy Lord stretched out the shade? If He willed, He would make it a place of rest. Again, We made the sun an indicator over it. 
25|46| Again, We seized it to Us an easy seizing. 
25|47| And it is He Who made the nighttime a garment for you and sleep a rest and made the daytime for rising. 
25|48| And it is He Who sent the winds, bearers of good tidings in advance of His Mercy. And We caused to descend undefiled water from heaven 
25|49| that We give life by it to a lifeless land and with it We satiate. We created flocks on it and many humans. 
25|50| And, certainly, We diversified among them so that they recollect. Then, most of humanity refused everything, but disbelief. 
25|51| And if We willed, We would have raised up a warner in every town. 
25|52| So obey not the ones who are ungrateful and struggle against them thereby with a great struggle. 
25|53| And it is He Who let forth the two seas—this, agreeable and water of the sweetest kind and this, salty, bitter. He made between the two that which was unapproachable, a banned barrier. 
25|54| And it is He Who created a mortal from water and made for him kindred by blood and kin by marriage. And thy Lord had been ever Powerful. 
25|55| And they worship other than God what neither profits them nor hurts them. And the one who is ungrateful had been ever a sustainer against his Lord. 
25|56| And We sent thee not, but as one who gives good tidings and as a warner. 
25|57| Say: I ask of you no compensation for this but that whoever willed should take himself on a way to his Lord. 
25|58| And put thy trust in the Living Who is Undying and glorify His praise. And He sufficed to be aware of the impieties of His servants, 
25|59| He Who created the heavens and the earth and whatever is between the two in six days, again, He turned His attention to the Throne. The Merciful! Ask the aware, then, about Him. 
25|60| And when it was said to them: Prostrate yourselves to The Merciful, they said: And what is The Merciful? Will we prostrate ourselves to what thou hast commanded us? And it increased aversion in them.‡ 
25|61| Blessed be He Who made constellations in the heaven and made in it a light-giving lamp and an illuminating moon. 
25|62| And He it is Who made the nighttime and the daytime to follow in succession for who wanted to recollect, or who wanted thankfulness. 
25|63| And the servants of The Merciful are those who walk on the earth in meekness. And when the ones who are ignorant addressed them, they said: Peace! 
25|64| And those who spend the night with their Lord as ones who prostrate themselves and are upright, 
25|65| and those who say: Our Lord! Turn Thou away the punishment of hell from us. Truly, its punishment will be continuous torment. 
25|66| How evil a habitation and resting place. 
25|67| And those who, when they spent, neither exceed all bounds, nor are they tightfisted, but had been between that, a just stand: 
25|68| Those who call not to another god with God nor kill the soul which God forbade but rightfully, nor commit adultery. And whoever disregards and commits this will meet sinfulness. 
25|69| The punishment will be multiplied for him on the Day of Resurrection. And he will dwell in it forever, as one who is despised. 
25|70| Whoever has repented and believed and whose actions were done as one in accord with morality, for those God will substitute for their evil deeds benevolence. And God had been Forgiving, Compassionate. 
25|71| And whoever repented and did as one in accord with morality, he, truly, repents to God, turning in repentance. 
25|72| And those who bear not witness to untruth and if they passed by idle talk, they passed by nobly, 
25|73| and those who, when they were reminded of the signs of their Lord, fall not down unwilling to hear and unwilling to see 
25|74| and those who say: Our Lord! Bestow on us from our spouses and our offspring the comfort of our eyes and make us leaders of the ones who are Godfearing, 
25|75| those will be given recompense in the highest chambers because they endured patiently. They will be in receipt of greetings and peace, 
25|76| ones who will dwell in it forever. Excellent it is for habitation and as a resting place! 
25|77| Say: My Lord would not concern Himself with you if it had not been for your supplication, for, surely, you denied so it will be close at hand. 
26|1| ^[ S  M\m. 
26|2| That are the signs of the clear Book. 
26|3| Perhaps thou wouldst be one who consumes thyself in grief because they become not ones who believe. 
26|4| If We will, We send down to them from heaven a sign so that perhaps their necks would stay to it, ones that are bent in humility. 
26|5| And there approaches them not any renewed Remembrance from The Merciful but that they had been ones who turn aside from it. 
26|6| Surely, they denied it. So soon the tiding will approach them about what they had been ridiculing. 
26|7| Consider they the earth, how much We caused to develop in and on it of every generous pair? 
26|8| Truly, in that is a sign. Yet most of them had not been ones who believe. 
26|9| Truly, thy Lord, He is, certainly, The Almighty, The Compassionate. 
26|10| And when thy Lord proclaimed to Moses saying that: Approach the unjust folk, 
26|11| a folk of Pharaoh saying: Will they not be Godfearing? 
26|12| He said: My Lord! Truly, I fear that they will deny me 
26|13| and my breast be narrowed and my tongue will not be loosened. So send for Aaron. 
26|14| And they charge an impiety against me. I fear that they will kill me. 
26|15| He said: No indeed! Both of you go with Our signs. Truly, We will be with you, ones who are listening. 
26|16| And both of you approach Pharaoh and say: We are the Messengers of the Lord of the worlds, 
26|17| so send the Children of Israel with us. 
26|18| Pharaoh said: Raise not we thee up among us as a child? Hadst thou not lingered in expectation with us for many years of thy lifetime? 
26|19| And thou hadst accomplished thy accomplishment that thou hadst accomplished and thou art among the ones who are ungrateful. 
26|20| Moses said: I accomplished it when I was of the ones who go astray. 
26|21| So I ran away from you when I feared you. Then, my Lord bestowed on me critical judgment and made me among the ones who are sent. 
26|22| Beyond this past favor with which thou hast reproached me, thou hadst enslaved the Children of Israel. 
26|23| Pharaoh said: And what is the Lord of the worlds? 
26|24| Moses said: The Lord of the heavens and the earth and whatever is between the two of them if you had been ones who are certain. 
26|25| Pharaoh said to whoever was around him: Listen you not? 
26|26| Moses said: Your Lord and the Lord of your fathers, the ancient ones. 
26|27| Pharaoh said: Truly, your Messenger who was sent to you is one who is possessed! 
26|28| Moses said: The Lord of the East and the West and whatever is between the two of them if you had been reasonable! 
26|29| Pharaoh said: If thou hadst taken to thyself a god other than me. I will, certainly, assign thee to be imprisoned! 
26|30| Moses said: What if I drew near thee with something that makes it clear? 
26|31| Pharaoh said: Bring it, if thou hast been among the ones who are sincere. 
26|32| So he cast his staff; that is when it was a clear serpent. 
26|33| And he drew out his hand and that is when it was shimmering white to the ones who look. 
26|34| He said to the Council around him: Truly, this is one who is a knowing sorcerer! 
26|35| He wants to drive you out from your region by his sorcery. What is it, then, that you suggest? 
26|36| They said: Put him and his brother off and raise up ones who summon in the cities. 
26|37| They will bring every knowing witch to thee. 
26|38| So the ones who were sorcerers were gathered at a time appointed on a known day 
26|39| and it was said to humanity: Will you, you be ones who gather together 
26|40| so that perhaps we follow the ones who are sorcerers if they had been the ones who are victors? 
26|41| So when the ones who are sorcerers drew near, they said to Pharaoh: Is there a compensation for us if we had been the ones who are victors? 
26|42| Pharaoh said: Yes! Truly, you will be the ones who are brought near to me. 
26|43| Moses said to them: Cast what you will as ones who cast. 
26|44| So they cast their ropes and their staffs and said: By the vainglory of Pharaoh, we, we will, surely, be the ones who are victors! 
26|45| Then, Moses cast down his staff. That is when it swallows what they faked. 
26|46| The ones who are sorcerers were cast down, ones who prostrate themselves. 
26|47| They said: We believed in the Lord of the worlds, 
26|48| the Lord of Moses and Aaron. 
26|49| Pharaoh said: You believed in him before I give permission to you? He is, truly, your foremost master who taught you sorcery. Then, you will know. I will, certainly, cut off your hands and your feet on opposite sides, and I will cause you to be crucified one and all. 
26|50| They said: No grievance. Truly, to our Lord we are ones who are turning. 
26|51| Truly, we are desirous that Our Lord forgive us our transgressions that we had been the first of the ones who believe. 
26|52| And We revealed to Moses saying that: Set thou forth by night with My servants. Truly, you are ones who will be followed. 
26|53| Then, Pharaoh sent to the cities, ones who summon. 
26|54| They said: These are, truly, a small crowd 
26|55| and, truly, they are ones who enrage us. 
26|56| We are altogether, truly, ones who are cautious. 
26|57| So We drove them out from the gardens and springs 
26|58| and treasures and a generous station. 
26|59| And We, thus, gave them as inheritance to the Children of Israel. 
26|60| So they pursued them at sunrise. 
26|61| Then, when the two multitudes sighted each other, the Companions of Moses said: Truly, we are ones who are to be overtaken. 
26|62| Moses said: No indeed. Truly, my Lord is with me and He will guide me. 
26|63| Then, We revealed to Moses saying that: Strike the sea with thy staff and it divided and each had been a separate part like a high, tremendous mountain. 
26|64| And, again, We brought the others close 
26|65| and We rescued Moses and whoever was with him, one and all. 
26|66| Again, We drowned the others. 
26|67| Truly, in this is a sign and yet most of them had not been ones who believe. 
26|68| And, truly, thy Lord, He is The Almighty, The Compassionate. 
26|69| And recount to them the tidings of Abraham 
26|70| when he said to his father and his folk: What is it you worship? 
26|71| They said: We worship idols. We will stay ones who give ourselves up to them. 
26|72| He said: Hear they when you call them? 
26|73| Or are they profiting you or hurting you? 
26|74| They said: Nay! But we found our fathers acting likewise. 
26|75| He said: Then, considered what you had been worshipping, 
26|76| you and your fathers, the elders? 
26|77| Truly, they are an enemy to me, but not so the Lord of the worlds 
26|78| Who created me. And it is He Who guides me. 
26|79| And that He Who feeds me and gives me drink. 
26|80| And when I was sick, it is He Who heals me 
26|81| and Who causes me to die, again, will give me life, 
26|82| and from Whom I am desirous that He will forgive me my transgressions on the Day of Judgment. 
26|83| My Lord! Bestow on me critical judgment and cause me to join with the ones in accord with morality. 
26|84| And assign me a good name of good repute with the later ones 
26|85| and make me one who inherits the Garden of Bliss. 
26|86| And forgive my father. Truly, he had been among the ones who go astray. 
26|87| And cover me not with shame on a Day they will be raised up, 
26|88| on a Day neither wealth will profit nor children 
26|89| but he who approached God with a pure-hearted heart. 
26|90| And the Garden will be brought close for the ones who are Godfearing 
26|91| and hellfire will be advanced for the ones who are in error. 
26|92| And it will be said to them: Where is what you had been worshipping 
26|93| instead of God? Are you helped by them? Or help they themselves? 
26|94| Then, they were thrown down into it, they and the ones who are in error, 
26|95| and the army of Iblis, one and all. 
26|96| And they said while they are in it striving against one another: 
26|97| By God! Truly, we had been clearly wandering astray 
26|98| when we made you equal with the Lord of the worlds. 
26|99| And no one caused us to go astray but the ones who sin. 
26|100| Now we have not ones who are intercessors 
26|101| nor an ardent friend, a loyal friend. 
26|102| Would that there were for us a return again. Then, we would be among the ones who believe! 
26|103| Truly, in this is a sign; yet most of them had not been ones who believe. 
26|104| And, truly, thy Lord, He is The Almighty, The Compassionate. 
26|105| The folk of Noah denied the ones who are sent 
26|106| when their brother, Noah, said to them: Will you not be Godfearing? 
26|107| Truly, I am a trustworthy Messenger to you 
26|108| so be Godfearing of God and obey me. 
26|109| And I ask you not for any compensation for it. My compensation is only from the Lord of the worlds. 
26|110| So be Godfearing of God and obey you me. 
26|111| They said: Will we believe in thee when it is the most wretched that followed thee? 
26|112| He said: And what knowledge have I of what they had been doing? 
26|113| Truly, their reckoning is but with my Lord if you be aware. 
26|114| I am not one who drives away the ones who believe. 
26|115| I am not but a clear warner. 
26|116| They said: If thou hast not refrained thyself, O Noah, thou wilt, certainly, be among the ones who are stoned! 
26|117| He said: My Lord! My folk denied me, 
26|118| so give Thou deliverance between me and them and victory and deliver me and whoever is with me among the ones who believe. 
26|119| And We rescued him and whoever was with him in the laden boat. 
26|120| Again, We drowned after that the ones who remained. 
26|121| In this is, truly, a sign, yet most of them had not been ones who believe. 
26|122| Thy Lord, He, truly, is The Almighty, The Compassionate. 
26|123| Ad denied the ones who are sent 
26|124| when their brother Hud said to them: Will you not be Godfearing? 
26|125| Truly, I am a trustworthy Messenger to you, 
26|126| so be Godfearing of God and obey me. 
26|127| And I ask you not for any compensation for it. My compensation is only from the Lord of the worlds. 
26|128| Build you a sign on every high hill to amuse? 
26|129| And take you for yourselves castles so that perhaps you will dwell in them forever? 
26|130| And when you seized by force, seized you by force haughtily? 
26|131| So be Godfearing of God and obey me. 
26|132| Be Godfearing of Him Who furnished relief to you with all that you know. 
26|133| He furnished relief to you with flocks and children 
26|134| and gardens and springs. 
26|135| Truly, I fear for you the punishment of a tremendous Day. 
26|136| They said: It is equal to us whether thou wert to admonish or thou hast not been among the ones who admonish. 
26|137| Truly, this is nothing but morals of the ancient ones 
26|138| and we are not ones who are punished. 
26|139| So they denied him and We caused them to perish. Truly, in this is a sign yet most of them had not been ones who believe. 
26|140| And, truly, thy Lord, He is, certainly, The Almighty, The Compassionate. 
26|141| And Thamud denied the ones who are sent 
26|142| when their brother Salih said to them: Will you not be Godfearing? 
26|143| Truly, I am a trustworthy Messenger to you, 
26|144| so be Godfearing of God and obey me. 
26|145| And I ask you not for any compensation for it. My compensation is only from the Lord of the worlds. 
26|146| Will you be left ones who are safe in what you have here 
26|147| in gardens and springs 
26|148| and crops of slender spathes of date palm trees? 
26|149| Will you carve houses out of the mountains as ones who are skillful? 
26|150| So be Godfearing of God and obey me. 
26|151| Obey not the command of the ones who are excessive, 
26|152| who make corruption in and on the earth and make not things right. 
26|153| They said: Truly, thou art only of the ones against whom a spell is cast. 
26|154| Thou art not but a mortal like us. So bring us a sign if thou hadst been of the ones who are sincere. 
26|155| He said: This is a she camel. She has a right to drink and you have a right to drink on a known day. 
26|156| And afflict her not with evil so that you should take the punishment of a tremendous Day. 
26|157| But they crippled her and, then, it came to be in the morning that they are ones who are remorseful. 
26|158| So the punishment took them. Truly, in this is a sign yet most of them had not been ones who believe. 
26|159| And, truly, thy Lord! He is, certainly, The Almighty, The Compassionate. 
26|160| The folk of Lot denied the ones who are sent 
26|161| when their brother, Lot, said to them: Will you not be Godfearing? 
26|162| Truly, I am a trustworthy Messenger to you 
26|163| so be Godfearing of God and obey me. 
26|164| And I ask you not for any compensation for it. My compensation is only from the Lord of the worlds. 
26|165| You approach males among worldly beings 
26|166| forsaking spouses whom your Lord created for you? Nay! You are a folk ones who turn away. 
26|167| They said: If thou hast not refrained thyself, O Lot, thou wilt, certainly, be among ones who are driven out. 
26|168| He said: I am of the ones with hatred for your actions. 
26|169| My Lord! Deliver me and my people from what they do! 
26|170| So We delivered him and his people one and all 
26|171| but an old woman of the ones who stay behind. 
26|172| Again, We destroyed the others 
26|173| and We rained down on them a rain. And how evil was the rain for the ones who are warned! 
26|174| Truly, in this is a sign. Yet most of them had not been ones who believe. 
26|175| And, truly, thy Lord, He is, certainly, The Almighty, The Compassionate. 
26|176| The Companions of the Thicket denied the ones who are sent. 
26|177| When Shuayb said to them: Will you not be Godfearing? 
26|178| Truly, I am a trustworthy Messenger to you 
26|179| so be Godfearing of God and obey me. 
26|180| And I ask you not for any compensation for it. My compensation is only from the Lord of the worlds. 
26|181| Live up to the full measure and be not of the ones who cause loss to others by fraud. 
26|182| And weigh with a straight scale 
26|183| and diminish not to humanity their things nor do mischief in or on the earth as ones who make corruption. 
26|184| And be Godfearing of Him Who created you and the array of the ancient ones. 
26|185| They said: Thou art only ones against whom a spell is cast. 
26|186| And thou art nothing but a mortal like us. And, truly, we think thee to be among the ones who lie. 
26|187| So cause pieces of heaven to drop on us, if you had been among the ones who are sincere. 
26|188| He said: My Lord is greater in knowledge of what you do. 
26|189| But they denied him. So took them the punishment on the overshadowing day. Truly, that had been the punishment of a tremendous Day! 
26|190| Truly, in this is a sign. Yet most of them had not been ones who believe. 
26|191| And, truly, thy Lord, He is, certainly, The Almighty, The Compassionate. 
26|192| And this, truly, is the sending down successively of the Lord of the worlds 
26|193| that the Trustworthy Spirit brought down 
26|194| on thy heart that thou be among the one who warn 
26|195| in a clear Arabic tongue. 
26|196| And, truly, it is in the ancient scrolls of the ancient ones. 
26|197| Would it not be a sign for them that is known to the knowing among the Children of Israel? 
26|198| And if We sent it down to some of the non-Arabs, 
26|199| and he recited it to them, they had not been ones who believe in it. 
26|200| Thus, We thrust it into the hearts of the ones who sin. 
26|201| They will not believe in it until they see the painful punishment. 
26|202| Then, it will approach them suddenly while they are not aware. 
26|203| Then, they will say: Are we ones who are given respite? 
26|204| Seek they to hasten Our punishment? 
26|205| Hadst thou considered that if We gave them enjoyment for years 
26|206| and, again, there drew near them what they had been promised, 
26|207| they would not be availed by what they had been given of enjoyment? 
26|208| We caused no town to perish but that it had ones who warn 
26|209| as a reminder. And We had not been ones who are unjust. 
26|210| It came not forth by the satans 
26|211| and neither is it fit and proper for them nor are they able. 
26|212| Truly, they, from having the ability to hear, are the ones who are set aside. 
26|213| So call thou not to any god with God so that thou be among the ones who are punished. 
26|214| And warn thy nearest kin, the kinspeople. 
26|215| And make low thy wing to whoever followed thee among the ones who believe. 
26|216| Then, if they rebelled against thee, then, say: Truly, I am free of what you do. 
26|217| And put thy trust in The Almighty, The Compassionate, 
26|218| Who sees thee at the time thou hast stood up 
26|219| and thy going to and fro of the ones who prostrate themselves? 
26|220| Truly, He is The Hearing, The Knowing. 
26|221| Will I tell you in whom the satans come forth? 
26|222| They come forth in every sinful false one who gives listen, 
26|223| but most of them are ones who lie. 
26|224| As for the poets, the ones who are in error follow them. 
26|225| Hast thou not considered that they wander in every valley 
26|226| and that they say what they accomplish not? 
26|227| But those who believed and did as the ones in accord with morality remembered God frequently and helped themselves after they were wronged. And those who did wrong will know by which overturning they will be turned about! 
27|1| ^[ S . That are the signs of the Quran and a clear Book, 
27|2| a guidance and good tidings for the ones who believe, 
27|3| those who perform the formal prayer and give the purifying alms so that they of the world to come, they are certain. 
27|4| Truly, as for those who believe not in the world to come, We made their actions appear pleasing to them so that they wander unwilling to see. 
27|5| Those are those for whom is the dire punishment and they, in the world to come, they are the ones who are the losers. 
27|6| And, truly, thee, thou art in receipt of the Quran, that which proceeds from the Presence, Wise, Knowing. 
27|7| Mention when Moses said to his people: Truly, I, I observed a fire! I will bring you news from it or I will approach you with a flaming firebrand so that perhaps you would warm yourselves. 
27|8| But when he drew near it, it was proclaimed that: Blessed be He Who is in the fire and Who is around it, and glory be to God, the Lord of the worlds. 
27|9| O Moses! Truly, I alone am God, The Almighty, The Wise. 
27|10| Cast down thy staff. But when he saw it quiver as if it were a snake, he turned as one who draws back to retrace his steps. O Moses! Fear not! The ones who are sent fear not My nearness 
27|11| but whoever did wrong does. Again, he substituted goodness after evil and, truly, I am Forgiving, Compassionate. 
27|12| Cause thy hand to enter into thy bosom. It will go forth shimmering white without evil. These are among nine signs to Pharaoh and his folk. Truly, they had been a folk, ones who disobey. 
27|13| But when Our signs drew near them, ones who perceive, they said: This is clear sorcery. 
27|14| And they negated them—although their souls confessed to them—out of injustice and self-exaltation. So look on how had been the Ultimate End of the ones who make corruption. 
27|15| Certainly, We gave David and Solomon knowledge; and they said: All Praise belongs to God Who gave us advantage over many of His servants, ones who believe. 
27|16| And Solomon inherited from David and he said: O humanity! We were taught the utterance of the birds and everything was given to us. Truly, this is clearly grace. 
27|17| And there was assembled before Solomon his armies of jinn and humankind and birds and they are marching in rank 
27|18| until when they approached the Valley of the Ants. One ant said: O ants! Enter your dwellings so that Solomon and his armies not crush you while they are not aware. 
27|19| So Solomon smiled as one who laughs at its saying and he said: My Lord! Arouse me that I give thanks for Thy divine blessing with which Thou wert gracious to me and ones who are my parents and that I do as one in accord with morality. May Thou be well-pleased and cause me to enter by Thy Mercy among Thy servants, ones in accord with morality. 
27|20| And he reviewed the birds and said: Why see I not the hoopoe bird? Had it been among the ones who are absent? 
27|21| I will, certainly, punish him with a severe punishment or deal a death blow to it unless it brings me a clear authority! 
27|22| But it was not long in coming. Then, it said: I comprehended what thou hast not comprehended of it. And I drew near thee from Sheba with certain tidings. 
27|23| Truly, I found a woman controlling them. And she was given everything and for her is a sublime throne. 
27|24| I found her and her folk prostrating herself to the sun—instead of God—and Satan made to appear pleasing to them their actions and barred them from the way so they are not truly guided. 
27|25| So they prostrate themselves not to God Who brings out that which is hidden in the heavens and the earth and knows what you conceal and what you speak openly. 
27|26| God, there is no god but He, the Lord of the Sublime Throne.‡ 
27|27| Solomon said: We will look on if thou hadst been sincere or thou art of the ones who lie. 
27|28| Go thou with this letter of mine and cast it to them. Again, turn away from them and look on what they return. 
27|29| She said: O Council! Truly, a generous letter was cast down to me. 
27|30| Truly, it is from Solomon and, truly, it is in the Name of God, The Merciful, The Compassionate. 
27|31| Rise not up against me, but approach me as ones who submit to God. 
27|32| She said: O Council! Render me an opinion in my affair. I had not been one who resolves unless you bear witness. 
27|33| They said: We are imbued with strength and vigorous might, but the command is for thee. So look on what thou wilt command. 
27|34| She said: Truly, when kings entered a town, they made corruption in it and made the most mighty of its people humiliated in spirit. Thus, this is what they accomplish. 
27|35| But, truly, I am one who will send to them a present and will be one who looks with what returns the ones who are sent. 
27|36| So when they drew near Solomon, he said: Are you furnishing me relief with wealth? What God gave me is better than what He gave you. Nay! It is you who should be glad with your present! 
27|37| Return thou to them and We, truly, will approach them with armies against which they will not be capable and we will drive them out from there as ones who are disgraced and they, humble-spirited. 
27|38| He said: O Council! Which of you will bring me her throne before they approach me as ones who submit to God? 
27|39| A demon from among the jinn said: I will bring it to thee before thou wilt stand up from thy station. And, truly, I am strong, trustworthy. 
27|40| Said he who has knowledge of the Book: I will bring it to thee before thy glance goes back to thee. And, then, when he saw that which is settled before him, he said: This is from the grace of my Lord to try me whether I give thanks or am ungrateful. And whoever gave thanks, truly, he gives thanks for himself. And whoever was ungrateful, then, truly, my Lord is Rich, Generous. 
27|41| He said: Disguise her throne for her that we look on whether she will be truly guided or she will be of those who are not truly guided. 
27|42| So when she drew near, it was said: Is thy throne like this? She said: It is as though it had been it. Solomon said: The knowledge was given us before her and we had been ones who submit to the One God. 
27|43| She was barred from worshipping God by what she had been worshipping other than God for, truly, she had been of a folk, ones who are ungrateful. 
27|44| It was said to her: Enter the pavilion. And when she saw it, she assumed it to be a pool and she bared her legs. He said: Truly, it is a smooth, crystal pavilion. She said: My Lord! Truly, I did wrong to myself and I submitted with Solomon to God, the Lord of the worlds. 
27|45| And, certainly, We sent to Thamud their brother, Salih that they worship God! Then, when they became two groups of people striving against one another, 
27|46| he said: O my folk! Why seek you to hasten the evil deed before benevolence? Why ask you not for forgiveness of God so that perhaps you will find mercy? 
27|47| They said: We auger ill of thee and whoever is with thee. He said: That which is your omen is with God. Nay! You are a folk who are being tried. 
27|48| And there had been nine groups of persons in the city who make corruption in the earth and make not things right. 
27|49| They said: Swear to one another by God: We will, certainly, attack him by night and his people. Again, we will, certainly, say to his protector: We bore not witness to the destruction of his people and, truly, we are ones who are sincere. 
27|50| So they planned a plan and We planned a plan while they were not aware. 
27|51| So look on how had been the Ultimate End of their planning! Truly, We destroyed them and their folk one and all. 
27|52| And that are their houses, ones that have fallen down for what they did wrong? Truly, in this is a sign for a folk who know. 
27|53| And We rescued those who believed and had been Godfearing. 
27|54| And Lot, when he said to his folk: You approach indecency and you perceive what you do. 
27|55| Why approach you men with lust instead of women? Nay! You are a folk who are ignorant. 
27|56| Then, there had been no answer by his folk, but that they said: Drive the people of Lot out from your town. Truly, they are a clan to cleanse themselves. 
27|57| So We rescued him and his people, but his woman. We ordained her to be among the ones who stay behind. 
27|58| And We rained down on them a rain. How evil was the rain to the ones who are warned! 
27|59| Say: The Praise belongs to God and peace be on His servants, those whom He favored. Is God better or what they ascribe as partner with God?
27|60| Who created the heavens and the earth and caused to descend for you from the heavens, water? With it We caused joyous, fertile gardens to develop. It had not been for you to cause their trees to develop. Is there any god besides God? Nay! They are a folk who equate others with God. 
27|61| Who made the earth a stopping place and made rivers in the midst and made firm mountains for it and made between the two sees that which hinders? Is there a god besides God? Nay! But most of them know not! 
27|62| Who answers one who is constrained when he called to Him and He removes the evil and assigns you as vice-regents on the earth? Is there a god besides God? Little is what you recollect! 
27|63| Who guides you in the shadows of the dry land the sea and Who sends the winds, bearer of good news in advance of His mercy? Is there a god besides God? Exalted is God above partners they ascribe with God. 
27|64| Who begins creation, again, will cause it to return and Who provides you from the heaven and the earth. Is there a god besides God? Say: Prepare your proof if you had been ones who are sincere! 
27|65| Say: None knows who is in the heavens and the earth, nor the unseen but God. Nor are they aware when they will be raised up. 
27|66| Nay! Their knowledge of the world to come failed. Nay! They are in uncertainty about it. Nay! They are in the dark about it. 
27|67| And those who were ungrateful said: When we had been earth dust like our fathers will we, truly, be ones who are brought out? 
27|68| Certainly, we were promised this, we and our fathers before. Truly, this is nothing but fables of the ancient ones. 
27|69| Say: Journey through the earth; then, look on how had been the Ultimate End of the ones who sin. 
27|70| And feel thou not remorse for them, nor be troubled by what they plan. 
27|71| And they say: When is the promise if you had been ones who are sincere? 
27|72| Say: Perhaps coming close behind you be some of that which you seek to hasten. 
27|73| And, truly, thy Lord is Possessor of Grace for humanity, but most of them give not thanks. 
27|74| And, truly, thy Lord knows what their breasts hide and what they speak openly. 
27|75| Not is that which is absent in the heaven and the earth, but that it is in the clear Book. 
27|76| Truly, this, the Quran, relates about the Children of Israel and most of what they are at variance in it. 
27|77| And, truly, it is a guidance and a mercy for the ones who believe. 
27|78| Truly, thy Lord will decree between them with His determination. And He is The Almighty, The Knowing. 
27|79| So put thy trust in God. Truly, thou art on The Clear Truth. 
27|80| Truly, thou wilt not cause the dead to hear nor wilt thou cause to hear the unwilling to hear the calling to them when they turned as ones who draw back. 
27|81| Nor wilt thou be one who guides the unwilling to see out of their fallacy. Thou wilt not cause to hear, but whoever believes in Our signs and so they are ones who submit to God. 
27|82| And when the saying fell on them, We will bring out a moving creature for them from the earth that will speak to them, that: Humanity had not been certain of Our signs. 
27|83| And on a Day We will assemble a unit out of every community of whoever denies Our signs and they will be marching in rank. 
27|84| Until when they drew near, He will say: Denied you My signs without comprehending them in knowledge, or what is it that you had been doing? 
27|85| And the saying will fall on them because they did wrong. And they will speak nothing for themselves. 
27|86| Considered they not? We made the nighttime for them to rest in it and the daytime for ones who perceive. Truly, in that are signs for a folk who believe. 
27|87| On a Day on which the trumpet will be blown, whoever is in the heavens will be terrified and whoever is on the earth, but him whom God willed. And all will approach Him as ones who are in a state of lowliness. 
27|88| And thou wilt see the mountains thou hast assumed to be that which are fixed. But they will pass by as the passing of the clouds. This is the handiwork of God Who created everything very well. Truly, He is Aware of what you accomplish. 
27|89| Whoever drew near with benevolence, for him will be better than it and they would be from the terror ones who are safe on that Day. 
27|90| And whoever drew near with evil deeds, they would be slung on their faces in the fire: Are you given recompense but for what you had been doing? 
27|91| Truly, I was commanded to worship the Lord of this land which He made sacred and to Whom everything belongs. And I was commanded that I be among the ones who submit to God 
27|92| and to recount the Recitation. So whoever was truly guided, then, he is truly guided only for himself. And to whoever went astray say: Truly, I am among the ones who warn. 
27|93| And say: The Praise belongs to God. He will cause you to see His signs and you will recognize them. Thy Lord is not One Who is Heedless of what you do. 
28|1| ^a S  M\m. 
28|2| That are the signs of the clear Book. 
28|3| We recount to thee the tiding of Moses and Pharaoh with The Truth for a folk who believe. 
28|4| Truly, Pharaoh exalted himself on the earth and made his people partisans, taking advantage of due to their weakness, a section among them. He slaughters their children and saves alive their women. Truly, he had been of the ones who make corruption. 
28|5| And We want to show grace to those who were taken advantage of due to their weakness on the earth and to make them leaders and to make them the ones who inherit 
28|6| and to establish them firmly on the earth. And We cause Pharaoh and Haman to see—and their armies from them— that of which they had been fearful. 
28|7| And We revealed to the mother of Moses: Breast feed him. But if thou hadst feared for him, then, cast him into the water of the sea and neither fear nor feel remorse. Truly, We will be ones who restore him to thee, ones who make him among the ones who are sent. 
28|8| Then, the people of Pharaoh picked him out to be an enemy to them and a cause of grief. Truly, Pharaoh and Haman and their armies had been ones who are inequitable. 
28|9| And the woman of Pharaoh said: He will be a comfort to our eyes for me and for thee. Kill him not. Perhaps he may profit us or we may take him to ourselves as a son. But they are not aware. 
28|10| And it came to be in the morning that the mind of the mother of Moses was that which is empty. Truly, she was about to show him, if We had not invigorated her heart so that she became among the ones who believe. 
28|11| And she said to his sister: Track him. So she kept watching him from afar while they are not aware. 
28|12| And We forbade any breast feeding female for him before. Then, she said: Shall I point you to the people of a house who will take control of him for you and they will be ones who will look after him? 
28|13| So We returned him to his mother that her eyes settle down and she not feel remorse and that she knows that the Promise of God is true. But most of them know not. 
28|14| And when he was fully grown, come of age and he straightened himself up, We gave him critical judgment and knowledge. And, thus, We give recompense to the ones who are doers of good. 
28|15| And he entered the city at a time of heedlessness of its people. He found in it two men fighting one against the other. This who was from among his partisans and this who was from among his enemies. The one who was among his partisans cried for help against him who was among his enemies. So Moses struck him with his fist and Moses made an end of him. He said: This is the action of Satan. Truly, he is a clear enemy, one who leads astray. 
28|16| He said: My Lord! Truly, I did wrong to myself so forgive me and He forgave him. Truly, He is The Forgiving, The Compassionate. 
28|17| He said: My Lord! For that with which Thou wert gracious to me I will never be a sustainer of the ones who sin. 
28|18| So he came to be in the morning in the city one who is fearful and is vigilant. That is when the one who had asked for help yesterday cries out aloud to him. Moses said to him: Truly, thou art clearly a hothead. 
28|19| Then, when he wanted to seize by force the one who he was an enemy of both of them—he said: O Moses! Wouldst thou want to kill me as thou hadst killed a soul yesterday? Thou wouldst want nothing, but to be haughty on the earth? And thou wouldst want not to be among the ones who make things right? 
28|20| A man drew near from the farther part of the city, coming eagerly, he said: O Moses! Truly, the Council is conspiring against thee to kill thee, so go forth. Truly, I am the one who gives advice to thee. 
28|21| So Moses went forth from there as one who is fearful, is vigilant. He said: My Lord! Deliver me from the folk, ones who are unjust. 
28|22| When of his own accord he turned his face toward Midian he said: Perhaps my Lord guides me to the right way. 
28|23| And when he went down to the well of Midian, he found a community there of personages drawing water and he found other than them two women who keep away. He said: What is your business? They both said: We draw not water until the ones who are shepherds move on. And our father is an aged, old man. 
28|24| So he drew water for them. Again, he turned away to the shade and said: My Lord! Truly, I am, certainly, of whatever Thou caused to descend of good to me, in need. 
28|25| Then, drew near him one of the two women, walking bashfully. She said: Truly, my father calls to thee that he may give thee recompense of compensation because thou hadst drawn water for us. So when he drew near him and related to him the narrative, he said: Fear not. Thou wert delivered from the folk, ones who are unjust. 
28|26| One of the two women said: O my father! Employ him. Truly, best is that thou wouldst employ the strong, the trustworthy. 
28|27| He said: Truly, I want to wed thee to one of my two daughters if that thou wilt hire thyself to me for eight years. But if thou wert to fulfill ten years, then, it will be from thee, for I want not to press thee hard. Thou wilt find me, if God willed, among the ones in accord with morality. 
28|28| He said: That is between thee and between me whichever of the two terms I satisfied. There will be no deep seated dislike from me. And God is Trustee over what we say. 
28|29| Then, when Moses satisfied the term and journeyed with his people, he observed at the edge of the mount a fire. He said to his people: Abide! Truly, I, I observed a fire so that perhaps I will bring you some news from there or burning wood of fire so that perhaps you will warm yourselves. 
28|30| So when he approached it, it was proclaimed from the right side of the ridge of the valley, in a corner of the blessed ground from the tree: O Moses! Truly, I am God, the Lord of the worlds. 
28|31| Cast thy staff. But when he saw it quiver as if it were a snake, he turned as one who draws back, and he retraces his steps. O Moses! Come forward and fear not. Truly, thou art among the ones who are safe. 
28|32| Insert thy hand into thy bosom. It will go forth shimmering white without evil and clasp thy arm pits against fright. These are two proofs from thy Lord to Pharaoh and his Council. Truly, they had been a folk, ones who disobey. 
28|33| He said: My Lord! Truly, I killed a soul among them and I fear that they will kill me. 
28|34| And my brother Aaron, he is more oratorical in language than I, so send him with me as a helpmate to establish me as true. Truly, I fear that they will deny me. 
28|35| He said: We will strengthen thy arm through thy brother and assign to you both authority so that they reach not out to you both. With Our signs, you two and whoever followed you two will be the ones who are victors. 
28|36| Then, when Moses drew near them with Our signs, clear portents, they said: This is nothing but forged sorcery. We heard not of this from our fathers, the ancient ones. 
28|37| Moses said: My Lord is greater in knowledge of who drew near with guidance from Him and what will be the Ultimate End in the Abode. Truly, the ones who are unjust will not prosper. 
28|38| And Pharaoh said: O Council! I knew not of any god for you other than me so kindle for me, O Haman, a fire on the clay and make a pavilion for me so that perhaps I will peruse the God of Moses. And, truly, I think that he is among the ones who lie. 
28|39| And he grew arrogant, he and his armies, on the earth without right and they thought that they would not be returned to Us. 
28|40| So We took him and his armies and We cast them forth in the water of the sea. So look on how had been the Ultimate End of the ones who are unjust. 
28|41| We made them leaders. They call to the fire. And on the Day of Resurrection, they will not be helped. 
28|42| And a curse pursued them in the present. And on the Day of Resurrection they will be of the ones who are spurned. 
28|43| And, certainly, We gave Moses the Book, after We caused previous generations to perish as clear evidence for humanity and a guidance and a mercy so that they recollect. 
28|44| And thou hadst not been on the western edge when We decreed the command to Moses and thou hadst not been among the ones who bear witness. 
28|45| But We caused generations to grow and their lifetimes continued to be long. And thou hadst not been one who is a dweller with the people of Midian who recount Our signs to them, but it is We Who had been ones who send. 
28|46| And thou hadst not been at the edge of the mount when We proclaimed, but as a mercy from thy Lord, that thou wast to warn a folk to whom no warner approached them before thee so that perhaps they will recollect. 
28|47| So that if affliction lights on them for what their hands put forward, they say: Our Lord! Why hadst Thou not sent a Messenger to us that we would have followed Thy signs and we would be among the ones who believe? 
28|48| But when The Truth drew near them from Us they said: Why was he not given the like of what was given to Moses? They are ones who are ungrateful for what was given to Moses before. They said: Two kinds of sorcery, each helped one against the other. And they said: Truly, we disbelieve in all of it. 
28|49| Say: Then, bring a Book from God that is better guided than these two that I follow it, if you had been ones who are sincere. 
28|50| But if they respond not to thee, then, know that they only follow their own desires. And who is one who goes astray than whoever followed his own desires without guidance from God? Truly, God guides not the folk, the ones who are unjust. 
28|51| And, certainly, We caused the saying to reach them so that perhaps they will recollect. 
28|52| Those to whom We gave the Book before it, they believe in it. 
28|53| And when it is recounted to them, they say: We believed in it. Truly, it is The Truth from our Lord. Truly, even before it we had been ones who submit to God. 
28|54| Those will be given their compensation two times because they patiently endured and drive off evil deeds with benevolence and they spend out of what We provided them. 
28|55| And when they heard idle talk, they turned aside from it and said: To us are our actions and to you are your actions. Peace be to you! We are not looking for the ones who are ignorant. 
28|56| Truly, thou hast not guided whom thou hast loved but God guides whomever He wills. And He is greater in knowledge of the ones who are truly guided. 
28|57| They said: If we follow the guidance with thee, we would be snatched away from our region. Establish We not firmly for them a holy, safe place where all kinds of fruits are collected as provision from that which proceeds from Our Presence? But most of them know not. 
28|58| And how many a town that We caused to perish boasted about its livelihood. And these are their dwellings, not to be inhabited after them but a little. And, truly, We, We had been the ones who inherit. 
28|59| Thy Lord had not been One Who Causes towns to perish until He raises up to their mother-town a Messenger who recounts Our signs to them. We never had been Ones Who Cause towns to perish unless their people are ones who are unjust. 
28|60| And whatever things you were given are enjoyment for this present life and its adornment. And what is with God is better for one who endures. Will you not, then, be reasonable? 
28|61| Is he to whom We promised a fairer promise—and it is one that reaches fulfillment—like him to whom We gave the enjoyment of enjoyment for this present life? Again, on the Day of Resurrection he will be among the ones who are charged? 
28|62| And on that Day He will proclaim to them and will say: Where are My ascribed associates whom you had been claiming? 
28|63| They would say about whom will be realized the saying: Our Lord! These are they whom we led into error. We led them into error even as we erred. We clear ourselves with Thee. They had never been worshipping us. 
28|64| And it would be said: Call to your ascribed associates. Then, they will call to them, but they will not respond to them and they will see the punishment. If only they had been truly guided! 
28|65| And on a Day when He would proclaim to them and He would say: What have you answered to the ones who are sent? 
28|66| Then, the tidings of that day will be in darkness and they will not demand anything of one another. 
28|67| As for him who repented and believed and did as one in accord with morality, then, perhaps he will be among the ones who prosper. 
28|68| And thy Lord creates whatever He wills and chooses. Not for them had there been a choice. Glory be to God and exalted is He above partners they ascribe! 
28|69| And thy Lord knows what their breasts hide and what they speak openly. 
28|70| And He, God, there is no god but He. His is all Praise in the First and in the Last. And His is the determination. And to Him you will be returned. 
28|71| Say: Considered you what if God made the nighttime endless for you until the Day of Resurrection? What god other than God brings you illumination? Will you not, then, hear? 
28|72| Say: Considered you what if God made the daytime endless for you until the Day of Resurrection? What god other than God brings you nighttime wherein you rest? Will you not, then, perceive? 
28|73| And it is out of His mercy that He assigned for you the nighttime and the daytime that you rest in it and that you be looking for His grace and so that perhaps you will give thanks. 
28|74| And on a Day He will proclaim to them and say: Where are My ascribed associates whom you had been claiming? 
28|75| And We will tear out a witness from every community and We will say: Prepare your proof. Then, they will know that The Truth is with God and will go astray from them what they had been devising. 
28|76| Truly, Korah had been of the folk of Moses, but he was insolent towards them. And We gave him of the treasures which truly, the keys of it were a heavy ordeal to many imbued with strength. Mention when His folk said to him: Exult not. Truly, God loves not the exultant. 
28|77| Look for what God gave thee for the Last Abode. And forget not thy share of the present and do good even as God did good to thee. And be not insolent, corrupting in and on the earth. Truly, God loves not the ones who make corruption. 
28|78| Korah said: I was only given it because of the knowledge with me. Knows he not that God caused to perish before him some of the generations who were more vigorous in strength than he and more numerous in multitude yet the ones who sin will not be asked about their impieties? 
28|79| So he went forth to his folk in his adornment. And said those who want this present life: O would that we had the like of what was given to Korah! Truly, he is the possessor of a sublime allotment. 
28|80| And those who were given the knowledge said: Woe to you! The reward for good deeds from God is better for whoever believed and did as ones in accord with morality. And none will be in receipt of it, but the ones who remain steadfast. 
28|81| So We caused to swallow him the earth and his abode! Then, there had been not any faction to help him against God. And he had been of the ones who are helpless. 
28|82| And it came to be in the morning those who had coveted his place but yesterday, say: God extends the provision to whomever He wills of His servants and confines it to whomever He wills. Were it not that God showed grace to us, He would have caused the earth to swallow us; O how the ones who are ungrateful will not prosper! 
28|83| This is the Last Abode that We will assign to those who want not self-exaltation in the earth, nor corruption. And the Ultimate End is for the ones who are Godfearing. 
28|84| Whoever brought about benevolence, for him there will be better than it. And whoever brought about an evil deed, then, not will be given recompense to those who did evil deeds other than for what they had been doing. 
28|85| Truly, He Who imposed the Quran for thee will be one who restores thee to the place of return. Say: My Lord is greater in knowledge of whoever drew near guidance and whoever is clearly wandering astray. 
28|86| And thou hadst been without hope that the Book would be cast down to thee, but as a mercy from thy Lord. Be thou not a sustainer of the ones who are ungrateful. 
28|87| And let them not bar thee from the signs of God after they were caused to descend to thee. And call to thy Lord. And be thou not among the ones who are polytheists. 
28|88| And call not to any god other than God.• There is no god but He! Everything is that which perishes, but His Countenance. To Him is the determination and to Him you will be returned. 
29|1| Alif L[m M\m. 
29|2| Assumed humanity that they will be left because they say: We believed and they will not be tried? 
29|3| And, certainly, We tried those who were before them. Then, certainly, God knows those who were sincere and knows the ones who lie. 
29|4| Or assumed those who do evil deeds that they will out do Us? How evil is that about which they give judgment! 
29|5| Whoever had been hoping for the meeting with God, then, truly, the term of God is that which arrives. And He is The Hearing, The Knowing. 
29|6| Whoever struggled, he struggles only for himself. Then, truly, God is Sufficient for the worlds. 
29|7| And those who believed and do as ones in accord with morality, certainly, We will absolve them of their evil deeds and We will give recompense for the fairer of what they had been doing. 
29|8| And We charged the human being with goodness to ones who are his parents and if they struggled with thee that thou ascribest partners with Me, that of which for thee there is no knowledge, then, obey them not. To Me is your return and I will tell you of what you had been doing. 
29|9| And those who believed and did as the ones in accord with morality, We will, certainly, cause them to enter among the ones in accord with morality. 
29|10| And of humanity is he who says: We believed in God. But, when he was maligned for the sake of God, he mistook the persecution by humanity for a punishment by God. And if help drew near from thy Lord, they would, surely, say: We had been with you. Is not God greater in knowledge of what is in the breasts of beings? 
29|11| And, certainly, God knows those who believed and, certainly, He knows the ones who are hypocrites. 
29|12| And those who were ungrateful said to those who believed: Follow our way and we will, certainly, carry your transgressions while they are not ones who carry any of their own transgressions. Truly, they are the ones who lie. 
29|13| And, certainly, they will carry their own lading and other ladings with their own ladings. And, certainly, they will be asked on the Day of Resurrection about what they had been devising. 
29|14| And, certainly, We sent Noah to his folk and he lingered in expectation among them a thousand years less fifty years. And the Deluge took them while they were the ones who are unjust. 
29|15| Then, We rescued him and the Companions of the Vessel and made it a sign for the worlds. 
29|16| And when Abraham said to his folk: Worship God and be Godfearing of Him. That would be better for you if you had been knowing. 
29|17| You only worship graven images and not God? And you create calumny? Truly, those whom you worship other than God possess not for you any power to provide for you. So look for the provision from God and worship Him and give thanks to Him. To Him you will be returned. 
29|18| And if you deny, then, surely, communities denied before you. And for the Messenger is not but the delivering of the clear message. 
29|19| Consider they not how God causes the creation to begin and, again, He causes it to return? Truly, that for God is easy. 
29|20| Say: Journey through the earth; then, look on how He began the creation. Again, God will cause the last growth to grow. Truly, God is Powerful over everything. 
29|21| He punishes whom He wills and has mercy on whom He wills. And to Him you will come back. 
29|22| You will not be ones who frustrate Him on the earth nor in the heaven and there is not for you, other than God, either a protector or a helper. 
29|23| And those who disbelieved in the signs of God and the meeting with Him, those gave up hope of My mercy and those, for them there will be a painful punishment. 
29|24| So the answer of his folk had been not but that they said: Kill him or burn him! Then, God rescued him from the fire. Truly, in this are, certainly, signs for a folk who believe. 
29|25| And he said: You take only to yourselves graven images instead of God because of affection among yourselves for this present life. Again, on the Day of Resurrection some of you will disavow some others and some of you will curse some others and your place of shelter will be the fire. And for you there will be no ones who help. 
29|26| So Lot believed in him.• And Abraham said: Truly, I am one who emigrates for my Lord. Truly, He, He is The Almighty, The Wise. 
29|27| And We bestowed Isaac and Jacob on him and We assigned to his offspring prophethood and the Book. We gave him his compensation in the present. And, truly, in the world to come he will be, certainly, among the ones in accord with morality. 
29|28| And Lot, when he said to his folk: Truly, you approach indecency which none who preceded you committed in the worlds. 
29|29| You approach men with lust and sever the way and approach that which is unlawful in your conclave. Then, the answer of his folk had not been but that they said: Bring on us the punishment of God if thou hadst been among the ones who are sincere. 
29|30| He said: My Lord! Help me against the folk, ones who make corruption. 
29|31| And when Our messengers drew near Abraham with the good tidings. They said: Truly, We are ones who will cause to perish the people of this town. Truly, its people had been ones who are unjust. 
29|32| He said: Truly, in it is Lot. They said: We are greater in knowledge of who is in it. We will, truly, deliver him and his family, but his woman. She had been among the ones who stay behind. 
29|33| And when Our messengers drew near Lot, he was troubled because of them and he was concerned for them, distressed, and they said: Neither fear nor feel remorse. Truly, we are ones who will deliver thee and thy family but thy woman. She had been among the ones who stay behind. 
29|34| Truly, we are ones who will cause to descend on the people of this town wrath from heaven because they had been disobeying. 
29|35| And, certainly, We left in it a sign, clear portents for a folk who be reasonable. 
29|36| And to Midian, their brother Shuayb. He said: O my folk! Worship God and hope for the Last Day and do not mischief in and on the earth as ones who make corruption. 
29|37| And they denied him. So the quaking of the earth took them and it came to be in the morning in their abodes, ones who are fallen prostrate. 
29|38| And Ad and Thamud, surely, it became clear to you from their dwellings. Satan made their actions appear pleasing to them and barred them from the way and they had been ones who see clearly. 
29|39| And Korah and Pharaoh and Haman and, certainly, Moses drew near to them with the clear portents, but they grew arrogant on the earth and they had not been ones who take the lead from Us. 
29|40| So We took each of them in his impiety. And of them was he on whom We sent a sand storm and of them was he whom the Cry took and of them was he whom We caused the earth to swallow and of them were some whom We drowned. And God had not been doing wrong to them, but they had been doing wrong themselves. 
29|41| The parable of those who took other than God to themselves as protectors is that of the spider who took a house to itself. But, truly, the frailest of houses is the house of the spider if they had but been knowing. 
29|42| Truly, God knows what thing they call to other than Him. And He is The Almighty, The Wise. 
29|43| And We propound these parables for humanity. And no one is reasonable among them but the ones who know. 
29|44| God created the heavens and the earth with The Truth. Truly, in that is a sign for the ones who believe. 
29|45| Recount what was revealed to thee of the Book and perform the formal prayer. Truly, the formal prayer prohibits depravity and that which is unlawful, and, truly, the remembrance of God is greater. And God knows what you craft. 
29|46| And dispute not with the People of the Book unless in a way that is fairer, but with those who did wrong among them. And say: We have believed in what was caused to descend to us and was caused to descend to you and our God and your God is One and we are ones who submit to Him. 
29|47| And, thus, We caused the Book to descend to thee. And those to whom We gave the Book before will believe in it. And of these, the people of Makkah, there are some who believe in it. And none negates Our signs but the ones who are ungrateful. 
29|48| And neither hadst thou been recounting from any Book before it nor writest thou it with thy right hand for then, certainly, they would have been in doubt, the ones who deal in falsehood. 
29|49| Nay! It is clear portents, signs in the breasts of those who were given the knowledge. And none negate Our signs but ones who are unjust. 
29|50| And they said: Why were signs not caused to descend to him from his Lord? Say: The signs are only with God. I am only a warner, one who makes clear. 
29|51| Suffices for them not that We caused the Book to descend to thee which is recounted to them? Truly, in that is a mercy and a reminder for a folk who believe. 
29|52| Say: God sufficed as a witness between me and between you. He knows whatever is in the heavens and the earth. And those who believed in falsehood and were ungrateful to God, those, they are the ones who are losers. 
29|53| And they seek thee to hasten the punishment! And were it not for a term, that which is determined, the punishment would have drawn near them. And, certainly, it will approach them suddenly while they are not aware. 
29|54| They seek to hasten the punishment and, truly, hell will be that which encloses the ones who are ungrateful. 
29|55| On a Day when the punishment overcomes them from above them and from beneath their feet, He will say: Experience what you had been doing! 
29|56| O my servants who have believed, My earth, truly, is that which is extensive, so worship Me! 
29|57| Every soul is one that experiences death. Again, to Us you will return. 
29|58| And those who believed and did as the ones in accord with morality, We will certainly place them in a settlement in the highest chambers in the Garden, beneath which rivers run, ones who will dwell in it forever. How excellent is the compensation for the ones who work, 
29|59| those who endured patiently and they put their trust in their Lord. 
29|60| And how many a moving creature carries not its own provision, but God provides for it and for you. And He is The Hearing, The Knowing. 
29|61| And if thou hadst asked them: Who created the heavens and the earth and caused the sun and the moon to be subservient? They will, certainly, say: God. Then, how they are misled! 
29|62| God extends the provision for whom He wills of His servants and confines it for whom He wills. Truly, God is Knowing of everything. 
29|63| And if thou hadst asked them: Who sent down water from heaven and gave life by it to the earth after its death, certainly, they would say: God! Say: The Praise belongs to God! Nay! Most of them are not reasonable. 
29|64| And this present life is not, but a diversion and a pastime. And, truly, the Last Abode is the eternal life if they had been knowing! 
29|65| And when they embarked on the boats, they called to God, ones who are sincere and devoted in the way of life to Him. Then, when He delivered them to dry land, that is when they ascribed partners with God, 
29|66| being ungrateful for what We gave them. So let them take joy for soon they will know! 
29|67| Consider they not that We made a safe, holy place while humanity is being snatched away all around them? Believe they, then, in falsehood and are they ungrateful for the divine blessing? 
29|68| And who does greater wrong than he who devised a lie against God? Or denied The Truth when it drew near him? Is there not in hell a place of lodging for the ones who are ungrateful? 
29|69| And as for those who struggled for Us, We will truly guide them to Our ways. And, truly, God is with ones who are doers of good. 
30|1| Alif L[m M\m. 
30|2| The Romans were vanquished 
30|3| in the closer region, and they, after being vanquished, will prevail 
30|4| within a certain number of years. To God belongs the command before and after. And that Day ones who believe will be glad 
30|5| with the help of God. He helps whom He wills. And He is The Almighty, The Compassionate. 
30|6| It is the promise of God. God breaks not His Promise, but most of humanity knows not. 
30|7| They know only that which is manifest in this present life. And of the world to come, they are ones who are heedless. 
30|8| Or if they reflect not in themselves, God created not the heavens and the earth and whatever is between the two but with The Truth and for a term that is determined. And, truly, most of humanity, in the meeting with their Lord, are, certainly, ones who disbelieve. 
30|9| Or journey they not through the earth and look on how had been the Ultimate End of those who were before them? They had been superior to them in strength. And they plowed the earth and frequented it more than they frequented it. And drew near them their Messengers with the clear portents. Then, it had not been God doing wrong to them, but they had been doing wrong to themselves. 
30|10| Again, the Ultimate End had been misdeeds for those who did evil, because they denied the signs of God and had been ridiculing them. 
30|11| God begins the creation. Again, He causes it to return. Again, you will be returned to Him. 
30|12| And on a Day when the Hour will be secure, the ones who sin will be seized with despair. 
30|13| And for them among their ascribed associates will not be intercessors and their ascribed associates with God will be ones who disavow them. 
30|14| And on a Day when the Hour will be secure, that Day they will be split up. 
30|15| Then, as for those who believed and did as the ones in accord with morality, they will be walking with joy in a well-watered meadow. 
30|16| And as for those who are ungrateful and denied Our signs and the meeting of the world to come, those are ones who are charged with the punishment. 
30|17| So glory be to God at the time of the evening hour and at the time when it comes to be the morning! 
30|18| To Him be The Praise in the heavens and the earth and in the evening and at the time of noon. 
30|19| He brings out the living from the dead. And He brings out the dead from the living. And He gives life to the earth after its death. And, thus, you will be brought out. 
30|20| And among His signs are that He created you from earth dust, when, again, you were mortals dispersed. 
30|21| And among His signs are that He created for you spouses from among yourselves, that you rest in them. And He made affection and mercy among you. Truly, in that are certainly signs for a folk who reflect. 
30|22| And among His signs are the creation of the heavens and the earth and the alteration of your languages and hues. Truly, in that are certainly signs for ones who know. 
30|23| And among His signs are your slumbering by nighttime and by daytime and your looking for His grace. Truly, in that are, certainly, signs for a folk who hear. 
30|24| And among His signs are that He causes you to see the lightning in fear and in hope. And He sends water down from heaven and gives life by it to the earth after its death. Truly, in that are, certainly, signs for a folk who are reasonable. 
30|25| And among His signs are that the heaven and the earth are secured for you by His command. When He will call you by a call again from the earth, that is when you will go forth! 
30|26| And to Him belongs whoever is in the heavens and the earth. All are ones who are morally obligated to Him. 
30|27| And He it is Who begins the creation. Again, He causes it to return and this is insignificant for Him. And His is the Lofty Parable in the heavens and the earth. And He is The Almighty, The Wise. 
30|28| He propounds a parable for you from yourselves. Have you—among those whom your right hands possessed—ascribed associates in what We provided you so that you share as equals and you fear them like your awe for each other? Thus, We explain distinctly the signs to a folk who are reasonable. 
30|29| Nay! Those who did wrong followed their own desires without knowledge. Then, who will guide whom God caused to go astray? And they will not have ones who help. 
30|30| So set thy face towards a way of life as a monotheist. It is the nature originated by God in which He originated humanity. There is no substitution for the creation of God. That is the truth-loving way of life, but most of humanity knows not. 
30|31| Be ones who turn in repentance to Him and be Godfearing and perform the formal prayer and be not among the ones who are polytheists 
30|32| or of those who separated and divided their way of life and had been partisans, each party is glad with what they have. 
30|33| And when harm afflicted humanity, they call to their Lord as ones who turn in repentance to Him. When He caused them, again, to experience His mercy, that is when a group of people among them ascribe partners with their Lord, 
30|34| for they are ungrateful for what We gave them. Then, take joy; you will know. 
30|35| Or caused We to descend to them an authority that it assert what they had been ascribing as partners with Him? 
30|36| And when We caused humanity to experience mercy, they were glad of it. But when an evil deed lights on them because of what their hands put forward, that is when they are in despair. 
30|37| Consider they that God extends the provision for whom He wills and confines it for whom He wills? Truly, in that are signs for a folk who believe. 
30|38| So give to possessors of kinship rightfully and to the needy and to the traveler of the way. That is better for those who want the Countenance of God. And those, they are the ones who prosper. 
30|39| And what you gave in usury in order that it swell the wealth of humanity swells not with God. And what you gave in purifying alms, wanting the Countenance of God, then, those, they are the ones who will receive manifold. 
30|40| God is He Who created you. Again, He provided for you and, again, He will cause you to die. Again, He will give you life. Is there among your ascribed associates with Him who accomplish anything of that? Glory be to Him! Exalted is He above partners they ascribe! 
30|41| Corruption was manifested on the dry land and the sea because of what the hands of humanity earned. He causes them to experience some of what they did, so that perhaps they will return repentant. 
30|42| Say: Journey through the earth; then, look on how had been the Ultimate End of those who were before. Most of them had been ones who are polytheists. 
30|43| So set thy face to the truth-loving way of life before that Day approaches from God and there is no turning back. They will be split up on that Day. 
30|44| Whoever was ungrateful, his ingratitude is on him. Whoever did as one in accord with morality will be arranging provision for themselves. 
30|45| And He gives recompense to those who believed and did as the ones in accord with morality from His grace. Truly, He loves not the ones who are ungrateful. 
30|46| Among His signs are that He sends the winds as ones that give good tidings and causes you to experience His mercy and so that the boats run at His command and that you be looking for His grace so that perhaps you will give thanks. 
30|47| And, certainly, We sent Messengers before thee to their own folk. They drew near them with the clear portents. Then, We requited those who sinned. And it had been an obligation on Us to help ones who believe. 
30|48| God is He Who sends the winds so they raise clouds. He extends them in the heaven how He wills and He makes them into pieces until thou hast seen rain drops go forth from their midst. That is when He lit it on whomever He wills of His servants. That is when they rejoice at the good tidings. 
30|49| And, truly, they had been—even before it is sent down on them—before that, ones who are seized with despair. 
30|50| Look on the effects of the mercy of God, how He gives life to the earth after its death! Truly, that! He is One Who Gives Life to the dead and He is Powerful over everything. 
30|51| And if We sent a wind and they saw fields, ones that are yellowing, they would stay ungrateful after that. 
30|52| Then, truly, thou wilt not cause the dead to hear nor wilt thou cause the unwilling to hear, to hear the calling to them when they turned as ones who draw back. 
30|53| And thou art not one who guides the unwilling to see from their fallacy. Thou hast caused none to hear but those who believe in Our signs. And they are ones who submit to God. 
30|54| God is He Who created you in your weakness. Again, after that weakness, He assigned strength; again, after that strength, He assigned weakness and grayness of hair. And He creates what He wills. And He is The Knowing, The Powerful. 
30|55| And on a Day when the Hour is secured for you, the ones who sin will swear that they lingered in expectation not but an hour. Thus, they had been misled. 
30|56| And said those who were given the knowledge and the belief: Certainly, you lingered in expectation by what is prescribed by God until the Day of the Upraising. This is the Day of Upraising, but you had not been knowing. 
30|57| So on that Day will not profit them, those who did wrong, their excuses nor will they ask to be favored. 
30|58| And, certainly, We propounded for humanity in this, the Quran, every kind of parable. But if thou wert to bring about any sign to them, certainly, they who were ungrateful would say: Truly, you are nothing but ones who deal in falsehood. 
30|59| Thus, God sets a seal on the hearts of those who know not. 
30|60| So have thou patience. Truly, the promise of God is True. And let them not irritate thee, those who are not certain in belief. 
31|1| Alif L[m M\m. 
31|2| There are the signs of the wise Book, 
31|3| a guidance and a mercy to the ones who are doers of good, 
31|4| those who perform the formal prayer and give the purifying alms and they are certain of the world to come. 
31|5| Those are on a guidance from their Lord. And those, they are the ones who prosper. 
31|6| And of humanity is he who exchanges diversionary conversation to cause others to go astray from the way of God without any knowledge. And he takes it to himself in mockery. Those, for them will be a despised punishment. 
31|7| When Our signs are recounted to him, he turned as one who grows arrogant, as if he had not been hearing them, as if there had been heaviness in his ears. So give him the good tidings of a painful punishment. 
31|8| Truly, those who believed and did as the ones in accord with morality, for them are Gardens of Bliss, 
31|9| ones who will dwell in them forever. The promise of God is true. And He is The Almighty, The Wise. 
31|10| He created the heavens without any pillars so that you see the heavens. And He cast firm mountains on the earth so that the earth should not vibrate with you. And He disseminated in and on it of all moving creatures. And We caused water to descend from heaven. We caused all generous, diverse pairs to develop in it. 
31|11| This is the creation of God. Then, cause me to see what other than He created? Nay! The ones who are unjust are clearly wandering astray. 
31|12| And, certainly, We gave Luqman wisdom that: Give thanks to God. And whoever gives thanks, gives thanks only for himself. And whoever was ungrateful— then, truly, God is Sufficient, Worthy of Praise. 
31|13| And when Luqman said to his son as he admonishes him: O my son! Ascribe not partners with God. Truly, association with God is, certainly, a tremendous injustice. 
31|14| And We charged the human being about ones who are his parents. His mother carried him in feebleness on feebleness and his weaning is in two years. Give thanks to Me and to ones who are thy parents. And to Me is the Homecoming. 
31|15| But if they both struggled with thee that thou hast ascribed partners with Me of what for thee is no knowledge, then, obey them not. And keep their company in the present as one who is honorable but follow the way of him who was penitent to Me. Again, to Me will be your return and I will tell you of what you had been doing. 
31|16| O my son! Truly, even if it be the weight of a grain of a mustard seed and though it be in a rock or in the heavens or in or on the earth God will bring it. Truly, God is Subtle, Aware. 
31|17| O my son! Perform the formal prayer. And command that which is honorable. And prohibit that which is unlawful. And have thou patience with whatever lit on thee. Truly, that is the constancy of affairs. 
31|18| And turn not thy cheek away from humanity nor walk through the earth exultantly. Truly, God loves not any proud boaster. 
31|19| And be moderate in thy walking and lower thy voice. Truly the most horrible of voices is, certainly, the voice of the donkey. 
31|20| Consider you not that God caused to become subservient to you whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in and on the earth and lavished on you His divine blessing, that which is manifest and that which is inward and yet most of humanity is he who disputes about God without knowledge and with no guidance and without an illuminating Book. 
31|21| And when it was said to them: Follow what God caused to descend. They said: Nay! We will follow what we found our fathers on. Even if it Satan had been calling them to the punishment of the blaze? 
31|22| And whoever submits his face to God while he is one who is a doer of good, then, surely, he held fast to the most firm handhold. And to God is the Ultimate End of affairs. 
31|23| And whoever was ungrateful, let not his ingratitude dishearten thee. To Us is their return and We will tell them what they did. Truly, God is Knowing of what is in the breasts. 
31|24| We give them enjoyment for a little while. Again, We will compel them to a harsh punishment. 
31|25| And if thou hadst asked them who created the heavens and the earth, they will certainly say: God! Say: The Praise belongs to God! But most of them know not. 
31|26| To God belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth. Truly, God, He is The Sufficient, The Worthy of Praise. 
31|27| And if trees on the earth were only pens and the sea causes to increase after that with seven more seas that were ink, yet the Words of God would not come to an end. Truly, God is Almighty, Wise. 
31|28| Your creation and your Upraising are not but like that of a single soul. Truly, God is Hearing, Seeing. 
31|29| Hast thou not considered that God causes the nighttime to be interposed into the daytime and causes the daytime to be interposed into the nighttime and caused the sun to become subservient and the moon, each run for a term, that which is determined and that God is Aware of what you do? 
31|30| That is because God, He is The Truth and what they call to other than Him is falsehood. And that God, He is The Lofty, The Great! 
31|31| Hast thou not considered that the boats run through the sea by the divine blessing of God that He causes you to see His signs? Truly in that are signs for every enduring, grateful one. 
31|32| And when a wave overcame them like an overshadowing, they called to God as ones who are sincere and devoted in the way of life to Him. Then, when He delivered them to dry land among them are ones who halt between two opinions. And none negates Our signs but every ungrateful turncoat. 
31|33| O humanity! Be Godfearing of your Lord, and dread a Day when recompense will not be given by a child to one to whom the child is born, nor will one to whom a child is born be one who gives recompense for the one who is born at all. Truly, the promise of God is True so let not this present life delude you nor let the deluder delude you about God. 
31|34| Truly, the knowledge of the Hour is with God. And He sends plenteous rain water down. And He knows what is in the wombs. And no soul is informed of what it will earn tomorrow. And no soul is informed in what region it will die. Truly, God is Knowing, Aware. 
32|1| Alif L[m M\m. 
32|2| The sending down successively of the Book, there is no doubt in it. It is from the Lord of the worlds. 
32|3| Or they say: He devised it. Nay! It is The Truth from thy Lord that thou warnest a folk to whom no warner approached them before thee, so that perhaps they will be truly guided. 
32|4| God! It is He Who created the heavens and the earth and whatever is between them in six days. Again, He turned His attention to the Throne. You will have none other than Him as protector and no intercessor. Will you not, then, recollect? 
32|5| He manages every command from the heaven to the earth. Again, it will go up to Him in a day, the span of which had been a thousand years of what you number. 
32|6| That is the One Who Knows of the unseen and the visible, The Almighty, The Compassionate 
32|7| Who did everything that He created well. And He began the creation of the human being from clay. 
32|8| Again, He made human progeny from the extraction of despicable water. 
32|9| Again, He shaped him and breathed into him His Spirit. And He made for you the ability to hear and sight and minds. But you give little thanks! 
32|10| They said: When we went astray on the earth will we be in a new creation? Nay! In the meeting with their Lord they are ones who disbelieve. 
32|11| Say: The angel of death who was charged with you, will call you to itself. Again, you will be returned to your Lord. 
32|12| And if thou but see when the ones who sin become ones who bend down their heads before their Lord: Our Lord! We perceived and heard. So return us. We will do as ones in accord with morality. Truly, we are now ones who are certain. 
32|13| And if We willed it, We would have, surely, given every soul its guidance, but My saying will be realized. I will fill hell with genies and humanity one and all. 
32|14| Then, experience it. As you forgot the meeting of this Day of yours, truly, We forgot you. And experience the infinite punishment for what you had been doing. 
32|15| Only those believe in Our signs who, when they were reminded of them, fell down, ones who prostrate themselves and glorified the praise of their Lord and they grow not arrogant,‡ 
32|16| whose sides deliberately avoided their sleeping places to call to their Lord in fear and hope. And they spend of what We provided them. 
32|17| No soul knows what was concealed for them of comfort for their eyes as a recompense for what they had been doing. 
32|18| Is he who had been one who believes like he who had been one who disobeys? They are not on the same level. 
32|19| As for those who believed and did as the ones in accord with morality, for them are Gardens as places of shelter, hospitality for them for what they had been doing. 
32|20| And as for those who disobeyed, their place of shelter will be the fire. Every time they would want to go forth from there, they would be caused to return to it. And it will be said to them: Experience the punishment of the fire which you had been denying! 
32|21| And, certainly, We will cause them to experience the closer punishment other than the greater punishment so that perhaps they will return. 
32|22| And who does greater wrong than he who was reminded of the signs of His Lord, then, he turned aside from them? Truly, on the ones who sin, We are ones who requite. 
32|23| And, certainly, We gave Moses the Book. So be you not hesitant about meeting Him. And We assigned it as a guidance for the Children of Israel. 
32|24| And We assigned leaders from among them to guide under Our command when they endured patiently. And they had been certain of Our signs. 
32|25| Truly, thy Lord is He Who will distinguish among them on the Day of Resurrection about what they had been at variance in it. 
32|26| Guides them not how many We caused to perish of generations before them amidst whose dwellings they walk? Truly, in that are the signs. Will they not then hear? 
32|27| Consider they not that We drive water to the barren dust of earth? We drive out crops with it from which their flocks eat and they themselves. Will they not, then, perceive? 
32|28| And they say: When is this victory if you had been ones who are sincere? 
32|29| Say: On the Day of Victory there will be no profit for those who disbelieved if they, then, have belief nor will they be given respite. 
32|30| So turn thou aside from them and wait awhile. Truly they are ones who are waiting awhile. 
33|1| O Prophet! Be Godfearing of God and obey not the ones who are ungrateful and the ones who are hypocrites. Truly, God had been Knowing, Wise. 
33|2| And follow what is revealed to thee from thy Lord. Truly, God is Aware of what you had been doing. 
33|3| And put thy trust in God. And God sufficed as a Trustee. 
33|4| And God made not two hearts for any man in his interior. Nor made He your spouses those whom you divorced saying: Be as the back of my mother! Nor made He your adopted sons, your sons. That is but a saying of your mouths. And God says The Truth and He guides to the way. 
33|5| Call to them by the names of their fathers. That is more equitable with God. But if you know not their fathers, they are your brothers in the way of life and your defenders. And there is no blame on you in what mistake you made in it, but what your hearts premeditated. And God had been Forgiving, Compassionate. 
33|6| The Prophet is closer to the ones who believe than their own souls. And his spouses are their mothers and those imbued through the wombs, blood relations, some of them are closer to some other in what is prescribed by God than the other ones who believe and ones who emigrate, but accomplish what you may for your protectors as ones who are honorable—that which had been inscribed in the Book. 
33|7| Mention when We took a solemn promise from the Prophets and from thee and from Noah and Abraham and Moses and Jesus son of Mary. We took an earnest solemn promise from them 
33|8| so that He ask the ones who are sincere about their sincerity. He prepared for the ones who are ungrateful a painful punishment. 
33|9| O those who believed! Remember the divine blessing of God to you when armies drew near you and We sent the winds against them and armies you see not. And God had been Seeing of what you do. 
33|10| When they drew near you from above you and from below you and when the sight swerved and the hearts reached the throats and you think thoughts about God, 
33|11| there the ones who believe were tested and were convulsed with a severe convulsing. 
33|12| And when the ones who are hypocrites say, as well as those who in their hearts is a sickness: What God and His Messenger promised is nothing but delusion. 
33|13| And when a section of them said: O people of Yathrib! There is no habitation for you, so return. A group of people ask permission of the Prophet among them saying: Truly, Our houses are exposed. But they were not exposed. They want only to run away. 
33|14| And if entry was forced against them from all areas and, again, they were asked to dissent, they would have given into it and they would not have but briefly hesitated 
33|15| although, certainly, they made a contract with God before that they would not turn their backs to the enemy. And about their compact with God that had been, they are ones who will be asked. 
33|16| Say: Running away will never profit you that you ran away from death or killing, then, you will be given enjoyment but for a little. 
33|17| Say: Who will save you from harm from God if He wanted evil for you or wanted mercy for you? And they will not find for themselves other than God a protector or a helper. 
33|18| Surely, God knows the ones of you who hold off and the ones who converse with their brothers saying to us: Come on! And they approach not the battle themselves but a little, 
33|19| being covetous of you. Then, when fear drew near, thou wilt see them looking on thee, their eyes rolling like he who is overcome by death. But when their fear went, they abused you with sharp tongues in their covetousness for good things. Those believe not and God caused their actions to fail. And that had been easy for God. 
33|20| They assume the confederates go not, withdrawing. And if the confederates approach you, returning, they would wish they were nomads among the ones who are desert dwellers, asking tidings about you. And if they had been among you, they would fight but a little. 
33|21| Surely, in the Messenger of God there is for you a fairer, good example for those whose hope had been in God and the Last Day and remembered God frequently. 
33|22| When the ones who believe saw the confederates, they said: This is what God and His Messenger promised us and God and His Messenger were sincere. And it increased them not but in belief and to resign themselves to submission to God. 
33|23| Among the ones who believe are men who were sincere in the contracts they made with God. Of them are some who satisfied by fulfilling their vow with death and of them are some who wait awhile. And they substituted not any substitution 
33|24| so that God gives recompense to the ones who are sincere for their sincerity and punish the ones who are hypocrites had He willed or He turns to them in forgiveness. Truly, God had been Forgiving, Compassionate. 
33|25| God repelled those who were ungrateful in their rage without their attaining any good. And God spared the ones who believe in fighting. And God had been Strong, Almighty. 
33|26| And He caused to descend those who were behind among the People of the Book from their strongholds and He hurled alarm into their hearts so that you kill a group of people and make captives of another group of people. 
33|27| And He gave you their region as an inheritance and their abodes and their wealth and a region you tread not. And God had been Powerful over everything! 
33|28| O Prophet! Say to thy spouses: If you had been wanting this present life and its adornment, then, approach now. I will give you enjoyment and set you (f) free, releasing gracefully. 
33|29| And if you had been wanting God and His Messenger, and the Last Abode, then truly God prepared for the ones who are doers of good among you a sublime compensation. 
33|30| O wives of the Prophet! Whoever of you (f) approaches a manifest indecency, her punishment will be multiplied for her twofold. And that would have been easy for God. 
33|31| And whoever of you (f) is morally obligated to God and His Messenger and do as ones (f) in accord with morality, We will give her her compensation two times over. We made ready a generous provision for her. 
33|32| O wives of the Prophet! There is not among the wives any like you. If you (f) were Godfearing, then, be not soft in your saying so that he become desirous he in whose heart is a sickness, but say (f) a saying of one who is honorable. 
33|33| And settle down (f) in your (f) houses and flaunt (f) not your (f) finery as those who flaunted their finery in the previous Age of Ignorance. And perform (f) the formal prayer and give (f) the purifying alms and obey (f) God and His Messenger. God only wants to cause disgrace to be put away from you—People of the House—and purify you with a purification. 
33|34| And remember (f) what is recounted in your (f) houses of the signs of God and wisdom. Truly, God had been Subtle, Aware. 
33|35| Truly, the males, ones who submit to God and the females, ones who submit to God and the males, ones who believe and the females, ones who believe and the males, ones who are morally obligated and the females, ones who are morally obligated and the males, ones who are sincere and the females, ones who are sincere and the males, ones who remain steadfast and the females, ones who remain steadfast and the males, ones who are humble and the females, ones who are humble and the males, ones who are charitable and the females, ones who are charitable and the males, ones who fast and the females, ones who fast and the males, ones who guard their private parts and the females, ones who guard and the males, ones who are remember God frequently and the females, ones who remember, God prepared for them forgiveness and a sublime compensation. 
33|36| It had not been for a male, one who believes and a female, one who believes, when God and His Messenger decreed an affair that there be any choice for them in their affair. And whoever rebels against God and His Messenger, certainly, he went astray, clearly wandering astray. 
33|37| And mention when thou hast said to him to whom God was gracious and to whom thou wert gracious: Hold back thy spouse to thyself and be Godfearing of God. But thou hast concealed in thyself what God is One Who Shows and thou hast dreaded humanity whereas God has a better right that thou hast dreaded Him. So when Zayd satisfied the necessary formality, We gave her to thee in marriage so that there be no fault for ones who believe in respect of the spouses of their adopted sons when they (m) satisfied the necessary formality. And the command of God had been one that is accomplished. 
33|38| There had been no fault with the Prophet in what is undertaken by him as a duty from God. This is a custom of God with those who passed away before. And the command of God had been a measured measure 
33|39| for those who state the messages of God and dread Him and dread none but God, and God sufficed as a Reckoner. 
33|40| Muhammad had not been the father of any men from among you, but he is the Messenger of God and the Seal of the Prophets. And God had been Knowing of everything. 
33|41| O those who believed! Remember God with a frequent remembrance 
33|42| and glorify Him at early morning dawn and eventide. 
33|43| He it is Who gives blessings to you and His angels that He bring you out of the shadows into the light. And He had been Compassionate to ones who believe. 
33|44| Their greetings on the Day they will meet Him will be: Peace! And He prepared for them a generous compensation. 
33|45| O Prophet! Truly, We sent thee as one who bears witness and as one who gives good tidings and as a warner 
33|46| and as one who calls to God with His permission and as a light-giving illuminating lamp. 
33|47| And give good tidings to the ones who believe that for them is a great grace from God. 
33|48| And obey not the ones who are ungrateful and the ones who are hypocrites and heed not their annoyance and put thy trust in God. And God sufficed as a Trustee. 
33|49| O those who believed! If you married the females, ones who believe, and, again, divorced them before you touch them (f), then, there is no waiting period to reckon against; so make provision for them (f), and set them (f) free, releasing gracefully. 
33|50| O Prophet! Truly, We have permitted to thee thy spouses (f), those whom thou hadst given their (f) compensation and whom thy right hand possessed from that God gave thee as spoils of war and the daughters of thy paternal uncles and the daughters of thy paternal aunts and the daughters of thy maternal uncles and the daughters of thy maternal aunts those who emigrated with thee and a woman, one who believes, if she bestowed herself on the Prophet. And if the Prophet wanted to take her in marriage—that is exclusively for thee—not for the other ones who believe. Surely, We know what We imposed on them about their spouses and whom their right hands possessed (f) that there be no fault on thee. And God had been Forgiving, Compassionate. 
33|51| Thou wilt put off whom thou wilt of them (f) and thou will give refuge to whom thou wilt. And whomever thou wilt be looking for of whom thou hadst set aside, there is no blame on thee to receive her again. That is likelier that will be refreshed their (f) eyes and they (f) not feel remorse and may they (f) be well-pleased with what thou hadst given them (f), all of them (f). And God knows what is in your hearts. And God had been Knowing, Forbearing. 
33|52| Women are not lawful for thee in marriage after this, nor that thou wert taking them (f) in exchange for other spouses, even though their (f) goodness impressed thee, but whom thy right hand possessed (f). And God had been watching over everything. 
33|53| O those who believed! Enter not the houses of the Prophet for food unless permission be given to you without being ones who look for the proper time. And when you were called to enter, when you have eaten your meal, then, disperse, and be not one who lingers for conversation. Truly, such had been to harass the Prophet and he is ashamed to ask you to leave. But God is not ashamed before The Truth. And when you asked his wives for sustenance, then, ask them (f) from behind a partition. That is purer for your hearts and their (f) hearts. And it had not been for you to harass the Messenger of God nor marry you his spouses after him ever. Truly, that would have been serious with God. 
33|54| Whether you show anything or conceal it, truly, God had been Knowing of everything. 
33|55| There is no blame on them (f) to converse freely with their (f) fathers nor their (f) sons nor their (f) brothers, nor the sons of their (f) brothers nor the sons of their (f) sisters, nor their (f) women, nor what their (f) right hands possessed. And be Godfearing of God. Truly, God had been Witness over everything. 
33|56| Truly, God and His angels give blessings to the Prophet. O those who believed! Give your blessings to him and blessings of peace and invoke peace for him. 
33|57| Truly, those who malign God and His Messenger, God cursed them in the present and in the world to come and prepared for them a despised punishment. 
33|58| And those who malign the males, ones who believe and the females, ones who believe without their deserving it, surely, they lay a burden on themselves of false charges to harm another’s reputation and a clear sin. 
33|59| O Prophet! Say to thy spouses (f) and thy daughters and the females, ones who believe to draw closer their (f) outer garments over themselves (f). That is more fitting so that they (f) be recognized and not be maligned. And God had been Forgiving, Compassionate. 
33|60| If the ones who are hypocrites refrain not themselves and those who in their hearts is a sickness and the ones who make a commotion in the city, We will stir thee up against them. Again, they will not be thy neighbors in it, but a little while. 
33|61| They are ones who are cursed. Whenever they were come upon, they were taken and were killed with a terrible slaying. 
33|62| This is a custom of God with those who passed away before. And thou wilt never find in a custom of God any substitution. 
33|63| Humanity asks thee about the Hour. Say: The knowledge of it is only with God. And what will cause thee to recognize that perhaps the Hour be near? 
33|64| Truly, God cursed the ones who are ungrateful and prepared a blaze for them, 
33|65| ones who will dwell in it forever, eternally. They shall not find a protector nor a helper. 
33|66| On a Day when will be turned upside down, their faces in the fire, they will say: O would that we obeyed God and obeyed the Messenger! 
33|67| And they will say: Our Lord! Truly, we obeyed our chiefs and our great ones. They caused us to go astray from the way. 
33|68| Our Lord! Give them double the punishment and curse them with a great cursing! 
33|69| O those who believed! Be not like those who maligned Moses. God declared him innocent of what they said. And he had been well-esteemed with God. 
33|70| O those who believed! Be Godfearing of God and say an appropriate saying. 
33|71| He will make your actions right for you and forgive you your impieties. And whoever obeys God and His Messenger surely, won a triumph, a sublime triumph! 
33|72| Truly, We presented the trust to the heavens and the earth and the mountains, but they refused to carry it and were apprehensive of it. But the human being carried it. Truly, he had been wrongdoing, very ignorant. 
33|73| God punishes the males, ones who are hypocrites and the females, ones who are hypocrites and the males, ones who are polytheists and the females, ones who are polytheists and God will turn to forgiveness toward the males, ones who believe and the females, ones who believe. And God had been Forgiving, Compassionate. 
34|1| The Praise belongs to God. To Him belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in and on the earth. And His is The Praise in the world to come. And He is The Wise, The Aware. 
34|2| He knows whatever penetrates into the earth and what goes forth out of it and what comes down from the heaven and what goes up to it. And He is The Compassionate, The Forgiving. 
34|3| And those who were ungrateful said: The Hour will not approach us. Say: Yea! By my Lord, it will, certainly, approach you. He is One Who Knows of the unseen. Not an atom’s weight escapes from Him in the heavens or in and on the earth, be it smaller than that or greater, but that it had been in a clear Book 
34|4| that He may give recompense to those who believed and did as the ones in accord with morality. Those, for them there is forgiveness and a generous provision. 
34|5| But those who endeavored against Our signs as ones who strive to thwart, those, for them there is a punishment of painful wrath. 
34|6| And consider those who were given the knowledge that what was caused to descend to thee from thy Lord. It is The Truth and it guides to a path of The Almighty, The Worthy of Praise. 
34|7| Those who were ungrateful said: Shall we point you to a man who will tell you when you were torn to pieces, ones who are totally torn to pieces? Then, you will be, truly, in a new creation. 
34|8| Devised he a lie against God or is there a madness in him? Nay! Those who believe not in the world to come there is a punishment and a going far astray. 
34|9| Consider they not what is in advance of them and what is behind them of the heaven and the earth? If We will, We could cause the earth to swallow them, or cause to drop on them pieces of heaven. Truly, in this is a sign for every servant, one who turns in repentance. 
34|10| And, certainly, We gave David grace from Us. O mountains! Echo psalms of praise with him and the birds. And We softened iron for him, 
34|11| saying that: Work on full coats of mail and calculate the links. And do as one in accord with morality. Truly, I am Seeing of what you do. 
34|12| And to Solomon We subjected the wind. The first part of the day was a month’s journey and the evening course was a month’s journey. We caused a spring of molten brass to flow for him. And We gave him of the jinn who work in advance of him with the permission of his Lord. Whoever of them swerved from Our command We caused him to experience the punishment of the blaze. 
34|13| They worked for him whatever of sanctuaries he wills—images and basin-like cisterns like water-troughs and cooking pots—ones firmly fixed. People of David! Act with thankfulness. But few of My servants are grateful. 
34|14| Then, when We decreed death for Solomon, nothing pointed out his death to the jinn, but a moving creature of the earth that consumes his scepter. So when he fell down, it became clear to the jinn that if they had been knowing the unseen, they would not have lingered in expectation in the despised punishment. 
34|15| There had, certainly, been for Sheba a sign in their dwelling place. Two gardens on the right and on the left. Eat of the provision of your Lord and give thanks to Him: A good land and a forgiving Lord. 
34|16| But they turned aside, so We sent against them the overwhelming flood, and We substituted for their two gardens, two gardens yielding a sour harvest, and tamarisks, and something of lote-trees here and there. 
34|17| That is how We gave recompense to them because they were ungrateful. And we recompense, but the ungrateful. 
34|18| And We made between them and between the towns which We blessed, that which are manifest towns and We ordained journeying in them. Journey through them as ones who are safe night and day. 
34|19| But they said: Our Lord! Cause a distance between our journeys and they did wrong to themselves. So We made them as tales and We tore them to pieces, a total tearing to pieces. Truly, in that are signs for every enduring grateful one. 
34|20| And, certainly, established as true about them was the opinion of Iblis and they followed him, but a group of people among the ones who believe. 
34|21| There had not been for him any authority over them, but that We know who believe in the world to come from who is in uncertainty of it. And thy Lord is Guardian over everything. 
34|22| Say: Call on those whom you claimed other than God. They possess not the weight of an atom in the heavens nor on the earth, nor have they in either any association, nor among them is there any sustainer of Him. 
34|23| No intercession profits with Him, but for him to whom He gave permission. Until when their hearts were freed from terror, they said: What is it that your Lord said. They said: The Truth. And He is the Lofty, the Great. 
34|24| Say: Who provides for you from the heavens and the earth? Say: God. And, truly, we or you are either on guidance or clearly going astray. 
34|25| Say: You will not be asked of what we sinned, nor will we be asked about what you do. 
34|26| Say: Our Lord will gather us. Again, He will explain The Truth among us and He is The Opener, The Knowing. 
34|27| Say: Cause me to see those whom you caused to join with Him as ascribed associates. No indeed! Nay! He is God, The Almighty, The Wise. 
34|28| And We sent thee not, but collectively for humanity as a bearer of good tidings and a warner, but most of humanity knows not. 
34|29| And they say: When is this promise if you had been ones who are sincere? 
34|30| Say: Yours is the solemn declaration of a Day which you delay not for an hour nor press forward. 
34|31| And those who were ungrateful said: We will never believe in this, the Quran, nor in what was in advance of it, but if thou hast considered when the ones who are unjust who are stationed before their Lord, returning the saying, some of them to some others. Say to those who were taken advantage of due to their weakness to those who grew arrogant: If it were not for you, we would have been ones who believe. 
34|32| Those who grew arrogant would say to those who were taken advantage due to their weakness: Barred we you from guidance after it drew near you? Nay! You had been ones who sin. 
34|33| And would say those who were taken advantage due to their weakness to those who grew arrogant: Nay! It was your planning by nighttime and daytime when you commanded us to be ungrateful to God and to assign rivals to Him. And they will keep their self-reproach secret when they will see the punishment and We assigned yokes around the necks of those who were ungrateful. Are they given recompense but for what they had been doing? 
34|34| We sent not any warner to a town, but that the ones who are given ease said: Truly, in what you were sent, we are ones who disbelieve it. 
34|35| And they said: We are more than you in wealth and in children and we are not ones who are punished! 
34|36| Say: Truly, my Lord extends the provision for whomever He wills and confines it for whom He wills, but most of humanity knows not. 
34|37| And it is not your wealth nor your children that will bring you near to Us, but whoever believed and did as one in accord with morality. As for those, for them, the recompense is doubled for what they did and they will live in the highest chambers as one who is safe. 
34|38| And those who endeavor against Our signs, as ones who strive to thwart them, those are ones who are charged with the punishment. 
34|39| Say: Truly, my Lord extends the provision for whomever He wills of His servants and confines for him what He wills. And whatever you spent of anything, He will replace it. And He is Best of the ones who provide. 
34|40| And on a Day He will assemble them altogether. Again, He will say to the angels: Was it these who had been worshiping you? 
34|41| They would say: Glory be to Thee! Thou art our Protector and not they. Nay! They had been worshiping the jinn. Most of them were ones who believe in them. 
34|42| Then, today none of you will possess the power over some others to profit nor hurt and We will say to those who did wrong: Experience the punishment of the fire which you had been denying. 
34|43| When are recounted to them Our signs, clear portents, they said: This is not but a man who wants to bar you from what your fathers had been worshipping. And they said: This is not but a forged calumny. And those who were ungrateful for The Truth said when it drew near them: Truly, this is but clear sorcery. 
34|44| And We gave them not any Books that they study them nor sent We to them any warner before thee. 
34|45| Those that were before them denied and they reached not one-tenth of what We gave them. Yet they denied My Messengers. So how had My disapproval of them been! 
34|46| Say: I admonish you in but one thing: That you stand up for God by twos and one by one. Again, reflect. There is not in your companion any madness. He is only a warner to you of a severe punishment in advance of you. 
34|47| Say: Whatever compensation I asked of you, that is for you. My compensation is only from God. And He is a Witness over everything. 
34|48| Say: Truly, my Lord hurls The Truth. He is The Knower of the unseen. 
34|49| Say: The Truth drew near and falsehood neither causes to begin nor causes to return. 
34|50| Say: If I went astray, truly, I will only go astray with loss for myself. And if I was truly guided, it is because of what my Lord reveals to me. Truly, He is Hearing, Ever Near. 
34|51| And if thou wouldst see when they would be terrified, when there is no escape and they would be taken from a near place, 
34|52| they would say: We believed in it! But how could they reach it from a place so far away? 
34|53| And, surely, they were ungrateful for it before. And they hurl at the unseen from a far place. 
34|54| And a barrier was set up between them and between that for which they lust just as was accomplished with partisans before. Truly, they had been uncertain, in grave doubt. 
35|1| The Praise belongs to God, One Who is the Originator of the heavens and the earth, the One Who Makes the angels messengers imbued with wings by twos and in threes and fours. He increases in creation what He wills. Truly, God is Powerful over everything. 
35|2| Whatever God may open of mercy to humanity, there is not one who holds it back. And what He holds back, there is not one who sends it after that. And He is The Almighty, The Wise. 
35|3| O humanity! Remember the divine blessing of God on you! Is there anyone who is a creator other than God Who provides for you from the heaven and the earth? There is no god but He. Then, how you are misled! 
35|4| And if they deny thee, surely, Messengers before thee were denied. And to God all affairs are returned. 
35|5| O humanity! Truly, the promise of God is true. So let not this present life delude you. And let not the deluder delude you about God. 
35|6| Truly, Satan is an enemy to you so take him to yourselves as an enemy. He calls only his party that they be among the Companions of the Blaze. 
35|7| Those who were ungrateful, for them will be a severe punishment. And those who believed and did as the ones in accord with morality, for them there is forgiveness and a great compensation. 
35|8| Then, who is there that was made to appear pleasing to him the direness of his actions so that, then, he saw it as fairer. Truly, God causes to go astray whomever He wills and guides whomever He wills. So let not thy soul be wasted in regret for them. Truly, God is Knowing of what they craft! 
35|9| And it is God Who sent the winds so that they raise clouds and We drove them to a dead land and We gave life by them to the earth after its death. Thus, will be the rising! 
35|10| Whoever had been wanting great glory, great glory belongs to God altogether. To Him Words of what is good rise. He exalts the actions of one in accord with morality. But those who plan evil deeds, for them will be a severe punishment. And the planning of those, it will come to nothing. 
35|11| And God created you from earth dust: Again, from seminal fluid. Again, He made you pairs. And no female carries nor brings forth her burden but with His Knowledge. No one who is given a long life is given a long life, nor is anything reduced from his lifetime but it is in a Book. Truly, that is easy for God. 
35|12| The two bodies of water are not on the same level. This is agreeable, water of the sweetest kind, that which is delicious to drink, and the other is salty, bitter. But from each you eat succulent flesh and pull out glitter that you wear. And thou wilt see the boats, that which plows through the waves on it, that you be looking for His grace and so that perhaps you will give thanks. 
35|13| He causes the nighttime to be interposed in the daytime and He causes the daytime to be interposed into the nighttime and He caused the sun to be subservient and the moon. Each runs its course for a term, that is determined. That is God, your Lord. For Him is the dominion! And those whom you call to other than Him possess not even the white spot of a date stone. 
35|14| If you call to them, they would not hear your supplication. Even if they heard, they would not respond to you. And on the Day of Resurrection they will disbelieve in your association with them. And none tells thee like One Who is Aware. 
35|15| O humanity! It is you who are poor in relation to God. And God—He is Sufficient, Worthy of Praise. 
35|16| If He wills, He would cause you to be put away and bring a new creation. 
35|17| And that for God is not a great matter. 
35|18| And no burdened soul will bear another’s load. If one who is weighed down calls for help for his heavy load, nothing of it is carried for him, even if he had been possessor of kinship. Hast thou warned only those who dread their Lord in the unseen and performed the formal prayer. And he who purified himself, then, only purifies for himself. And to God is the Homecoming. 
35|19| Not on the same level are the unwilling to see and the seeing 
35|20| nor are shadows and light 
35|21| nor are the shade and the torrid heat. 
35|22| Nor are the living and the lifeless on the same level. Truly, God causes to hear whom He wills. And thou art not one who causes to hear whoever is in graves. 
35|23| Thou art but a warner. 
35|24| Truly, We sent thee with The Truth, a bearer of good tidings and a warner. And there is not any community, but a warner passed away among them. 
35|25| And if they deny thee, so, surely, those who were before them denied. Their Messengers drew near them with the clear portents and with the Psalms and the illuminating Book. 
35|26| Again, I took those who were ungrateful. And how had My disapproval of them been! 
35|27| Hast thou not considered that God caused water to descend from the heavens? And, then, We brought out fruits, the ones of varying hues. Among the mountains are white and red streaks—the ones of varying hues—and others raven black, 
35|28| and of humanity and moving creatures and flocks, thus, they are likewise of hues, ones at variance. Only His servants who dread God are knowing. Truly, God is Almighty, Forgiving. 
35|29| Truly, those who recount the Book of God and performed the formal prayer and spent out of what We provided for them secretly and in public, they hope for a trade that will never come to nothing. 
35|30| He will, certainly, pay them their account in full as their compensation and increase them more out of His grace. Truly, He is Forgiving, Ready to Appreciate. 
35|31| And what We revealed to thee of the Book is The Truth, that establishes as true what was in advance of it. Truly, God is Aware, Seeing of His servants. 
35|32| Again, We gave the Book as an inheritance to those whom We favored of Our servants. Then, of them are ones who are unjust to themselves and of them are ones who halt between two opinions and some of them are ones who take the lead with good deeds by permission of God. That is the greater grace. 
35|33| Gardens of Eden—they will enter them. They will be adorned in them with bracelets of gold and pearls. And their garments in them will be silk. 
35|34| And they would say: The Praise belongs to God Who caused grief to be put away from us. Truly, our Lord is Forgiving, Ready to Appreciate. 
35|35| He Who caused us to live in the inhabited Abode out of His grace, fatigue will not afflict us in it, nor will we be afflicted with exhaustion in it. 
35|36| And those who were ungrateful, for them will be the fire of hell: Neither will it be decided a term for them so that they die nor will its punishment be lightened for them. Thus, We give recompense to every ungrateful one. 
35|37| And they will shout aloud in it: Our Lord! Bring us out and we shall do as ones in accord with morality, not what we had been doing! Give We not you a long enough life so that whoever recollects would recollect there? And the warner drew near you, so experience it because there is no helper for ones who are unjust. 
35|38| Truly, God is One Who Knows the unseen of the heavens and the earth. Truly, He is Knowing of what is in the breasts. 
35|39| He it is Who made you viceregents on the earth. So whoever was ungrateful, then, his ingratitude will be against him. And the ones who are ungrateful increase not their ingratitude to their Lord, but in repugnance. And the ones who are ungrateful increase not their ingratitude to their Lord, but in loss. 
35|40| Say: Considered you your ascribed associates to whom you call to other than God? Cause me to see what they created in the earth or have they any association in creation of the heavens? Or gave We them a Book so that they have a clear portent from there? Nay! The ones who are unjust promise nothing—some of them to some others—but delusion. 
35|41| Truly, God holds back the heavens and the earth so that they are not displaced. And if they were displaced, there is none who held them back after Him. Truly, He had been Forbearing, Forgiving. 
35|42| And they swore by God the most earnest oaths, that if a warner drew near them, they would be better guided than any of the other communities. Yet when a warner drew near to them, it increased nothing in them but aversion, 
35|43| growing arrogant on the earth and planning evil deeds. The plan of bad deeds surround none but people themselves. Then, look they on but a custom of the ancient ones? Thou wilt never find in a custom of God any substitution. And thou wilt never find in a custom of God any revision. 
35|44| Journey they not through the earth and look on how had been the Ultimate End of those before them? They had been stronger than they are in strength. And God had not been weakened by anything in the heavens nor in or on the earth. Truly, He had been Knowing, Powerful. 
35|45| And if God takes humanity to task for what they earned, He would not leave on the back of the earth any moving creature, but He postpones to a term, that is determined. And when their term drew near, then, truly, God had been Seeing of His servants. 
36|1| Y[ S . 
36|2| By the Wise Quran, 
36|3| truly, thou art among the ones who are sent 
36|4| on a straight path, 
36|5| sent down successively by The Almighty, The Compassionate that 
36|6| thou warnest a folk whose fathers were not warned, so they were ones who were heedless. 
36|7| Certainly, the saying was realized against most of them for they believe not. 
36|8| We laid yokes on their necks up to the chins, so that they are ones who are stiff-necked. 
36|9| And We laid in advance of them an embankment and behind them an embankment. Then, We covered them so they perceive not. 
36|10| And equal it is to them whether thou warn them, or thou warn them not. They will not believe. 
36|11| Thou hast only warned whoever followed the Remembrance and dreaded The Merciful in the unseen, so give him good tidings of forgiveness and a generous compensation. 
36|12| Truly, We give life to the dead and We write down what they put forward and their effects. We counted everything in a clear record. 
36|13| And propound a parable for them: The Companions of the Town when ones who were sent drew near them. 
36|14| When We sent to them two, they denied them both, so We replenished them with the third. And they said: Truly, We are ones who are sent to you. 
36|15| They said: You are nothing but mortals like ourselves and The Merciful caused not to descend anything. You are but lying! 
36|16| They said: Our Lord knows that we are ones who are sent to you. 
36|17| On us is only the delivering of the clear message. 
36|18| They said: Truly, we augured ill of you. If you refrain not yourselves, we will, certainly, stone you. Certainly, a painful punishment will afflict you from us. 
36|19| They said: Ones who auger ill will be with you! Is it because you were reminded? Nay! You are a folk, ones who are excessive. 
36|20| A man drew near from the farther part of the city, coming eagerly. He said: O my folk! Follow the ones who are sent! 
36|21| Follow whoever asks not of you any compensation and they are ones who are truly guided. 
36|22| What is it for me that I worship not Him Who originated me and to Whom you will be returned? 
36|23| Will I take gods to myself other than He when, if The Merciful wants any harm for me, their intercession will not avail me at all nor will they save me. 
36|24| Truly, I would, then, be clearly going astray. 
36|25| Truly, I believed in your Lord so hear me! 
36|26| It was said: Enter the Garden. He said: O would that my folk know 
36|27| that my Lord forgave me and made me one who is honored! 
36|28| After him We caused not to descend on his folk an army from heaven, nor had We been ones who need to cause to descend again. 
36|29| It would be but one Cry and that is when they were ones who are silent and still. 
36|30| O how regrettable of the servants! A Messenger approaches them not, but they had been ridiculing him. 
36|31| Consider they not how many generations We caused to perish before them who, truly, return not to them. 
36|32| And, truly, all of them will be altogether, ones who are charged in Our Presence. 
36|33| And a sign for them is the dead body of the earth. We gave life to it and We brought out grain from it so that they eat from it. 
36|34| We made in them gardens of date palm trees and grapevines and We caused a spring to gush forth in it 
36|35| so that they may eat of the fruit from there that are not what their hands did. Will they, then, not give thanks? 
36|36| Glory be to Him Who created pairs, all of them, of what the earth causes to develop as well as of themselves and of what they know not! 
36|37| And a sign for them is the nighttime. We pluck the daytime from it and that is when they are ones in darkness! 
36|38| And the sun runs to a resting place for it. That is foreordained by The Almighty, The Knowing. 
36|39| And for the moon We ordained mansions until it reverted like an ripe aged, dry, date stalk. 
36|40| It is not fit and proper for the sun to overtake the moon nor the nighttime one to take the lead over the daytime. They each swim in an orbit. 
36|41| A sign for them is that We carried their offspring in a laden boat. 
36|42| And We created for them of its like that they ride. 
36|43| And if We will, We drown them with none for them to whom they cry aloud for help nor will they be saved 
36|44| unless it be a mercy from Us and as an enjoyment for a while. 
36|45| And when it was said to them: Be Godfearing of what is in advance of you and what is behind you, so that perhaps you will find mercy, 
36|46| there never approaches them any sign from the signs of their Lord, but they had been ones who turn aside from it. 
36|47| And when it was said to them: Spend of whatever God provided you, those who were ungrateful said to those who believed: Will we feed him whom He would have fed, if He wills? You are nothing, but in a clear going astray. 
36|48| And they say: When is this promise if you had been ones who are sincere? 
36|49| They expect but one Cry which will take them while they strive against one another. 
36|50| Then, they will not be able to leave a legacy nor will they return to their people. 
36|51| And the trumpet would be blown! That is when they will be sliding down to their Lord from their tombs. 
36|52| They would say: Woe on us! Who raised us up from our place of sleep? This is what The Merciful promised and the ones who are sent were sincere. 
36|53| It would be but one Cry. That is when they will be in Our Presence altogether, ones who are charged. 
36|54| This Day no soul will be wronged at all nor will you be given recompense but for what you had been doing. 
36|55| Truly, the Companions of the Garden that Day are ones who are joyful in their engagements. 
36|56| They and their spouses, in shade on raised benches, ones who are reclining. 
36|57| They will have in it sweet fruits and they will have whatever they call for: 
36|58| Peace! A saying from the Compassionate Lord. 
36|59| And be separated on this Day, O ones who sin! 
36|60| Make I not a compact with you, O Children of Adam, that you not worship Satan? Truly, he is a clear enemy 
36|61| and that you should worship Me. This is a straight path. 
36|62| And, certainly, He caused to go astray many an array of you. Be you not, then, reasonable? 
36|63| This is hell which you had been promised. 
36|64| Roast in it this Day because you had been ungrateful. 
36|65| On this Day We will seal over their mouths and their hands will speak to Us and their feet will bear witness to what they had been earning. 
36|66| And if We will, We would, certainly, have obliterated their eyes. Then, they would race towards the path. How would they have perceived? 
36|67| And if We will, We would, certainly, have transformed their ability. Then, they would not have been able to pass on, nor would they return. 
36|68| And he to whom We give a long life, We bend him over in his constitution. Will they not, then, be reasonable? 
36|69| We taught him not poetry, nor is it fit and proper for him. It is but a Remembrance and a clear Recitation 
36|70| to warn whoever had been living and that the saying be realized against the ones who are ungrateful. 
36|71| Consider they not how We created for them—out of what Our hands did— flocks, so they were of them ones who are owners? 
36|72| And We subdued them for them so that of them, some are riding animals and some of them, they eat. 
36|73| And they have profits from them and providing a place from which to drink. Will they not, then, give thanks? 
36|74| And they took to themselves gods other than God so that perhaps they will be helped. 
36|75| They are not able to help them while they are to them as a charged army. 
36|76| So let not their saying dishearten thee.• Truly, We know what they keep secret and what they speak openly. 
36|77| Consider not the human being that We created him from seminal fluid? That is when he is a clear adversary. 
36|78| He propounded parables for Us and forgot his own creation. He said: Who will give life to these bones when they decayed? 
36|79| Say: He will give life to them Who caused them to grow the first time and He is The Knowing of every creation. 
36|80| It is He Who made for you fire out of a green tree. That is when you kindle from it. 
36|81| Is not He Who created the heavens and the earth One Who Has Power to create the like of them? Yea! And He is The Knowing Creator. 
36|82| Truly, His command when He wanted a thing is but to say to it: Be! Then, it is! 
36|83| Then, Glory be to Him in whose hand is the Kingdom of everything! And to Him you will be returned. 
37|1| °°°Stage 6 By the ones standing in ranks, ranged in rows 
37|2| then, ones who scare in a scaring 
37|3| then, ones who recount the Remembrance, 
37|4| truly, your God is One, 
37|5| the Lord of the heavens and the earth and whatever is between them and the Lord of the sunrise. 
37|6| Truly, We made to appear pleasing the present heaven with the adornment of the stars 
37|7| and keeping it safe from every emboldened Satan. 
37|8| They pay no attention to the lofty Council for they are hurled at from every edge, 
37|9| rejected. And for them is a punishment, that which lasts forever, 
37|10| but for him who snatched a fragment, then, a piercing flame pursued him. 
37|11| So ask them for advice: Are they stronger in constitution or those others whom We created? Truly, We created them of clinging clay. 
37|12| Nay! Thou hadst marveled while they deride. 
37|13| And when they were reminded, they remember not. 
37|14| And when they saw a sign, they scoff at it. 
37|15| And they said: This is not but clear sorcery. 
37|16| Is it when we were dead and had been earth dust and bones that we will, truly, be ones who are raised up 
37|17| and our fathers, the ancient ones? 
37|18| Say: Yes, you will be ones in a state of lowliness. 
37|19| There will be only one Scare. So when they will be looking on it, 
37|20| they will say: Woe to us! This is the Day of Judgment! 
37|21| This is the Day of Decision which you had been denying. 
37|22| Assemble those who did wrong and their spouses, and what they had been worshipping 
37|23| —other than God—and guide them to the path to hellfire. 
37|24| And stop them for they are ones who will be asked: 
37|25| What is the matter with you that you help not one another? 
37|26| Nay! They are on that Day ones who will resign themselves to submission to God. 
37|27| And some of them came forward to some others, demanding of one another. 
37|28| They would say: Truly, you, you had been approaching us from the right. 
37|29| They would say: Nay! You are not ones who believe 
37|30| and we had not been any authority over you. Nay! You had been a folk, ones who are defiant. 
37|31| So the saying was realized against us of our Lord. That, truly, we are ones who experience the punishment. 
37|32| So we led you into error. Truly, we had been ones who are in error. 
37|33| Then, truly, they will be on that Day ones who are partners in the punishment. 
37|34| We accomplish, thus, with the ones who sin. 
37|35| Truly, when it had been said to them: There is no god but God, they grow arrogant. 
37|36| And they said: Are we ones who leave our gods for a possessed poet? 
37|37| Nay! He drew near with The Truth and he established as true the ones who are sent. 
37|38| Truly, you are ones who will experience the painful punishment 
37|39| and you will be given recompense but for what you had been doing. 
37|40| But the devoted servants of God, 
37|41| those, for them was a known provision 
37|42| —sweet fruits—and they will be ones who are honored 
37|43| in the Gardens of Bliss, 
37|44| on couches—ones who face one another. 
37|45| A cup from a spring of water will be passed around, 
37|46| white, a delight to ones who drink it. 
37|47| In that is neither headache, nor are they intoxicated by it. 
37|48| And with them are ones who are restraining their (f) glance, lovely eyed 
37|49| as if they are well-guarded pearls. 
37|50| So some of them will come forward to some others, demanding of one another. 
37|51| One of them who converses would say: Truly, I had a comrade 
37|52| who would say: Art thou of the ones who establish the Resurrection as true? 
37|53| When we are dead and had been earth dust and bones, will we be ones who are judged? 
37|54| He said: Will you be ones who peruse? 
37|55| So he perused and saw him amidst hellfire. 
37|56| He said: By God, thou wert about to deal me destruction! 
37|57| Had it not been for the divine blessing of my Lord I would have been of the ones who are charged. 
37|58| Are we not, then, to be dead again 
37|59| but for our first death and will we not be ones who are punished? 
37|60| Truly, this, it is the winning the sublime triumph. 
37|61| For the like of this, let the ones who work, work. 
37|62| Is this better as hospitality or the tree of Zaqqum? 
37|63| Truly, We made it a test for the ones who are unjust. 
37|64| Truly, it is a tree that goes forth, its root in hellfire, 
37|65| its spathes have been like the heads of satans. 
37|66| So, truly, they, they are ones who eat from it, ones who fill their bellies with it. 
37|67| Again, truly, on top of that for them is a brew of scalding water. 
37|68| Again, truly, their return is to hellfire. 
37|69| They discovered their fathers ones who go astray, 
37|70| yet they are running in their footsteps. 
37|71| And, certainly, went astray most of the ancient ones before them. 
37|72| And, certainly, We sent among them ones who warn. 
37|73| Then, look on how had been the Ultimate End of the ones who are warned, 
37|74| but the devoted servants of God. 
37|75| And, certainly, Noah cried out to Us. And how excellent were the ones who answer! 
37|76| And We delivered him and his people from tremendous distress. 
37|77| And We made his offspring—they, the ones who remain. 
37|78| And We left for him to say with the later ones: 
37|79| Peace be on Noah among the worlds. 
37|80| Thus, We give recompense to the ones who are doers of good. 
37|81| Truly, he is one of Our believing servants. 
37|82| Again, We drowned the others. 
37|83| And, truly, among his partisans was Abraham. 
37|84| When he drew near his Lord with a pure-hearted heart, 
37|85| when he said to his father and to his folk: What is it that you worship? 
37|86| Is it a calumny that you want gods other than God! 
37|87| Then, what is your opinion about the Lord of the worlds? 
37|88| And he looked on them with a glimpse at the stars 
37|89| and he said: Truly, I am ill! 
37|90| But they turned away from him as ones who draw back 
37|91| and he turned upon their gods then, said: Will you not eat? 
37|92| Why speak you not for yourselves? 
37|93| Then, he turned upon them, striking them with his right hand. 
37|94| Then, the people came forward towards him rushing. 
37|95| He said: Worship you what you yourselves carve out 
37|96| while God created you and what you do? 
37|97| They said: Build for him a structure. Then, cast him into hellfire. 
37|98| So they wanted to use cunning against him, but We made them the lowest. 
37|99| He said: Truly, I am one who goes to my Lord. He will guide me. 
37|100| My Lord! Bestow on me among the ones in accord with morality. 
37|101| So We gave him the good tidings of a forbearing boy. 
37|102| And when he reached maturity endeavoring with him, he said: O my son! Truly, I see while slumbering that I am sacrificing thee. So look on what thou hast considered? He said: O my father! Accomplish whatever thou art commanded. Thou wilt find me, if God willed, of the ones who remain steadfast. 
37|103| Then, when they both submitted themselves to God and he flung him on his brow 
37|104| We cried out to him: O Abraham! 
37|105| Surely, thou hadst established the dream as true. Thus, We give recompense to the ones who are doers of good. 
37|106| Truly, that was, certainly, the clear trial. 
37|107| And, then, We took ransom for him with a sublime slaughter 
37|108| and We left for him a good name with the later ones: 
37|109| Peace be on Abraham! 
37|110| Thus, We give recompense to the ones who are doers of good. 
37|111| Truly, he is one of Our believing servants. 
37|112| And We gave him the good tidings of Isaac, a Prophet, among the ones in accord with morality. 
37|113| And We blessed him and Isaac. And of their offspring are ones who are doers of good and ones who are clearly unjust to themselves. 
37|114| And, certainly We showed Our grace to Moses and Aaron. 
37|115| And We delivered them and their folk from the tremendous distress 
37|116| and helped them so that they, they had been the ones who are victors. 
37|117| And We gave them the manifest Book 
37|118| and guided them to the straight path. 
37|119| We left for them a good name with the later ones: 
37|120| Peace be on Moses and Aaron! 
37|121| Truly, thus, We give recompense to the ones who are doers of good. 
37|122| Truly, they were of Our servants, ones who believe. 
37|123| And, truly, Elijah was of the ones who are sent 
37|124| when he said to his folk: Will you not be Godfearing? 
37|125| Will you call to Baal and forsake the fairer of ones who are the creators, 
37|126| God, your Lord and the Lord of your ancient fathers? 
37|127| But they denied him, so they, truly, were ones who are charged. 
37|128| As for the devoted servants of God among them, 
37|129| We left for him a good name with the later ones: 
37|130| Peace be on Elijah! 
37|131| Thus, We give recompense to the ones who are doers of good. 
37|132| Truly, he was of Our servants, ones who believe. 
37|133| And, truly, Lot was of the ones who are sent. 
37|134| We delivered him and his people, one and all, 
37|135| but an old woman of the ones who stay behind. 
37|136| Again, We destroyed the others. 
37|137| And, truly, you pass by them in that which is morning 
37|138| and at night. Will you not, then, be reasonable? 
37|139| And, truly, Jonah was of the ones who are sent 
37|140| when he fled, without his Lord’s permission, to the laden boat. 
37|141| He cast lots with them and he had been of the ones who are refuted. 
37|142| Then, the great fish engulfed him while he was one who is answerable. 
37|143| If he had not been of the ones who glorify, 
37|144| he would have lingered in expectation in its belly until the Day they are raised up. 
37|145| Then, We cast him forth on the naked shore while he was ill. 
37|146| We caused a vine of gourd to develop over him. 
37|147| We sent him to a community of a hundred thousand, or they even exceed that. 
37|148| And they believed, so We gave them enjoyment for a while. 
37|149| Then, ask them for advice: Are daughters for thy Lord and for them, sons? 
37|150| Or created We female angels while they were ones who bear witness? 
37|151| Truly, it is out of their calumny that they say: 
37|152| God procreated! And, truly, they are ones who lie. 
37|153| Favored He daughters over sons? 
37|154| What is the matter with you? How you give judgment! 
37|155| Will you not, then, recollect? 
37|156| Or is there for you a clear authority? 
37|157| Then, bring your Book if you would be ones who are sincere. 
37|158| And they made kindred between him and between the genies. But, surely, the genies knew well that they were ones who will be charged. 
37|159| Glory be to God from what they allege, 
37|160| but not the devoted servants of God. 
37|161| So, truly, you and those whom you worship 
37|162| will not be ones who are tempters against Him, 
37|163| but he who would be one who roasts in hellfire. 
37|164| There is not any of us but he has a known station. 
37|165| And we are ones who are standing in ranks. 
37|166| And we are the ones who glorify. 
37|167| And, truly, they had been saying: 
37|168| Had been with us a Remembrance from the ancient ones, 
37|169| we would have been servants of God, ones who are devoted, 
37|170| but they were ungrateful for it. and soon they will know. 
37|171| And, certainly, Our Word preceded for Our servants, the ones who are sent. 
37|172| They, truly, they are ones who shall be helped. 
37|173| And, truly, Our armies are the ones who are victors. 
37|174| So turn thou away from them for awhile 
37|175| and perceive them and soon they will perceive. 
37|176| Are they impatient for Our punishment? 
37|177| Then, when it would come down into their courtyard, how evil will be the morning daybreak of the ones who are warned! 
37|178| So turn thou away from them for a while, 
37|179| and perceive and they will perceive. 
37|180| Glory be to thy Lord, the Lord of Great Glory, from what they allege about Him. 
37|181| And peace be to the ones who are sent. 
37|182| And The Praise belongs to God, the Lord of the worlds! 
38|1| @[d. By the Quran, Possessor of the Remembrance. 
38|2| Nay! Those who were ungrateful are in vainglory and breach. 
38|3| How many before them have We caused to perish of generations! And they cried out but there was no time for escape for a while. 
38|4| And they marveled that drew near them one who warns from among themselves. And the ones who are ungrateful said: This is one who is a sorcerer, a liar. 
38|5| Made He all gods One God? Truly, this is an astounding thing! 
38|6| And the Council set out from them, saying: Be gone! And have patience with your gods. Truly, this is a thing to be wanted! 
38|7| We heard not the like of this in the later creed. This is only made up tales! 
38|8| Was the Remembrance only caused to descend to him from among us? Nay! They are in uncertainty about My Remembrance. Nay! They experience not My punishment! 
38|9| Or are they owners of the treasures of mercy of thy Lord, The Almighty, The Giver? 
38|10| Or is theirs the dominion of the heavens and the earth and what is between them? Let them climb up with cords! 
38|11| Their army is one that is put to flight among the confederates. 
38|12| The folk of Noah before them denied and Ad and Pharaoh, the possessor of the stakes, 
38|13| and Thamud and a folk of Lot and the Companions of the Thicket. Those were the confederates. 
38|14| All of them denied the Messengers so My repayment was realized. 
38|15| These expect not but one Cry. There was no holding it back. 
38|16| And they said: Our Lord! Quicken the sentence of the judge on us before the Day of Reckoning. 
38|17| Have patience with what they say, and remember Our servant David, the possessor of potency. Truly, he was penitent. 
38|18| Truly, We caused the mountains to be subservient to glorify with him in the evening and the rising of the sun. 
38|19| And the birds were ones who are assembled, all penitent to Him. 
38|20| And We strengthened his dominion and gave him wisdom and decisiveness in argument. 
38|21| Approached thee the tiding of the disputants when they climbed over the wall of a sanctuary? 
38|22| When they entered in on David, he was terrified of them. They said: Fear not. Two disputants were insolent, one of us against the other. So give judgment duly between us and transgress not and guide us to the right path. 
38|23| Truly, this is my brother. He has ninety-nine ewe, while I have one ewe. And he said: Place it in my charge and he triumphed over me in argument. 
38|24| David said: Certainly, he did wrong to thee in asking for thy ewe in addition to his ewes. And, truly, many partners in business are insolent, one to another, but those who believed and did as the ones in accord with morality, and they are few. And David thought that We tried him and he asked for forgiveness of his Lord and fell down as one who bows down penitent.‡ 
38|25| So We forgave him that. And, truly, for him is nearness with Us and goodness of destination. 
38|26| O David! Truly, We made thee a viceregent on the earth so give judgment duly among humanity and follow not your desire for it will cause thee to go astray from the way of God. Truly, those who go astray from the way of God, for them there is a severe punishment because they forgot the Day of Reckoning. 
38|27| And We created not the heaven and the earth and whatever is between the two in falsehood. That is the opinion of those who were ungrateful. Then, woe to those who disbelieved in the fire! 
38|28| Or will We make those who believed and did as the ones in accord with morality like the ones who make corruption in and on the earth or will We make the ones who are Godfearing as the ones who acted immorally? 
38|29| It is a blessed Book that We caused to descend to thee, so that they meditate on its signs and those imbued with intuition recollect. 
38|30| And We bestowed Solomon on David. How excellent a servant. Truly, he was penitent. 
38|31| When they were presented before him in the evening—steeds standing with one foot slightly raised— 
38|32| he said: Truly, I cherished and loved the good instead of remembering my Lord when the sun secluded itself behind the partition of the night. 
38|33| Return them to me. Then, he took wiping over their legs and their necks. 
38|34| And, certainly, We tried Solomon. We cast a lifeless body on his seat. Again, he was penitent. 
38|35| He said: My Lord! Forgive me and bestow on me a dominion such will not be fit and proper for another after me. Truly, Thou art The Giver. 
38|36| So We caused the wind to be subservient to him. It runs at his command, a gentle wind, wherever it lit. 
38|37| And We made subservient the satans and every builder and diver 
38|38| and others, ones who are chained in bonds. 
38|39| This is Our gift. Then, hast thou shown grace or hast thou held back without reckoning? 
38|40| Truly, for him is nearness with Us, and goodness of destination. 
38|41| And remember Our servant Job when he cried out to his Lord: Truly, Satan afflicted me with fatigue and punishment! 
38|42| It is said: Stomp with thy foot. This is a place of washing that is cool and from which to drink. 
38|43| And We bestowed on him, his people, and the like of them along with them as a mercy from Us, a reminder for those imbued with intuition. 
38|44| And take in thy hand a bundle of rushes and strike with it and fail not thy oath. Truly, We found him one who remains steadfast. How excellent a servant. Truly, he was penitent. 
38|45| And remember Our servants Abraham, and Isaac and Jacob, all imbued with dynamic energy and insight. 
38|46| And, truly, We made them sincere with that which is pure, a reminder of the Abode. 
38|47| And, truly, they are to Us among ones who are favored and good. 
38|48| And remember Ishmael, Elisha, and Dhu-l Kifl. And all are among the good. 
38|49| This is a Remembrance. And, truly, for ones who are Godfearing this is, certainly, a goodly destination, 
38|50| the Gardens of Eden, the doors, ones that are opened up for them. 
38|51| Ones who are reclining in them. They will call for many sweet fruits and drink in it. 
38|52| And with them will be ones who are restraining their (f) glance, persons of the same age. 
38|53| This is what you are promised for the Day of Reckoning. 
38|54| Truly, this is Our provision. For it, there is no coming to an end. 
38|55| This is so. And, truly, for ones who are defiant, there will be a worse destination, 
38|56| hell, where they will roast. And miserable will be the cradling! 
38|57| This is so! Then, let them experience this—scalding water and filth 
38|58| and other torment of a like kind in pairs. 
38|59| This is an army unit, one that rushes in with you. There is no welcome for them! Truly, they are ones who roast in the fire. 
38|60| They said: Nay! You! There is no welcome for you. It is you who put this forward on us. Miserable will be the stopping place! 
38|61| They said: Our Lord! Whoever put this forward for us, increase him with a double punishment in the fire. 
38|62| And they said: What is the matter with us that we see not men whom we had been numbering among the worst? 
38|63| Took We them to ourselves as a laughing-stock or swerved our sight from them? 
38|64| Truly, this is true of the disagreement of the people of the fire. 
38|65| Say: I am only one who warns. And there is no god but God, The One, The Omniscient, 
38|66| the Lord of the heavens and the earth and whatever is between them, The Almighty, The Forgiver. 
38|67| Say: It is a serious tiding 
38|68| from which you are ones who turn aside. 
38|69| I had been without knowledge of the lofty Council when they are striving against one another. 
38|70| It is revealed to me only that I am a warner, one who makes clear. 
38|71| Thy Lord said to the angels: Truly, I am one who is Creator of a mortal from clay. 
38|72| So when I shaped him and breathed into him My Spirit, then, fall to him, ones who prostrate themselves. 
38|73| So the angels prostrated themselves, one and all, altogether 
38|74| but Iblis. He grew arrogant and had been among the ones who are ungrateful. 
38|75| He said: O Iblis! What prevented thee from prostrating thyself to what I created with My two hands? Hadst thou grown arrogant? Or hadst thou been among the ones who exalt themselves? 
38|76| Iblis said: I am better than he. Thou hadst created me from fire while Thou hadst created him from clay. 
38|77| He said: Then, go thou forth from here for, truly, thou art accursed. 
38|78| And, truly, on thee is My curse until the Day of Judgment. 
38|79| Iblis said: My Lord! Then, give me respite until the Day to be raised up. 
38|80| He said: Truly, thou art among the ones who are given respite 
38|81| until the Day of the known time. 
38|82| Iblis said: By Thy Great Glory, then, I will certainly lead them one and all into error, 
38|83| but Thy devoted servants among them. 
38|84| He said: This is The Truth and The Truth I say 
38|85| that I will fill hell with thee and with one and all of whoever heeded thee. 
38|86| Say: I ask of you not for any compensation for this nor am I among the ones who take things upon themselves. 
38|87| It is nothing other than a Remembrance for the worlds 
38|88| and you will, certainly, know its tidings after a while. 
39|1| The sending down successively of this Book is from God, The Almighty, The Wise. 
39|2| Truly, We caused to descend to thee the Book with The Truth so worship God as one who is sincere and devoted in the way of life to Him. 
39|3| The way of life is exclusively for God. And those who took to themselves protectors other than Him say: We worship them not, but that they bring us nearness to God. Truly, God gives judgment between them about what they are at variance in it. Truly, God guides not him, one who lies and is an ingrate. 
39|4| If God wanted to take to Himself a son, He would have favored from what He creates of what He wills. Glory be to Him. He is God, The One, The Omniscient. 
39|5| He created the heavens and the earth with The Truth. He wraps the nighttime around the daytime and wraps the daytime around the nighttime. And He caused to be subservient the sun and the moon, each run for a term, that which is determined. Is He not The Almighty, The Forgiver? 
39|6| He creates you from one soul. Again, He made its mate from it and He caused to descend for you eight pairs of flocks. He creates you in the wombs of your mothers, creation after creation, in threefold shadows. Such is God your Lord. His is the dominion. There is no god but He. Why, then, turn you away? 
39|7| If you are ungrateful, truly, God is Independent of you. And He is not well-pleased with ingratitude from His servants. And if you give thanks, He will be well-pleased with you. No burdened soul will bear the heavy load of another. Again, to your Lord is the return, so He will tell you what you had been doing. Truly, He is Knowing of what is in the breasts. 
39|8| And when some distress afflicted the human being, he calls to his Lord as one who turns in repentance to Him. Again, when He granted him divine blessing from Himself, he forgets that for which he had been calling to Him before and he laid on rivals to God to cause others to go astray from His way. Say: Take joy in thy ingratitude for a while. Truly, thou art of the Companions of the Fire. 
39|9| Is he one who is morally obligated during the night watch, one who prostrates himself or one who is standing up in prayer being fearful of the world to come and hoping for the mercy of his Lord? Say: Are those who know on the same level as those who know not? Only those imbued with intuition recollect. 
39|10| Say: O My servants who believed! Be Godfearing of your Lord. For those who did good in the present, there is benevolence, and the earth of God is One Who is Extensive. Only ones who remain steadfast will have their compensation without reckoning. 
39|11| Say: Truly, I was commanded to worship God, one who is sincere and devoted in the way of life to Him. 
39|12| And I was commanded that I be the first of the ones who submit to God. 
39|13| Say: Truly, I fear if I rebelled against my Lord the punishment of a tremendous Day. 
39|14| Say: God alone I worship as one sincere and devoted in the way of life to Him. 
39|15| So worship what you would other than Him. Say: Truly, the ones who are losers are those who lost themselves and their people on the Day of Resurrection. Truly, that is a clear loss. 
39|16| They will have overshadowings above from the fire and beneath them, overshadowings. With that, God frightens His servants. O my servants! Be Godfearing of Me! 
39|17| And those who avoided false deities so that they worship them not and were penitent to God, for them are good tidings. So give good tidings to My servants, 
39|18| those who listen to the saying of the Quran and follow the fairer of it. Those are those whom God guided. And those, they are imbued with intuition. 
39|19| Against whom was realized the word of punishment? Wilt thou be saving him from the fire? 
39|20| But those who were Godfearing of their Lord, for them are the highest chambers with the highest chambers built above them, beneath which rivers run. This is the solemn declaration of God. God never breaks His promise. 
39|21| Hast thou not considered that God caused to descend water from heaven and threaded fountains in the earth, again, brings out crops by it of hues, ones that are at variance? Again, they wither so thou seest them as ones that are growing yellow. Again, He makes them chaff. Truly, in this is a reminder for those imbued with intuition. 
39|22| So is he whose breast God has expanded for submission to God, in a light from His Lord? So woe to their hearts, ones that harden against the Remembrance of God. Those are clearly going astray. 
39|23| God sent down the fairer discourse, a Book, one that is consistent in its often repeated parts of the Quran by which shiver the skins of those who dread their Lord. Again, their skins and their hearts become gentle with the Remembrance of God. That is the guidance of God. With it He guides whom He wills. And whomever God causes to go astray, there is not for him any one who guides. 
39|24| Is he, then, one who fends off a dire punishment with his face on the Day of Resurrection? And it will be said to the ones who are unjust: Experience what you had been earning! 
39|25| Those before them denied and so the punishment approached them from where they are not aware. 
39|26| So God caused them to experience degradation in this present life. But the punishment of the world to come is greater if they had been knowing! 
39|27| And, certainly, We propounded for humanity in this, the Quran, every kind of parable so that perhaps they will recollect, 
39|28| an Arabic Recitation without any crookedness so that perhaps they would be Godfearing. 
39|29| God propounded a parable of a man owned by quarreling ascribed associates and a man belonging to another man. Are they both equal in likeness? The Praise belongs to God. But most of them know not. 
39|30| Truly, thou art mortal and, truly, they are mortal. 
39|31| Again, truly, on the Day of Resurrection before your Lord you will strive against one another. 
39|32| Then, who does greater wrong than one who lied against God and denied sincerity when it drew near him? Is there not in hell a place of lodging for the ones who are ungrateful? 
39|33| And he who brought about sincerity and he who established it as true, those, they are the ones who are Godfearing. 
39|34| For them is all that they will with their Lord. That is the recompense of the ones who are doers of good. 
39|35| Certainly, God absolves them of bad deeds of what they do and gives them recompense in compensation for the fairer of what they had been doing. 
39|36| Is not God One Who Suffices for His servants? They frighten thee with those other than Him. And whom God causes to go astray, there is not for him any one who guides. 
39|37| And whomever God guides, there is not for him anyone who leads astray. Is not God Almighty, The Possessor of Requital? 
39|38| And, truly, if thou hadst asked them: Who created the heavens and the earth? They would, certainly, say: God. Say: Considered you what you call to other than God? If God wanted some harm for me, would they (f) be ones who remove His harm from me? Or if He wanted mercy for me would they (f) be ones who hold back His mercy? Say: God is enough for me. In Him put their trust the ones who put their trust. 
39|39| Say: O my folk! Truly, act according to your ability. I am one who acts. You will know 
39|40| to whom punishment approaches covering him with shame and on whom alights an abiding punishment. 
39|41| Truly, We caused the Book to descend to thee for humanity with The Truth. So whoever was truly guided, it is only for himself. And whoever went astray, goes astray but for himself. Thou art not over them a trustee. 
39|42| God calls the souls to Himself at the time of their death and those that die not during their slumbering. He holds back those for whom He decreed death and sends the others back for a term, that which is determined. Truly, in that are signs for a folk who reflect. 
39|43| Or took they to themselves other than God intercessors? Say: Even though they had not been possessing anything and they are not reasonable? 
39|44| Say: To God belongs all intercession. His is the dominion of the heavens and the earth. Again, to Him you will be returned. 
39|45| And when God alone was remembered, the hearts shuddered of those who believe not in the world to come. But when those who, other than Him, were remembered, that is when they rejoice at the good tidings! 
39|46| Say: O God! One Who is Originator of the heavens and the earth! One Who Knows of the unseen and the visible! Thou wilt give judgment among Thy servants about what they had been at variance in it. 
39|47| And if those who did wrong had whatever is in and on the earth altogether and the like with it, they would, truly, have offered it as ransom for the evil punishment on the Day of Resurrection. And it will show itself to them from God what they not be anticipating. 
39|48| And it will show itself to them, the evil deeds that they earned and they will be surrounded by what they had been ridiculing. 
39|49| Then, when harm afflicted the human being, he called to Us. Again, We granted him divine blessing from Us. He would say: I was only given this because of my knowledge. Nay! It is only a test, but most of them know not. 
39|50| Truly, those who were before them said it so what they had been earning availed them not. 
39|51| The evil deeds they earned lit on them. And as for those who did wrong among these, evil deeds of what they earned will light on them. They will not be ones who frustrate Him. 
39|52| Know they not that God extends the provision for whomever He wills and tightens it for whom He wills. Truly, in this are, certainly, signs for a folk who believe. 
39|53| Say: O My servants who exceeded all bounds against themselves, despair not of the mercy of God. Truly, God forgives all impieties. Truly, He is The Forgiving, The Compassionate. 
39|54| Be penitent to your Lord and submit to Him before the punishment approaches you. Again, you will not be helped. 
39|55| And follow the fairer of what was caused to descend to you from your Lord before the punishment approaches you suddenly while you are not aware 
39|56| so that a soul not say: O me that I am regretful for what I neglected in my responsibility to God and that I had, truly, been among the ones who deride. 
39|57| Or he may say: If God guided me, I would, certainly, have been among the ones who are Godfearing. 
39|58| Or he say at the time he sees the punishment: If only I might return again, then, be among the ones who are doers of good. 
39|59| Yea! My signs drew near thee and thou hadst denied them and hadst grown arrogant. Thou hadst been among the ones who are ungrateful. 
39|60| And on the Day of Resurrection thou wilt see those who lied against God, their faces, ones that are clouded over. Is there not in hell a place of lodging for ones who increase in pride? 
39|61| And God delivers those who were Godfearing, keeping them safe. No evil will afflict them, nor will they feel remorse. 
39|62| God is One Who is Creator of everything. And He is Trustee over everything. 
39|63| To Him belongs the pass keys of the heavens and the earth. And those who were ungrateful for the signs of God, those, they are the ones who are the losers. 
39|64| Say: Commanded you me to worship other than God, O ones who are ignorant? 
39|65| And, certainly, it was revealed to thee and to those who were before thee that if thou hast ascribed partners with God, certainly, thy actions will be fruitless and thou wilt, certainly, be among the ones who are losers. 
39|66| Nay! Worship thou God and be thou among the ones who are thankful! 
39|67| And they measured not God with His true measure. And the earth altogether will be His handful on the Day of Resurrection when the heavens will be ones that are rolled up in His right hand. Glory be to Him! And exalted is He above partners they ascribe! 
39|68| And the trumpet will be blown. Then, whoever is in the heavens will swoon and whoever is in and on the earth, but he whom God willed. Again, it will be blown another time. Then, they will be upright looking on. 
39|69| And the earth will shine with the Light of its Lord and the Book will be laid down and the prophets and the witnesses will be brought about. And it will be decided among them with The Truth. And they, they will not be wronged. 
39|70| The account of each soul will be paid in full for what it did. He is greater in knowledge of what they accomplish. 
39|71| Those who were ungrateful will be ones driven to hell in troops until when they drew near it, then, the doors of it will be flung open. Ones who are its keepers will say to them: Approach not Messengers from among you who recount to you the signs of your Lord to warn you of the meeting of this your Day? They would say: Yea. But the word of punishment was realized against the ones who are ungrateful. 
39|72| It will be said: Enter the doors of hell as ones who will dwell in it forever. Miserable it will be as a place of lodging for the ones who increase in pride. 
39|73| Those who were Godfearing will be ones driven to their Lord in the Garden in troops until when they drew near it and its doors were let loose, ones who are its keepers will say to them: Peace be on you! You fared well! So enter it, ones who dwell in it forever. 
39|74| They would say: The Praise belongs to God Who was sincere in His promise to us and gave us the earth as inheritance that we take our dwelling in the Garden wherever we will. How excellent a compensation for the ones who work! 
39|75| And thou wilt see the angels as ones who encircle around the Throne glorifying their Lord with praise. And it would be decided in Truth among them. And it would be said: The Praise belongs to God, the Lord of the worlds. 
40|1| +[ M\m. 
40|2| The sending down successively of this Book is from God, The Almighty, The Knowing, 
40|3| The One Who Forgives impieties, The One Who Accepts remorse, The Severe in Repayment, The Possessor of Bounty. There is no god but He. To Him is the Homecoming. 
40|4| No one disputes the signs of God, but those who were ungrateful. So be thou not disappointed with their going to and fro in the land. 
40|5| The folk of Noah denied before them and the confederates after them. And every community is about to take its Messenger and they dispute with falsehood to refute The Truth. So I took them. And how had been My repayment! 
40|6| And, thus, was the Word of thy Lord realized against those who were ungrateful that they will be the Companions of the Fire. 
40|7| Those who carry the Throne and whoever is around it glorify the praises of their Lord and believe in Him and ask for forgiveness for those who believed say: Our Lord! Thou hadst encompassed everything in mercy and in knowledge. So forgive those who repented and followed Thy way and guard them from the punishment of hellfire. 
40|8| Our Lord! And cause them to enter the Gardens of Eden which Thou hadst promised them and whomever was in accord with morality among their fathers and their spouses and their offspring. Truly, Thou, Thou alone art The Almighty, The Wise. 
40|9| And guard them from the evil deeds. And whomever Thou hast guarded from the evil deeds on that Day. Surely, Thou hadst had mercy on him. And that, it is the winning the sublime triumph! 
40|10| It will be proclaimed to those who were ungrateful: Certainly, the repugnance of God is greater than your repugnance of yourselves when you are called to belief, but you are ungrateful. 
40|11| They said: Our Lord! Thou hadst caused us to die two times and Thou hadst given us life two times. We acknowledged our impieties. Then, is there any way of going forth? 
40|12| It will be said: That is because when God alone was called to, you disbelieved. But when partners are ascribed with Him, you believe. And the determination is with God alone, The Lofty, The Great. 
40|13| It is He Who causes you to see His signs and sends down provision for you from heaven. And none recollect but whoever is penitent. 
40|14| So call you on God ones who are sincere and devoted in the way of life to Him although the ones who are ungrateful disliked it. 
40|15| Exalter of Degrees, Possessor of the Throne, He casts the Spirit by His command on whom He wills of His servants to warn of the Day of the Encounter, 
40|16| a Day when they are ones who depart. Nothing about them will be hidden from God. Whose is the dominion this Day. It is to God, The One, The Omniscient. 
40|17| On this Day every soul will be given recompense for what it earned. There will be no injustice today. God is Swift in reckoning. 
40|18| And warn them of The Impending Day when the hearts will be near the throats, ones who choke. There will not be a loyal friend for ones who are unjust, nor an intercessor be obeyed. 
40|19| He knows that which is the treachery of the eyes and whatever the breasts conceal. 
40|20| And God decrees by The Truth. And those whom they call to other than Him decide not anything. Truly, God, He is The Hearing, The Seeing. 
40|21| Journey they not through the earth and look on how had been the Ultimate End of those who had been before them? They, they had been superior to them in strength and in traces they left on the earth, but God took them for their impieties and there had not been for them one who is a defender from God. 
40|22| That had been because their Messengers approached them with the clear portents, but they were ungrateful so God took them. Truly, He is Strong, Severe in Repayment. 
40|23| And, certainly, We sent Moses with Our signs and a clear authority 
40|24| to Pharaoh and Haman and Korah. But they said: He is one who is a lying sorcerer. 
40|25| Then, when he drew near with The Truth from Us, they said: Kill the children of those who believed with him and save alive their women. And the cunning of the ones who are ungrateful is but going astray. 
40|26| And Pharaoh said: Let me kill Moses and let him call to his Lord. Truly, I fear that he substitute for your way of life or that he cause to appear in and on the earth corruption. 
40|27| And Moses said: Truly, I took refuge in my Lord and your Lord from everyone who increases in pride and who believes not in the Day of Reckoning. 
40|28| Said a believing man of the family of Pharaoh, who keeps back his belief: Would you kill a man because he says: My Lord is God, and he drew near you with the clear portents from your Lord? And if he be one who lies, then, on him will be his lying. And if he be one who is sincere, then, will light on you some of what he promises. Truly, God guides not him who is one who is excessive, a liar. 
40|29| O my folk! Yours is the dominion this day, ones who are prominent on the earth. But who will help us from the might of God if it drew near us? Pharaoh said: I cause you to see not but what I see and what I guide you to is not but the way of rectitude. 
40|30| And he who believed said: O my folk! Truly, I fear for you like a Day of the confederates, 
40|31| in like manner of a folk of Noah and Ad and Thamud and those after them. And God wants not injustice for His servants. 
40|32| And O my folk! Truly, I fear for you a Day when they would call to one another 
40|33| a Day when you will turn as ones who draw back. No one saves you from harm from God. And for whomever God causes to go astray, there is not anyone who guides. 
40|34| And, certainly, Joseph drew near you before with the clear portents, but you ceased not in uncertainty as to what he brought about to you. Until when he perished you said: God will never raise up a Messenger after him. Thus, God causes him to go astray, one who is excessive, one who is a doubter, 
40|35| those who dispute the signs of God without any authority having approached them. It is troublesome, repugnant with God and with those who believed. Thus, God sets a seal on every heart of one who increases in pride, haughtiness. 
40|36| And Pharaoh said: O Haman! Build for me a pavilion so that perhaps I will reach the routes, 
40|37| the routes to the heavens, and that I may peruse The God of Moses but, truly, I think that he is one who lies. Thus, it was made to appear pleasing to Pharaoh, the evil of his actions. And he was barred from the way. And the cunning of Pharaoh was not but in defeat. 
40|38| And he who believed said: O my folk! Follow me; I will guide you to the way of rectitude. 
40|39| O my folk! Truly, this present life is nothing but transitory enjoyment and that the world to come is the stopping place, the Abode. 
40|40| Whoever did an evil deed will not be given recompense but the like of it. But whoever did as one in accord with morality, whether male or female, and such is one who believes, then, those will enter the Garden where they will be provided in it without reckoning. 
40|41| And O my folk! What is it to me that I call to you for deliverance and you call to me for the fire? 
40|42| You call to me to be ungrateful to God and to ascribe partners with Him of what there is no knowledge, while I call you to The Almighty, The Forgiver. 
40|43| Without a doubt what you call me to has no merit. It is not a call to the present or to the world to come. And our turning back is to God. And, truly, the ones who are excessive, they will be Companions of the Fire. 
40|44| And you will remember what I say to you. I commit my affair to God. Truly, God is Seeing of the servants. 
40|45| So God guarded him from the evil deeds that they planned while surrounded the people of Pharaoh an evil punishment: 
40|46| The fire to which they are presented the first part of the day and evening. And on a Day when the Hour is secure it is said: Cause the people of Pharaoh to enter the severest punishment. 
40|47| And when they dispute with one another in the fire, the weak will say to those who grew arrogant: Truly, we had been followers of you so will you be ones who avail us from a share of the fire? 
40|48| Those who grew arrogant would say: Truly, we are all in it. Truly, God, surely, gave judgment among His servants. 
40|49| And those in the fire would say to ones who are keepers of hell: Call to your Lord to lighten the punishment for us for a day. 
40|50| They would say: Be bringing not your Messengers the clear portents. They would say: Yea! They would say: Then, you call. And the supplication of the ones who are ungrateful only goes astray. 
40|51| Truly, We will, certainly, help Our Messengers and those who believed in this present life and on a Day when the ones who bear witness will stand up, 
40|52| a Day when their excuses will not profit the ones who are unjust. And for them will be the curse and for them will be an evil abode. 
40|53| And, certainly, We gave Moses the guidance and We gave as inheritance to the Children of Israel the Book 
40|54| as a guidance and a reminder for those imbued with intuition. 
40|55| So have thou patience. Truly, the promise of God is true. And ask for forgiveness for thy impiety. And glorify thy Lord with praise in the evening and the early morning. 
40|56| Truly, those who dispute about the signs of God without any authority having approached them, there is nothing but having pride in their breasts. They will never be ones who reach its satisfaction. So seek refuge in God. Truly, He, He is The Hearing, The Seeing. 
40|57| Certainly, the creation of the heavens and the earth is greater than the creation of humanity, yet most of humanity knows not. 
40|58| Not on the same level are the unwilling to see and the seeing nor those who believed and did as the ones in accord with morality and the ones who are evil doers. Little do they recollect. 
40|59| Truly, the Hour is that which arrives. There is no doubt about it, yet most of humanity believes not. 
40|60| And your Lord said: Call to Me; I will respond to you. Truly, those who grow arrogant toward My worship, they will enter hell as ones who are in a state of lowliness. 
40|61| God is He Who made for you the nighttime so that you may rest in it and the daytime for one who perceives. Truly, God is Possessor of Grace to humanity, but most of humanity gives not thanks. 
40|62| That is God, your Lord, the One Who is Creator of everything. There is no god but He. Then, how you are misled! 
40|63| Thus, are misled those who had been negating the signs of God. 
40|64| God is He Who made the earth for you as a stopping place and the heaven as a canopy. And He formed you and formed you well and He provided you of what is good. That is God, your Lord. Then, blessed be God, the Lord of the worlds! 
40|65| He is The Living! There is no god but He! So call to Him, ones sincere and devoted in the way of life to Him. The Praise belongs to God, the Lord of the worlds! 
40|66| Say: Truly, I was prohibited from worshipping those whom you call to other than God, because the clear portents drew near me from my Lord. And I was commanded to submit to the Lord of the worlds. 
40|67| He it is Who created you from earth dust, again, from seminal fluid, again, from a clot. Again, He brings you out as infant children. Again, you come of age and are fully grown. Again, you be an old man. And of you is he whom death calls to itself before, and that you reach a term, that which is determined so that perhaps you will be reasonable. 
40|68| He it is Who gives life and causes to die. And when He decreed an affair, He only says to it: Be! Then, it is! 
40|69| Hast thou not considered those who dispute about the signs of God, where they are turned away: 
40|70| Those who denied the Book and that with which We sent Our Messengers? Then, they will know. 
40|71| When yokes are on their necks and the chains, they will be dragged 
40|72| into scalding water. Again, they will be poured forth into the fire as fuel. 
40|73| Again, it will be said to them: Where are what you had been ascribing as partners 
40|74| other than God? They would say: They went astray from us. Nay! We be not calling to anything before. Thus, God causes to go astray ones who are ungrateful. 
40|75| That was because you had been exultant on the earth without right and that you had been glad. 
40|76| Enter the doors of hell as ones who will dwell in it forever. Then, miserable it will be as a place of lodging for the ones who increase in pride! 
40|77| So have thou patience. Truly, the promise of God is true. And whether We cause thee to see some part of what We promise them or We call thee to Us, then, it is to Us they will be returned. 
40|78| And, certainly, We sent Messengers before thee among whom We related to thee and of whom We relate not to thee. And it had not been for any Messenger that he bring a sign, except with the permission of God. So when the command of God drew near, the matter would be decided rightfully. And lost here are these, the ones who deal in falsehood. 
40|79| God is He Who has made for you flocks among which you may ride on them and among which you eat of them. 
40|80| And you have what profits from them and that with them you reach the satisfaction of a need that is in your breasts and you are carried on them and on boats. 
40|81| And He causes you to see His signs. So which of the signs of God do you reject? 
40|82| Journey they not through the earth and look on how had been the Ultimate End of those before them? They had been more than them and were more vigorous in strength and in regard to the traces they left on the earth. Then, availed them not what they had been earning. 
40|83| Then, when their Messengers drew near them with the clear portents, they were glad in the knowledge that they had and surrounded them was what they had been ridiculing. 
40|84| So when they saw Our might, they said: We believed in God alone and we were ungrateful in that we had been ones who are polytheists. 
40|85| But their belief be not what profits them once they saw Our might. This is a custom of God which was, surely, in force among His servants. And lost here are the ones who are ungrateful. 
41|1| +[ M\m. 
41|2| A sending down successively from The Merciful, The Compassionate, 
41|3| a Book in which its signs we37:181re explained distinctly, an Arabic Recitation for a folk who know, 
41|4| a bearer of glad tidings and a warner, but most of them turned aside so they hear not. 
41|5| And they said: Our hearts are sheathed from that to which thou hast called us and in our ears is a heaviness and between us and between thee is a partition. So work. Truly, we, too, are ones who work. 
41|6| Say: I am only a mortal like you. It is revealed to me that your God is God, One; so go straight to Him and ask for forgiveness from Him, and woe to the ones who are polytheists—those who give not the purifying alms 
41|7| and who in the world to come are ones who disbelieve. 
41|8| Truly, those who believed and did as the ones in accord with morality, for them will be compensation, that which is unfailing. 
41|9| Say: Truly, are you ungrateful to Him Who created the earth in two days? And assign you to Him rivals? That is the Lord of the worlds! 
41|10| And He made on it firm mountains from above it and He blessed it and ordained its subsistence within it in four days equally for the ones who ask. 
41|11| Again, He turned His attention to the heaven while it was smoke and He said to it and to the earth: Approach both of you willing or unwilling. They both said: We approached as ones who are obedient. 
41|12| Then, foreordaining seven heavens in two days, He revealed in each heaven its command. We made the present heaven appear pleasing with lamps and keeping them safe. Thus, decreed the Almighty, The Knowing. 
41|13| But if they turned aside, then, say: I warned you of a thunderbolt like the thunderbolt of Ad and Thamud. 
41|14| And when the Messengers drew near before them and from behind them saying: Worship none but God, they said: If our Lord willed, He would have caused angels to descend. Then, truly, in what you were sent, we are ones who disbelieve. 
41|15| As for Ad, they grew arrogant on the earth without right and they said: Who is more vigorous than us in strength? Consider they not that God Who created them, He was more vigorous than they in strength? And they had been negating Our signs. 
41|16| So We sent on them a raging wind in days of misfortune that We might cause them to experience the punishment of degradation in this present life. And the punishment in the world to come will be more degrading; and they will not be helped. 
41|17| And as for Thamud, We guided them, but they embraced blindness of heart instead of guidance. Then, a thunderbolt took them with a humiliating punishment because of what they had been earning. 
41|18| We delivered those who believed and had been Godfearing. 
41|19| On a Day when will be assembled the enemies of God to the fire, then, they will be marching in rank 
41|20| until when they drew near it. Witness will be borne against them by their having the ability to hear, and by their sight and by their skins as to what they had been doing. 
41|21| And they will say to their skins: Why bore you witness against us? They will say: We were given speech by God Who gave speech to all things. And He created you the first time and to Him you will be returned. 
41|22| And you had not been covering yourselves so that witness be borne against you by your having the ability to hear or by your sight or by your skins but that you thought that God knows not much of what you do. 
41|23| And that your thought, which you thought about your Lord has dealt destruction to you. Then, you became among the ones who are losers. 
41|24| Then, even if they endure patiently, yet the fire will be the place of lodging for them. And if they ask for favor, yet they will not be of the ones to whom favor is shown. 
41|25| And We allotted for them comrades who were made to appear pleasing to them whatever was before them and whatever was behind them. And the saying was realized against them in communities that passed away before them of jinn and humankind. Truly, they, they had been ones who are losers. 
41|26| And those who are ungrateful said: Hear not this, the Quran, but talk idly about it while it is being recited so that perhaps you will prevail. 
41|27| We will cause those who were ungrateful to experience a severe punishment. And We will give recompense to them for the bad deeds of what they had been doing. 
41|28| That is the recompense of the enemies of God: The fire. For them is the infinite abode in it, recompense because they had been negating Our signs. 
41|29| And those who were ungrateful would say: Our Lord! Cause us to see those who caused us to go astray among jinn and humankind. We will lay them both beneath our feet so that they become of the lowest. 
41|30| Truly, those who said: Our Lord is God, again, they went straight, the angels come forth to them: Neither fear nor feel remorse, but rejoice in the Gardens which you had been promised. 
41|31| We were protectors in this present life and in the world to come. And you will have in it that for which your souls lust and in it is what you call for, 
41|32| a hospitality from the Forgiving, Compassionate. 
41|33| And who has a fairer saying than he who called to God and did as one in accord with morality, and said: I am one of the ones who submit to God. 
41|34| Not on the same level are benevolence or the evil deed. Drive back with what is fairer. Then, behold he who between thee and between him was enmity as if he had been a protector, a loyal friend. 
41|35| And none will be in receipt of it but those who endured patiently. And none will be in receipt of it but the possessor of a sublime allotment. 
41|36| But if Satan sows enmity, sowing enmity in thee, then, seek refuge in God. Truly, He is The Hearing, The Knowing. 
41|37| And of His signs are the nighttime and the daytime and the sun and the moon. Prostrate not yourselves to the sun nor to the moon, but prostrate yourselves to God Who created both of them if it is He you had been worshiping. 
41|38| But if they grew arrogant, then, those who are with thy Lord glorify Him during the nighttime and the daytime and they never grow weary.‡ 
41|39| And among His signs are that thou hast seen the earth as that which is humble. But when We caused water to descend to it, it quivered and swelled. Truly, He Who gives life to it is the One Who Gives Life to the dead. Truly, He is Powerful over everything. 
41|40| Truly, those who blaspheme Our signs are not hidden from Us. Is he who is cast down into the fire better off, or he who approaches as one who is safe on the Day of Resurrection? Do as you willed. Truly, He is Seeing of what you do. 
41|41| Truly, those who were ungrateful for the Remembrance when it drew near them are not hidden from Us. And, truly, it is a mighty Book! 
41|42| Falsehood approaches it not from before it, nor from behind it. It is a sending down successively from The Wise, The Worthy of Praise. 
41|43| Nothing is said to thee but what, truly, was said to the Messengers before thee. Truly, thy Lord is, certainly, the Possessor of Forgiveness, and the Possessor of Painful Repayment. 
41|44| And if We made this a non-Arabic Recitation, they would have said: Why were His signs not explained distinctly: A non-Arab tongue and an Arab! Say: It is a guidance for those who believe and a healing. And as for those who believed not, there is a heaviness in their ears and blindness in their hearts. Those are given notice from a far place. 
41|45| And, certainly, We gave Moses the Book. Then, they were at variance about it. And if it were not for a Word that had preceded from thy Lord, it would have been decided between them. But, truly, they are in uncertainty, ones in grave doubt about it. 
41|46| Whoever did as one in accord with morality, it is for himself. And whoever did evil, it is against himself, and thy Lord is not unjust to His servants. 
41|47| To Him is returned the knowledge of the Hour. No fruits go forth from its sheath and no female conceives or brings forth offspring but with His knowledge. And on a Day He will cry out to them: Where are My ascribed associates? They would say: We proclaimed to Thee that none of us was a witness to that. 
41|48| Gone astray from them is what they had been calling to before. They would think that there is for them no asylum. 
41|49| The human being grows not weary of supplicating for good, but if the worst afflicted him, then, he is hopeless, desperate. 
41|50| And, truly, if We caused him to experience mercy from Us, after some tribulation afflicted him, he will, certainly, say: This is due to me. And I think not that the Hour will be one that arises, but if I were returned to my Lord, truly, with Him will be the fairer for me. Then, certainly, We will tell those who were ungrateful of what they did. And We will cause them to experience a harsh punishment. 
41|51| And when We were gracious to the human being, he turned aside, withdrew aside. But when the worst afflicted him, then, he is full of supplication. 
41|52| Say: Considered you that even though it had been from God, again, you were ungrateful for it. Who is one who goes more astray than he who is in wide breach? 
41|53| We will cause them to see Our signs on the horizons and within themselves until it becomes clear to them that it is The Truth. Suffices not thy Lord that, truly, He is Witness over all things? 
41|54| They are hesitant about the meeting with their Lord. Truly, He is who One Who Encloses everything. 
42|1| +[ M\m. 
42|2| <Ayn S  Q[f. 
42|3| Thus, He reveals to thee and to those who were before thee, God is The Almighty, The Wise. 
42|4| To Him belongs whatever is in and on the heavens and whatever is in and on the earth. And He is The Lofty, The Sublime. 
42|5| The heavens are about to split asunder from above them while the angels glorify the praise of their Lord and ask forgiveness for whoever is on the earth. Truly, God, He is The Forgiving, The Compassionate. 
42|6| As for those who took to themselves other than Him as protectors, God is Guardian over them and thou art not a Trustee over them. 
42|7| And, thus, We revealed to thee an Arabic Recitation that thou wilt warn the Mother of the Towns and whoever is around it. And warn of the Day of Amassing. There is no doubt about it. A group of people will be in the Garden and a group of people will be in the blaze. 
42|8| And if God willed, He would have made them one community but He causes to enter whom He wills into His mercy. And the ones who are unjust, there is not for them either a protector or a helper. 
42|9| Or they took other than Him to themselves as protectors. But God, He alone is The Protector. And He gives life to the dead. And He is Powerful over everything. 
42|10| Whatever thing about which you were at variance in it, then, its determination is with God. That is God, my Lord in Whom I put my trust and to Him I am penitent, 
42|11| One Who is Originator of the heavens and the earth. He made for you spouses of yourselves and of the flocks, pairs by which means He makes you numerous in it. There is not like Him anything. And He is The Hearing, The Seeing. 
42|12| To Him belongs the pass keys of the heavens and the earth. He extends provision for whomever He wills and measures it. Truly, He is The Knowing of everything. 
42|13| He laid down the law of the way of life for you, that with which He charged Noah and what We revealed to thee and that with which We charged Abraham and Moses and Jesus. Perform the prescribed way of life and be not split up in it. Troublesome for the ones who are polytheists is that to which thou hast called them. God elects for Himself whomever He wills and guides the penitent to Himself. 
42|14| And they split not up until after the knowledge drew near them through insolence between themselves. And if it were not for a Word that preceded from thy Lord—until a term, that which is determined—it would be decided between them. And, truly, those who were given as inheritance the Book after them are in uncertainty, in grave doubt about it. 
42|15| Then, for that, call to this. And go thou straight as thou wert commanded. And follow not their desires. And say: I believed in what God caused to descend from a Book. And I was commanded to be just among you. God is our Lord and your Lord. For us are our actions and for you, your actions. There is no disputation between us and between you. God will gather us together. And to Him is the Homecoming. 
42|16| And those who argue with one another about God, after He was assented to, their disputations are null and void with their Lord, and on them is His anger. And for them will be a severe punishment. 
42|17| It is God Who caused the Book to descend with The Truth and the Balance. And what causes thee to recognize it so that perhaps the Hour is near? 
42|18| Seeking to hasten are those who believe not in it. Those who believed are ones who are apprehensive of it. And they know that it is The Truth, those who altercate, truly, about the Hour are, certainly, going far astray. 
42|19| God is Subtle with His servants. He provides to whom He wills. And He is The Strong, The Almighty. 
42|20| Whoever had been wanting cultivation of the world to come, We increase his cultivation for him. Whoever had been wanting cultivation of the present, We give him of it. And he has not a share in the world to come. 
42|21| Or ascribe they associates who laid down the law of the way of life for them for which God gives not permission? Were it not for a decisive word, it would be decided among them. And, truly, the ones who are unjust, for them is a painful punishment. 
42|22| Thou wilt see the ones who are unjust as ones who are apprehensive of what they earned and it is that which falls on them. And those who believed and did as the ones in accord with morality, are in the well-watered meadows of the Gardens. For them will be whatever they will from their Lord. That it is the great grace. 
42|23| That is what God gives as good tidings to His servants who believed and did as the ones in accord with morality. Say: I ask you not for compensation, but for the affection for any kin. And whoever gains benevolence, We will increase for him goodness in it. Truly, God is Forgiving, Most Ready to Appreciate. 
42|24| Or they say: He devised against God a lie. But if God wills He would have sealed over thy heart. And God blots out falsehood and verifies The Truth by His Words. Truly, He is Knowing of what is in the breasts. 
42|25| And He accepts the remorse of His servants and pardons their evil deeds. And He knows what you accomplish. 
42|26| And He responds to those who believed and did as the ones in accord with morality, and increases them of His grace. And as for the ones who are ungrateful, theirs will be a severe punishment. 
42|27| And if God extended the provision for His servants, they would be insolent in the earth, but He sends down by measure whatever He wills. Truly, He is The Aware, The Seeing of His servants. 
42|28| And He it is Who sends down plenteous rain water after they despaired and He unfolds His mercy. And He is The Protector, The Worthy of Praise. 
42|29| And among His signs are the creation of the heavens and the earth and whatever of moving creatures He disseminated in them. And He has the power of amassing them when He wills. 
42|30| And whatever affliction lit on you is because of what your hands earned. And He pardons much. 
42|31| And you are not ones who frustrate Him on the earth. And there is not for you other than God either a protector or a helper. 
42|32| And among His signs are the ones that run on the sea like landmarks. 
42|33| If He wills, He stills the wind. Then, they would stay, that which is motionless on the surface. Truly, in that are signs for every enduring and grateful one. 
42|34| Or He wreck them because of what they earned. And He pardons them from much. 
42|35| And those who dispute Our signs know that there is no asylum for them. 
42|36| So whatever thing you were given is the enjoyment of this present life. And what is with God is better and is that which endures for those who believed and put their trust in their Lord 
42|37| and those who avoid the major sins and the indecencies and they forgive when they were angry 
42|38| and those who responded to their Lord and performed their formal prayer and their affairs are by counsel among themselves, and who spend of what We provided them, 
42|39| and those who, when insolence lit on them, they help each other. 
42|40| And the recompense for an evil deed is the like of an evil deed. Then, whoever pardoned and made things right, his compensation is due from God. Truly, He loves not the ones who are unjust. 
42|41| As whoever helped himself after an injustice, so those, there is not any way against them. 
42|42| The way is only against those who do wrong to humanity and are insolent in and on the earth unrightfully. Those, for them is a painful punishment. 
42|43| And whoever endured patiently and forgave, truly, that is, certainly, a sign of constancy of affairs. 
42|44| And whomever God causes to go astray has no protector apart from Him. And thou wilt see the ones who are unjust when they would see the punishment. They will say: Is there any way of turning it back? 
42|45| And thou wilt see them being presented to it as ones who are humbled by a sense of humility looking on with secretive glances. And those who believed will say: Truly, the ones who are losers are those who lost themselves and their people on the Day of Resurrection. Truly, the ones who are unjust will be in an abiding punishment 
42|46| that there had not been for them any protector to help them other than God. And he whom God causes to go astray, there is not for him any way. 
42|47| Respond to the call of your Lord before a Day approaches for which there is no turning back from God. There will be no shelter for you on that Day, nor is there for you any refusal. 
42|48| But if they turned aside, We put thee not forward as a guardian over them. It is for thee not but the delivering of the message. And, truly, when We caused the human being to experience mercy from Us, he was glad in it. But when evil deeds light on him—because of what his hands sent—then, truly, the human being is ungrateful. 
42|49| To God belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth. He creates what He wills. He bestows females on whom He wills. And He bestows males on whom He wills. 
42|50| And He couples them, males and females. And He makes barren whom He wills. Truly, He is Knowing, Powerful. 
42|51| And it had not been for a mortal that God speak to him, but by revelation or from behind a partition or that He send a Messenger to reveal by His permission what He wills. Truly, He is Lofty, Wise. 
42|52| And, thus, We revealed to thee the Spirit of Our command. Thou hadst not been informed what the Book is nor what is belief, but We made it a light by which We guide whomever We will of Our servants. And, truly, thou, thou hast guided to a straight path— 
42|53| the path of God, to whom belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in and on the earth. Truly, will not all affairs come home to God? 
43|1| +[ M\m. 
43|2| By the clear Book, 
43|3| We, truly, made it an Arabic Recitation so that perhaps you will be reasonable. 
43|4| Truly, it is in the essence of the Book from Our Presence, Lofty, Wise. 
43|5| Will We turn away the Remembrance from you, overlooking as you had been a folk, ones who are excessive? 
43|6| And how many a Prophet sent We among the ancient ones! 
43|7| And approaches them not a Prophet, but that they had been ridiculing him. 
43|8| Then, We caused to perish the more vigorous in courage than them and the example of the ancient ones passed. 
43|9| And, certainly, if thou hadst asked them: Who created the heavens and the earth? They will, certainly, say: The Almighty, The Knowing created them, 
43|10| Who made the earth a cradle for you and made in it ways for you so that perhaps you would be truly guided 
43|11| and Who sent down water from heaven in measure. Then, We revived with it a lifeless land. Thus, you are brought out. 
43|12| And it is He Who created all the pairs and assigned for you the boats and the flocks on which you ride 
43|13| so that you sit upon their backs. And, again, remember the divine blessing of your Lord when you are seated on them and you say: Glory be to Him Who caused this to be subservient to us and we had not been ones who are equal to it! 
43|14| And, truly, we, certainly, are to our Lord ones who are turning. 
43|15| Yet they assigned with Him a part of some of His servants. Truly, the human being is clearly ungrateful. 
43|16| Or took He to Himself daughters from what He creates and selected He sons for you? 
43|17| And if good tidings were given to one of them of what he cited as an example from The Merciful, his face stayed one that is clouded over and he chokes. 
43|18| Is whoever is brought up amid glitter one who is without clarity when he is in an altercation? 
43|19| And made they the angels—who themselves are servants of The Merciful— females? Bore they witness to their creation? Their giving testimony will be written down. And they will be asked about it. 
43|20| And they would say: If willed The Merciful, we would not have worshiped them. And they have no knowledge of that. They do nothing but guess. 
43|21| Or gave We them any Book before this so they are ones who hold fast to it? 
43|22| Nay! They said: We found our fathers in a community holding to a way of life and we are, truly, in their footsteps ones who are truly guided. 
43|23| And, thus, We sent not a warner to any town before thee without ones who are given ease saying: We found our fathers in a community. We are, certainly, ones who imitate their footsteps. 
43|24| He said: Even if I brought about better guidance for you than what you found your fathers on. They would say: Truly, we, in that with which you were sent are ones who disbelieve. 
43|25| So We requited them. Then, look on how had been the Ultimate End of the ones who deny. 
43|26| Mention when Abraham said to his father and his folk: Truly, I am released from obligation to what you worship 
43|27| other than He Who originated me and, truly, He will guide me. 
43|28| And He made it an enduring Word among his posterity, so that perhaps they will return. 
43|29| Nay! I gave enjoyment to these and to their fathers until The Truth drew near them and a clear Messenger. 
43|30| And when The Truth drew near them, they said: This is sorcery and we are ones who disbelieve in it. 
43|31| They said: Why was this, the Quran, not sent down to some eminent man of the two towns? 
43|32| Would they divide the mercy of thy Lord? It is We Who divided out among them their livelihood in this present life. Exalted are some of them above some others in degree so that some take to themselves others in their bondage. And the mercy of thy Lord is better than what they gather. 
43|33| And were it not that humanity be one community, would We have made for whoever is ungrateful for The Merciful, roofs of silver for their houses, and stairways which they would scale up 
43|34| and for their houses, doors, and couches on which they would recline 
43|35| and ornaments? Yet all this would have been nothing, but enjoyment of this present life. And the world to come with your Lord is for the ones who are Godfearing. 
43|36| And whoever withdraws from the Remembrance of The Merciful, We allotted for him a satan, so he is a comrade for him. 
43|37| And, truly, they bar them from the way, but they assume that they are ones who are truly guided. 
43|38| Then, when he drew near us he would say: Would that there were a distance between me and between thee of two sunrises! Miserable was the comrade. 
43|39| And it will never profit you this Day as you did wrong. You will be ones who are partners in the punishment. 
43|40| So hast thou caused someone unwilling to hear, to hear or wilt thou guide the unwilling to see, or someone who had been clearly going astray? 
43|41| And even if We take thee away, We will, truly, be ones who requite them 
43|42| or We will cause thee to see what We promised them. Then, We are ones who are omnipotent over them. 
43|43| So hold thee fast to what was revealed to thee. Truly, thou art on a straight path. 
43|44| And, truly, this is a remembrance for thee and thy folk. And you will be asked. 
43|45| And ask ones whom We sent before thee of Our Messengers: Made We gods other than the Merciful to be worshiped? 
43|46| And, certainly, We sent Moses with Our signs to Pharaoh and his Council. So he said: Truly, I am a Messenger of the Lord of the worlds. 
43|47| But when he drew near them with Our signs, that is when they laugh at them. 
43|48| And We cause them not to see any sign, but it was greater than its sister’s sign. And We took them with the punishment so that perhaps they would return. 
43|49| And they said: O one who is a sorcerer! Call for us to thy Lord by the compact He made with thee. Truly, We will be ones who are truly guided. 
43|50| But when We removed the punishment from them, that is when they break their oath! 
43|51| And Pharaoh proclaimed to his folk. He said: O my folk! Is not the dominion of Egypt for me and these rivers run beneath me? Will you not, then, perceive? 
43|52| Or am I better than this one who is despicable, who scarcely makes things clear? 
43|53| Why were bracelets of gold not cast down on him or the angels drawn near to him as ones who are connected with one another? 
43|54| Thus, he irritated his folk. Then, they obeyed him. Truly, they had been a folk, ones who disobey. 
43|55| So when they provoked against Us, We requited them and drowned them one and all 
43|56| and We made them a thing of the past and a parable for later ages. 
43|57| And when the son of Mary was cited as an example, that is when thy folk cry aloud 
43|58| and said: Are our gods better or is he? They cited him to thee not but to be argumentative. Nay! They are a contentious folk. 
43|59| He was but a servant to whom We were gracious, and We made him an example to the Children of Israel. 
43|60| And if We will, We would have assigned angels to succeed among you on the earth. 
43|61| And, truly, he is with the knowledge of the Hour, so contest not about it and follow Me. This is a straight path. 
43|62| And let not Satan bar you. Truly, he is a clear enemy to you. 
43|63| And when Jesus drew near with the clear portents, he said: Truly, I drew near you with wisdom and in order to make manifest to you some of that about which you are at variance in it. So be Godfearing of God and obey me. 
43|64| Truly, God He is my Lord and your Lord so worship Him. This is a straight path. 
43|65| The confederates were at variance among themselves. So woe to those who did wrong from the punishment of a painful Day. 
43|66| Looked they on but for the Hour that will approach them suddenly while they are not aware? 
43|67| Friends on that Day will be enemies some to some others, but ones who are Godfearing. 
43|68| O My servants! This Day there shall be no fear in you nor will you feel remorse. 
43|69| It will be said to those who believed in Our signs and had been ones who submit to God: 
43|70| Enter the Garden, you and your spouses, to be walking with joy! 
43|71| There will be passed around among them platters of gold and goblets. And in it will be whatever souls lust for and all that in which the eyes delight. And you will be ones who dwell in it forever. 
43|72| This is the Garden that you were given as inheritance because of what you had been doing. 
43|73| For you there will be much sweet fruit from which you will eat. 
43|74| Truly, ones who sin will be in the punishment of hell, ones who will dwell in it forever. 
43|75| It will not be decreased for them and they will be ones who are seized with despair in it. 
43|76| And We did not wrong them, but they had been ones who are unjust. 
43|77| And they would cry out: O Malik! Let thy Lord finish us. He would say: Truly, you will be ones who abide. 
43|78| Certainly, We brought about The Truth to you, but most of you are ones who dislike The Truth. 
43|79| Or fixed they on some affair? Then, We, too, are ones who fix some affair. 
43|80| Assume they that We hear not their secret thoughts and their conspiring secretly? Yea! Our messengers are near them writing down. 
43|81| Say: If The Merciful had had a son, then, I would be first of the ones who worship. 
43|82| Glory be to the Lord of the heavens and the earth, the Lord of the Throne, from all that they allege! 
43|83| So let them engage in idle talk and play until they encounter their Day which they are promised. 
43|84| And it is He Who is in the heaven, God, and on the earth, God. And He is The Wise, The Knowing. 
43|85| Blessed be He to whom belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth and whatever is between them and with Whom is the knowledge of the Hour and to Whom you will be returned. 
43|86| And those whom they call to possess no power other than Him for intercession, only whoever bore witness to The Truth, and they know. 
43|87| And if thou hadst asked them: Who created them? They would, certainly, say: God. Then, how are they misled? 
43|88| And his saying: O my Lord! Truly, these are a folk who believe not, 
43|89| so overlook them and say: Peace. And they will know. 
44|1| +[ M\m. 
44|2| By the clear Book 
44|3| truly, We caused it to descend on a blessed night. Truly, We had been ones who warn. 
44|4| Every wise command is made clear in it, 
44|5| a command from Us. Truly, We had been ones who send it 
44|6| as a mercy from thy Lord. Truly, He is The Hearing, The Knowing, 
44|7| Lord of the heavens and the earth and whatever is between them. If you had been ones who are certain. 
44|8| There is no god but He. It is He Who gives life and causes to die. He is your Lord and the Lord of your ancient fathers. 
44|9| Nay! They play in uncertainty. 
44|10| Then, thou be on the watch for a Day when the heavens will bring a clear smoke 
44|11| overcoming humanity. This is a painful punishment. 
44|12| Our Lord! Remove thou the punishment from us! Truly, we are ones who believe. 
44|13| What will there be as a reminder for them? A clear Messenger drew near them. 
44|14| Again, they turned away from him and they said: He is one who is taught by others, one who is possessed. 
44|15| Truly, We are ones who remove the punishment for a little. Truly, you are ones who revert to ingratitude. 
44|16| On the Day when We will seize by force with the greatest attack, truly, We will be ones who requite. 
44|17| And, certainly, We tried a folk of Pharaoh before them when there drew near them a generous Messenger: 
44|18| Give back to me the servants of God, the Children of Israel. Truly, I am a trustworthy Messenger to you. 
44|19| And rise not up against God. Truly, I am one who arrives with a clear authority. 
44|20| Truly, I took refuge in my Lord and your Lord so that you not stone me. 
44|21| But if you believe not in me, then, withdraw. 
44|22| So he called on his Lord: Truly, these are a folk, ones who sin. 
44|23| He said: Set thou forth with my servants by night. Truly, you will be ones who are followed. 
44|24| And leave the sea calmly as it is. Truly, they will be an army, one that is drowned. 
44|25| How many they left behind of gardens and springs 
44|26| and crops and generous stations 
44|27| and prosperity in which they had been, ones who are joyful! 
44|28| And, thus, We gave it as inheritance to another folk. 
44|29| And neither the heavens wept for them nor the earth nor had they been ones who are given respite. 
44|30| And, certainly, We delivered the Children of Israel from the despised punishment 
44|31| of Pharaoh. Truly, He had been one who exalts himself and was of the ones who are excessive. 
44|32| And, certainly, We chose them with knowledge above the worlds 
44|33| and gave them the signs in which there was a clear trial. 
44|34| Truly, these say: 
44|35| There is nothing but our first singled out death and we will not be ones who are revived. 
44|36| Then, bring our fathers back if you had been ones who are sincere. 
44|37| Are they better or a folk of Tubba and those who were before them? We caused them to perish. They, truly, had been ones who sin. 
44|38| And We created not the heavens and the earth and whatever is between them as ones who play! 
44|39| We created them not but with The Truth but most of them know not. 
44|40| Truly, the Day of Decision is the time appointed for them one and all, 
44|41| a Day when a defender will not avail another defender at all nor will they be helped 
44|42| but him on whom God had mercy. Truly, He is The Almighty, The Compassionate. 
44|43| Truly, the tree of Zaqqum 
44|44| will be the food of the sinful. 
44|45| Like molten copper it will bubble in the bellies, 
44|46| like boiling, scalding water. 
44|47| It will be said: Take him and drag him violently into the depths of hellfire. 
44|48| Again, then, unloose over his head the punishment of scalding water! 
44|49| Experience this! Truly, thou, thou art seemingly the mighty, the generous. 
44|50| Truly, this is what you had been contesting. 
44|51| Truly, the ones who are Godfearing will be in the station of trustworthiness 
44|52| among Gardens and springs 
44|53| wearing fine silk and brocade, ones who face one another. 
44|54| Thus, it is so. We will give in marriage lovely, most beautiful eyed ones. 
44|55| They will call therein for every kind of sweet fruit, ones that are safe. 
44|56| They will not experience death with them but the first singled out death. And He will protect them from the punishment of hellfire, 
44|57| a grace from thy Lord. That, it is the winning the sublime triumph! 
44|58| Truly, We made this easy in thy language so that perhaps they will recollect. 
44|59| So be on the watch! Truly, they are ones who watch. 
45|1| +[ M\m. 
45|2| The sending down the Book successively is from God, The Almighty, The Wise. 
45|3| Truly, in the heavens and the earth are signs for the ones who believe. 
45|4| And in your creation and what He disseminates of moving creatures are signs for a folk who are certain, 
45|5| the alternation of the nighttime and the daytime and what God caused to descend from the heaven of provision. He gave life with it to the earth after its death and the diversifying of the winds—signs for a folk who are reasonable. 
45|6| These are the signs of God We recount to thee with The Truth. Then, in which discourse, after God and His signs, will they believe? 
45|7| Woe to every false, sinful one! 
45|8| He hears the signs of God being recounted to him. Again, he persists as one who grows arrogant as if he hears them not. So give him good tidings of a painful punishment! 
45|9| And if he knew anything about Our signs, he took them to himself in mockery. Those, for them is a despised punishment. 
45|10| Behind them there is hell. What they earned will avail them not at all nor whatever they took to themselves other than God as protectors. And for them will be a tremendous punishment. 
45|11| This is a guidance. Those who were ungrateful for the signs of their Lord, for them there is a punishment of painful wrath. 
45|12| God! It is He Who caused the sea to be subservient to you that the boats may run through it by His command and so that you be looking for His grace and so that perhaps you will give thanks. 
45|13| And He caused to be subservient to you whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in and on the earth. All is from Him. Truly, in that are signs for a folk who reflect. 
45|14| Say to those who believed: Forgive those who hope not for the Days of God that He give recompense to a folk according to what they had been earning. 
45|15| Whoever did as one in accord with morality, it is for himself and whoever did evil, it is against himself. Again, to your Lord you will be returned. 
45|16| And, certainly, We gave the Children of Israel the Book, the critical judgment and the prophethood and We provided them from what is good and We gave them advantage over the worlds 
45|17| and We gave them clear portents of the command. And they are not at variance until after the knowledge drew near them through insolence among themselves. Truly, thy Lord will decree between them on the Day of Resurrection about what they had been at variance in it. 
45|18| Again, We assigned thee an open way of the command so follow it and follow not the desires of those who know not. 
45|19| Truly, they will never avail thee against God at all. And, truly, the ones who are unjust, some of them are protectors of some others. But God is Protector of the ones who are Godfearing. 
45|20| This is a clear evidence for humanity and a guidance and a mercy for a folk who are certain. 
45|21| Assumed those who sought to do evil deeds that We will make them equal with those who believed and did as the ones in accord with morality? Are their living and dying equal? How evil is the judgment they give! 
45|22| And God created the heavens and the earth with The Truth so that every soul would be given recompense for what it earned and they, they will not be wronged. 
45|23| Hadst thou considered he who took to himself his own desire as his god and whom God caused to go astray out of a knowledge, sealed over his having the ability to hear and his heart and laid a blindfold on his sight? Who, then, will guide him after God? Will you not, then, recollect? 
45|24| And they said: There is nothing, but this present life of ours. We die and we live and nothing causes us to perish but a long course of time. And there is for them not any knowledge. Truly, they are but surmising. 
45|25| And when are recounted to them Our signs, clear portents, then, disputation had not been but that they said: Bring our fathers if you had been ones who are sincere. 
45|26| Say: God gives you life. Again, He causes you to die. Again, He will gather you on the Day of Resurrection in which there is no doubt but most of humanity knows not. 
45|27| And to God belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth. And on a Day that the Hour will be secure, on that Day the ones who deal in falsehood will lose. 
45|28| Thou wilt see each community one who crawls on its knees. Each community will be called to its book: This Day you will be given recompense for what you had been doing. 
45|29| This is Our Book that speaks for itself against you with The Truth. Truly, We registered what you had been doing. 
45|30| Then, as for those who believed and did as the ones in accord with morality, their Lord will cause them to enter in His mercy. That will be the winning the clear triumph. 
45|31| But as for those who were ungrateful: Be not My signs recounted to you? Then, you grew arrogant and you had been a folk, ones who sin! 
45|32| And when it was said: Truly, the promise of God is true and the Hour, there is no doubt about it. You said: We are not informed about the Hour. Truly, We think it but an opinion and we are not ones who ascertain it. 
45|33| And shown to themselves will be the evil deeds they did. They will be surrounded by what they had been ridiculing. 
45|34| It would be said: This Day We will forget you as you forgot the meeting of this your Day. Your place of shelter will be the fire and there is not for you any one who helps. 
45|35| This is because you took to yourselves the signs of God in mockery and this present life deluded you. So this Day they will not be brought out from there nor will they ask to be favored. 
45|36| So The Praise belongs to God, the Lord of the heavens and the Lord of the earth, and the Lord of the worlds. 
45|37| And His is the domination of the heavens and the earth. And He is The Almighty, The Wise. 
46|1| +[ M\m. 
46|2| The sending down successively of the Book is from God The Almighty, The Wise. 
46|3| We created not the heavens and the earth and whatever is between the two, but with The Truth and for a term, that which is determined. And those who disbelieved in what they were warned about are ones who turn aside. 
46|4| Say: Considered you what you call to other than God? Cause me to see what of the earth they created. Have they an association in the heavens? Bring me a Book from before this, or a vestige of knowledge if you had been ones who are sincere. 
46|5| And who is one who has gone more astray than one who calls to other than God, one who responds not to him until the Day of Resurrection? And they are of their supplication to them, ones who are heedless. 
46|6| And when humanity will be assembled, they will become their enemies and will be ones who disavow their worship. 
46|7| And when Our signs are recounted, clear portents, those who were ungrateful for The Truth said when it drew near them: This is clear sorcery! 
46|8| Or they say: He devised it. Say: If I devised it, you still possess nothing for me against God. He is greater in knowledge of what you press on about. He sufficed as a Witness between me and between you. And He is The Forgiving, The Compassionate. 
46|9| Say: I had not been an innovation among the Messengers, nor am I informed of what will be wreaked on me, nor with you. I follow only what is revealed to me and I am only a clear warner. 
46|10| Say: Considered you if this had been from God and you were ungrateful for it and bore witness as one who bears witness from among the Children of Israel to its like and believed in it, yet you grew arrogant, how unjust you are; truly, God guides not the folk, the ones who are unjust. 
46|11| Those who were ungrateful said of those who believed: If it had been good, they would not have preceded us towards it. And when they are not truly guided by it, they say: This is a ripe, aged calumny. 
46|12| Yet before it was the Book of Moses for a leader and as a mercy. And this is a Book, that which establishes as true in the Arabic language to warn those who did wrong and as good tidings to the ones who are doers of good. 
46|13| Truly, those who say: Our Lord is God again, go straight, neither will there be fear in them, nor will they feel remorse. 
46|14| Those are the Companions of the Garden, ones who will dwell in it forever as a recompense for what they had been doing. 
46|15| And We charged the human being with kindness to ones who are his parents. His mother carried him painfully and she painfully brought him forth. And the bearing of him and the weaning of him are thirty months. When he was fully grown, having come of age and reached forty years he said: My Lord! Arouse me that I may give thanks for Thy divine blessing, that with which Thou wert gracious to me and to ones who are my parents and that I do as one in accord with morality so that Thou be well-pleased and make things right for me and my offspring. Truly, I repented to Thee and, truly, I am of the ones who submit to God. 
46|16| Those are those from whom We will receive the fairer of what they did and we will pass on by their evil deeds. They are among the Companions of the Garden. This is the promise of sincerity that they had been promised. 
46|17| But he who would say to ones who are his parents a word of disrespect to both of them: Promise you me that I will be brought out when generations before me passed away? And they will both cry to God for help: Woe unto thee! Believe! Truly, the promise of God is true. But he said: This is only the fables of the ancient ones. 
46|18| Those are those against whom the saying was realized about the communities that passed away before of the jinn and humankind. Truly, they had been ones who are losers. 
46|19| And for each there will be degrees according to what he did and He will pay them their account in full for their actions and they, they will not be wronged. 
46|20| On a Day when they will be presented—those who were ungrateful—to the fire, it will be said: You caused what is good to be put away in your present life while you enjoyed it. Then, you will be given recompense with a punishment of humiliation because you had been growing arrogant on the earth without right and because you had been disobeying. 
46|21| And remember the brother of Ad when he warned his folk in the curving sandhills. Warnings passed away before and after him saying: Worship nothing but God. Truly, I fear for you the punishment of a tremendous Day. 
46|22| They said: Hadst thou drawn near to us to mislead us from our gods? Then, bring us that which thou hast promised us if thou hadst been among the ones who are sincere. 
46|23| He said: The knowledge is only with God and I state to you what I was sent with, but I see that you are a folk who are ignorant. 
46|24| Then, when they saw it as a dense cloud proceeding towards their valleys, they said: This is a dense cloud, that which gives rain to us. Nay! It is what you seek to hasten, a wind in which there is a painful punishment. 
46|25| It will destroy everything at the command of its Lord. So it came to be in the morning nothing was seen but their dwellings. Thus, We give recompense to the folk, ones who sin. 
46|26| And, certainly, We established them firmly in what We established you firmly not and We made for them the ability to hear and sight and minds. Yet having the ability to hear availed them not, nor their sight, nor their minds at all since they had been negating the signs of God. And surrounded were they by what they had been ridiculing. 
46|27| And, certainly, We caused to perish towns around you and We diversified the signs so that perhaps they will return. 
46|28| Then, why helped them not those whom they took to themselves other than God as gods as a mediator. Nay! They went astray from them. And that was their calumny and what they had been devising. 
46|29| And when We turned away from thee groups of men or jinn who listen to the Quran, when they found themselves in its presence, they said: Pay heed. And when it was finished, they turned to their folk, ones who warn. 
46|30| They said: O our folk! Truly, We heard a Book was caused to descend after Moses, that which establishes as true what was in advance of it. It guides to The Truth and to a straight road. 
46|31| O our folk! Answer one who calls to God and believe in Him. He will forgive you your impieties and will grant protection to you from a painful punishment. 
46|32| And who answers not to one who calls to God? He is not one who frustrates Him in and on the earth. And there will not be for him other than God any protectors. Those are clearly gone astray. 
46|33| Considered they not that God Who created the heavens and the earth and is not wearied by their creation—is One Who Has Power to give life to the dead? Yea! He, truly, is Powerful over everything. 
46|34| And on a Day when will be presented those who were ungrateful to the fire saying: Is not this The Truth? They would say: Yea! By our Lord! He will say: Then, experience the punishment because you had been ungrateful! 
46|35| So have thou patience as endured patiently those imbued with constancy of the Messengers and let them not seek to hasten the Judgment. As, truly, on a Day they will see what they are promised as if they lingered not in expectation but for an hour of daytime. This is delivering the message! Will any be caused to perish but the folk, the ones who disobey? 
47|1| Those who were ungrateful and who barred from the way of God—He caused their actions to go astray. 
47|2| And those who believed and did as the ones in accord with morality and believed in what was sent down to Muhammad—for it is The Truth from their Lord—He will absolve them of their evil deeds and will make right their state of mind. 
47|3| That is because those who were ungrateful followed falsehood, while those who believed followed The Truth from their Lord. Thus, God propounds for humanity their parables. 
47|4| So when you met those who were ungrateful, then, strike their thick necks until you gave them a sound thrashing. Then, tie them fast with restraints. And afterwards either have good will towards them or take ransom for them until the war ends, laying down its heavy load. Thus, it is so! But if God willed, He Himself would have, certainly, avenged you. But it is to try some of you with some others. As for those who were slain in the way of God, He will never cause their actions to go astray. 
47|5| He will guide them and He will make right their state of mind. 
47|6| And He will cause them to enter the Garden with which He acquainted them. 
47|7| O those who believed! If you help God, He will help you and make firm your feet. 
47|8| As for those who are ungrateful, for them is falling into ruin! And He caused their actions to go astray. 
47|9| That is because they disliked what God caused to descend so He caused their actions to fail. 
47|10| Journey they not through the earth and look on how had been the Ultimate End of those who were before them? God destroyed them. And for ones who are ungrateful is its likeness. 
47|11| That is because God is the Defender of those who believed. And for the ones who are ungrateful, there is no defender of them. 
47|12| Truly, God will cause to enter those who believed and did as the ones in accord with morality, gardens beneath which rivers run. While those who were ungrateful, take joy in eating as the flocks eat, the fire will be the place of lodging for them. 
47|13| And how many a town had there been which was stronger in strength than thy town which drove thee out, that We have caused to perish? And there was no one who helps them! 
47|14| Is he who had been on a clear portent from his Lord like him for whom was made to appear pleasing his dire actions and they followed their own desires? 
47|15| This is the parable of the Garden which was promised the ones who are Godfearing: In it are rivers of unpolluted water and rivers of milk, the taste of which is not modified and rivers of intoxicants delightful to ones who drink and rivers of clarified honey, and in it for them all kinds of fruits and forgiveness from their Lord. Is this like ones who will dwell forever in the fire and they were given scalding water to drink so that it cuts off their bowels? 
47|16| And among them are some who listen to thee until when they went forth from thee. They said to those who were given the knowledge: What was that he said just now? Those are those upon whose hearts God set a seal. And they followed their own desires. 
47|17| And those who were truly guided, He increased them in guidance and He gave to them their God-consciousness. 
47|18| Look they, then, on not but the Hour, that it approach them suddenly? Certainly, its tokens drew near. Then, what will it be like for them when their reminder drew near to them? 
47|19| So know thou that there is no god but God and ask forgiveness for thy impieties and also for the males, ones who believe and the females, ones who believe, and God knows your place of turmoil and your place of lodging. 
47|20| And those who believed say: Why was a Chapter of the Quran not caused to descend? But when was caused to descend a definitive Chapter of the Quran and fighting was remembered in it, thou hadst seen those who in their hearts is a sickness looking on thee with the look of one who is fainting at death. 
47|21| But better for them would be obedience and an honorable saying! And when the affair was resolved, then, if they were sincere to God, it would have been better for them. 
47|22| Will it be that if you turned away, you would make corruption in the earth and cut off your ties with blood relations? 
47|23| Those are those whom God cursed, so He made them unwilling to hear and their sight, unwilling to see. 
47|24| Meditate they not, then, on the Quran or are there locks on their hearts? 
47|25| Truly, those who went back—turn their back— after the guidance became clear to them, it was Satan who enticed them and He granted them indulgence. 
47|26| That is because they said to those who disliked what God sent down: We will obey you in some of the affair. And God knows what they keep secret. 
47|27| Then, how will it be for them when the angels will call them to themselves, striking their faces and their backs? 
47|28| That is because they followed what displeased God and they disliked His contentment so He caused their actions to fail. 
47|29| Or assumed those who in their hearts is a sickness that God will never bring out their rancor? 
47|30| If We will, We would have caused thee to see them. Thou wouldst have recognized them by their mark. But, certainly, thou wilt recognize them by the twisting of sayings. And God knows all your actions. 
47|31| And, certainly, We will try you until We know the ones who struggle among you and the ones who remain steadfast and We will try your reports. 
47|32| Truly, those who were ungrateful and barred from the way of God and made a breach with the Messenger after guidance became clear to them, they never hurt or profit God at all, but He will cause their actions to fail. 
47|33| O those who believed! Obey God and obey the Messenger and render not your actions untrue. 
47|34| Truly, those who were ungrateful and barred from the way of God, again, they died while they were ones who are ungrateful, then, God will never forgive them. 
47|35| So be not faint and call for peace while you have the upper hand. God is with you and He will never cheat you out of your actions. 
47|36| This present life is only a pastime and a diversion. But if you believe and are Godfearing, He will give you your compensation and will not ask of you for your property. 
47|37| When He asks it of you and, then, urges persistently, you would be a miser and He will bring out your rancor. 
47|38| Lo and behold! These are being called to spend in the way of God, yet among you are some who are misers. And whoever is a miser, then, he is a miser only to himself. God is Sufficient and you are poor. And if you turn away, He will have a folk other than you in exchange. Again, they will not be the like of you. 
48|1| Truly, We gave victory to thee, a clear victory, 
48|2| that God forgive thee what was former of thy impiety and what remained behind that He fulfill His divine blessing on thee and guide thee on a straight path 
48|3| and that God help thee with a mighty help. 
48|4| He it is Who caused the tranquility to descend into the hearts of the ones who believe that they add belief to their belief. And to God belongs the armies of the heavens and the earth. And God had been Knowing, Wise 
48|5| that He causes to enter the males, ones who believe and the females, ones who believe Gardens beneath which rivers run, ones who will dwell in them forever, and that He absolve them of their evil deeds. And that had been with God a winning a sublime triumph. 
48|6| And that He punish the males, ones who are hypocrites and the females, ones who are hypocrites and the males, ones who are polytheists and the females, ones who are polytheists, the ones who think an evil thought about God, a reprehensible thought, for them is the reprehensible turn of fortune. And God was angry with them. And He cursed them and prepared hell for them. And how evil a Homecoming! 
48|7| And to God belongs the armies of the heavens and the earth. And God had been Almighty, Wise. 
48|8| Truly, We sent thee as one who bears witness and one who gives good tidings and as a warner, 
48|9| so that you believe in God and His Messenger and that you support him and revere Him and glorify Him at early morning dawn and eventide. 
48|10| Truly, those who take the pledge of allegiance to thee, take the pledge of alliance only to God. The hand of God is over their hands. Then, whoever broke his oath, breaks his oath only to the harm of himself. And whoever lived up to what he made as a contract with God, He will give him a sublime compensation. 
48|11| The ones who are left behind will say to thee among the nomads: Our property and our people occupied us, so ask forgiveness for us. They say with their tongues what is not in their hearts. Say: Who, then, has sway over you against God at all if He wanted to harm you or wanted to bring you profit? Nay! God had been aware of what you do. 
48|12| Nay! You thought that the Messenger would never turn about and the ones who believe to their people ever, and that was made to appear pleasing in your hearts. But you thought a reprehensible thought, and you had been a lost folk. 
48|13| And whoever believes not in God and His Messenger, truly, We made ready a blaze for the ones who are ungrateful. 
48|14| And to God belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth. He forgives whom He wills and punishes whom He wills. And God had been Forgiving, Compassionate. 
48|15| The ones who are left behind will say when you set out to take the gains: Let us follow you. They want to substitute for the assertion of God. Say: You will not follow us. Thus, God said before; then, they will say: Nay! You are jealous of us. Nay! They had not been understanding, but a little. 
48|16| Say to the ones who are left behind among the nomads: You will be called against a folk imbued with severe might. You will fight them or they will submit to God. Then, if you obey, God will give you a fairer compensation. But if you turn away as you turned away before, He will punish you with a painful punishment. 
48|17| There is neither a fault on the blind, nor a fault on the lame, nor a fault on the sick, and whoever obeys God and His Messenger, He will cause him to enter Gardens beneath which rivers run. And whoever turns away, He will punish him with a painful punishment. 
48|18| God was well-pleased with the ones who believe (f) when they take the pledge of allegiance to thee beneath the tree for He knew what was in their hearts and He caused the tranquility to descend on them and He repaid them with a victory near at hand. 
48|19| And they will take much gain. And God had been Almighty, Wise. 
48|20| God promised you much gain that you will take and He quickened this for you. He limited the hands of humanity from you so that perhaps it will be a sign to the ones who believe and that He guide you to a straight path 
48|21| and other gains which are not yet within your power. Surely, God enclosed them. And God had been over everything Powerful. 
48|22| And if those who were ungrateful fought you, they would have turned their backs. Again, they would not have found a protector or a helper. 
48|23| This is a custom of God which was, surely, in force before. Thou wilt never find in a custom of God any substitution. 
48|24| And He it is who limited their hands from you and your hands from them in the hollow of Makkah after He made you victors over them. And God had been Seeing of what you do. 
48|25| They were ungrateful, and they barred you from the Masjid al-Haram, and were ones who detained the sacrificial gift from reaching its place of sacrifice. If it had not been for men, ones who believe, and for women, ones who believe, whom you know not that you tread on them and guilt should light on you without your knowledge. This was so that God may cause to enter into His mercy whomever He wills. If they were clearly apart, separated, We would have punished those who were ungrateful among them with a painful punishment. 
48|26| Mention when those who were ungrateful laid zealotry in their hearts, like the zealotry of the Age of Ignorance. Then, God caused to descend His tranquility on His Messenger and on the ones who believe and fastened on them the Word of God-consciousness. They had been with right to it and were more worthy of it. And God had been Knowing. 
48|27| Certainly, God was sincere to the dream of His Messenger with The Truth: You will enter the Masjid al-Haram, if God willed, as ones who are safe, as ones who shaved your heads or as ones whose hair is cut short. You will fear not. He knew what you know not and He assigned other than that a victory near at hand. 
48|28| He it is Who sent His Messenger with guidance and the way of life of The Truth that He uplift it over all of the ways of life. And God sufficed as a witness. 
48|29| Muhammad is the Messenger of God. And those who are with him are severe against the one who is ungrateful, but compassionate among themselves. Thou hast seen them as ones who bow down as ones who prostrate themselves. They are looking for grace from God and contentment. Their mark is on their faces from the effects of prostration. This is their parable in the Torah. And their parable in the Gospel is like sown seed that brought out its shoot, energized. It, then, became stout and rose straight on its plant stalk impressing the ones who sow so that He enrage by them the ones who are ungrateful, God promised those who believed and did as the ones in accord with morality, for them forgiveness and a sublime compensation. 
49|1| O those who believed! Put not yourselves forward in advance of God and His Messenger. And be Godfearing of God. Truly, God is Hearing, Knowing. 
49|2| O those who believed! Exalt not your voices above the voice of the Prophet nor publish a saying to him as you would openly publish something to some others so that your actions not be fruitless while you are not aware. 
49|3| Truly, those who lower their voices near the Messenger of God, those are those who are ones God put to test their hearts for God-consciousness. For them is forgiveness and a sublime compensation. 
49|4| Truly, those who cry out to thee from behind the inner apartments, most of them are not reasonable. 
49|5| And if they endured patiently until thou wouldst go forth to them, it would have been better for them. And God is Forgiving, Compassionate. 
49|6| O those who believed! If one who disobeys drew near to you with a tiding, then, be clear so that you not light on a folk out of ignorance. Then, you would become ones who are remorseful for what you accomplished. 
49|7| Know you that the Messenger of God is of you. If he obeys you in much of the affairs, you would, certainly, fall into misfortune. But God endeared belief to you and made it appear pleasing to your hearts. And He caused to be detestable to you ingratitude and disobedience and rebellion. Those, they are the ones who are on the right way. 
49|8| This is a grace from God and His divine blessing. And God is Knowing, Wise. 
49|9| And if two sections among the ones who believe fought one against the other, then, make things right between them both. Then, if one of them was insolent against the other, then, fight the one who is insolent until it changed its mind about the command of God. Then, if it changes its mind, make things right between them justly. And act justly. Truly, God loves the ones who act justly. 
49|10| Only the ones who believe are brothers/sisters, so make things right between your two brothers/sisters. And be Godfearing of God so that perhaps you will find mercy. 
49|11| O those who believed! Let not a folk deride another folk. Perhaps they be better than they, nor women deride other women. Perhaps they be better than they. Nor find fault with one another nor insult one another with nicknames. Miserable was the name of disobedience after belief! And whoever repents not, then, those, they are the ones who are unjust. 
49|12| O those who believed! Avoid suspicion much. Truly, some suspicion is a sin. And spy not nor backbite some by some other. Would one of you love to eat the flesh of his lifeless brother? You would have disliked it. And be Godfearing of God. Truly, God is Accepter of Repentance, Compassionate. 
49|13| O humanity! Truly, We created you from a male and a female and made you into peoples and types that you recognize one another. Truly, the most generous of you with God is the most devout. Truly, God is Knowing, Aware. 
49|14| The nomads said: We believed. Say to them: You believe not. But say: We submitted to God, for belief enters not yet into your hearts. But if you obey God and His Messenger, He will not withhold your actions at all. Truly, God is Forgiving, Compassionate. 
49|15| The ones who believe are not but those who believed in God and His Messenger. Again, they were not in doubt and they struggled with their wealth and themselves in the way of God. Those, they are the ones who are sincere. 
49|16| Say: Would you teach God about your way of life while God knows whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in and on the earth? And God is Knowing of everything. 
49|17| They show grace to thee that they submitted to God. Say: Show you submission to God as grace to me? Nay! God shows grace to you in that He guided you to belief if you, truly, had been ones who are sincere. 
49|18| Truly, God knows the unseen of the heavens and the earth. And God is Seeing of what you do. 
50|1| Q[f. By the glorious Quran! 
50|2| Nay! They marveled that there drew near them one who warns from among themselves. So the ones who are ungrateful said: This is a strange thing. 
50|3| When we died and had been earth dust, that is a far-fetched returning! 
50|4| Surely, We knew what the earth reduces from them. And with Us is a guardian Book. 
50|5| Nay! They denied The Truth when it drew near them, so they are in a confused state of affairs. 
50|6| Look they not on the heaven above them, how We built it and made it appear pleasing? And there are not any gaps in it. 
50|7| And the earth, We stretched it out and cast on it firm mountains and caused in it to develop every lovely, diverse pair 
50|8| for contemplation and as a reminder to every servant, one who turns in repentance. 
50|9| And We sent down blessed water from heaven. Then, We caused gardens to develop from it and reaped grains of wheat 
50|10| and high-reaching date palm trees with ranged spathes 
50|11| as provision for My servants. And We gave life by them to a lifeless land. Thus, will be the going forth. 
50|12| The folk of Noah denied what came before them, and the Companions of the Rass and Thamud, 
50|13| and Ad and Pharaoh and the brothers of Lot, 
50|14| and the Companions of the Thicket and the folk of Tubba. Everyone denied the Messengers, so My threat was realized. 
50|15| Were We wearied by the first creation? Nay! They are perplexed about a new creation. 
50|16| And, certainly, We created the human being. We know what evil his soul whispers to him. We are nearer to him than the jugular vein. 
50|17| When the two receivers are ones who receive, seated on the right and on the left, 
50|18| he utters not a saying but that there is one ready, watching over near him 
50|19| when the agony of death drew near with The Truth. That is what thou hadst been shunning. 
50|20| And the trumpet will be blown. That is the Day of The Threat. 
50|21| And every person will draw near with an angel, one who drives, and an angel witness. 
50|22| Certainly, thou hadst been heedless of this so We removed thy screen from thee so that thy sight this Day will be sharp. 
50|23| And his comrade angel would say: This is what is ready near me of his record: 
50|24| Cast into hell every stubborn ingrate 
50|25| who delays the good, one who exceeds the limits, one who is in grave doubt, 
50|26| he who made another god with God! Then, cast him into the severe punishment! 
50|27| His comrade Satan would say: Our Lord! I made him not overbold, but he had been going far astray. 
50|28| He would say: Strive not against one another in My presence, for, surely, I will put forward The Threat to you. 
50|29| The statement is not substituted in My presence and I am not unjust to the servants. 
50|30| On a Day when We will say to hell: Art thou full? And it will say: Are there any additions? 
50|31| And the Garden was brought close to the ones who are Godfearing, not far off. 
50|32| This is what is promised you, for every penitent and guardian 
50|33| who dreaded The Merciful in the unseen and drew near with a heart of one who turns in repentance: 
50|34| Enter you there in peace. That is the Day of Eternity! 
50|35| They will have what they will in it and with Us there is yet an addition. 
50|36| And how many We caused to perish before them of generations who were stronger than they in courage so that they searched about on the land. Was there any asylum? 
50|37| Truly, in that is a reminder for him, for whoever had a heart or, having the ability to hear, gave listen. He is a witness. 
50|38| And, certainly, We created the heavens and the earth and whatever is between in six days, and no exhaustion afflicted Us. 
50|39| So have thou patience with whatever they say and glorify with the praise of thy Lord before the coming up of the sun and before sunset. 
50|40| And in the night glorify Him and at the end part of the prostrations. 
50|41| And listen thou on a Day when one who calls out will cry out from a near place. 
50|42| On a Day when they will hear the Cry with The Truth. That will be the Day of going forth. 
50|43| Truly, it is We who give life and cause to die and to Us is the Homecoming 
50|44| on a Day when the earth will be split open swiftly. That will be an easy assembling for Us. 
50|45| We are greater in knowledge as to what they say. And thou art not haughty over them so remind by the Quran whoever fears My threat. 
51|1| By the winnowing winds of ones that winnow 
51|2| by the burden-bearers, the ones who carry a heavy burden 
51|3| and the ones that run with ease 
51|4| and the ones who distribute the command, 
51|5| truly, what you are promised is that which is sincere. 
51|6| And, truly, the judgment is that which falls. 
51|7| By the heaven that is full of tracks, 
51|8| you are ones who are at variance in your sayings. 
51|9| He is misled there by he who was misled. 
51|10| Perdition to those who guess, 
51|11| ones who are inattentive because of obstinacy. 
51|12| They ask: When will the Day of Judgment be? 
51|13| A Day when they are tried over the fire: 
51|14| Experience your test. This is that for which you had been seeking to hasten. 
51|15| Truly, the ones who are Godfearing will be in the Garden and springs, 
51|16| ones who take what their Lord gave them. Truly, they had been before this—ones who are doers of good. 
51|17| They had been slumbering little during the night. 
51|18| And at the breaking of the day, they ask for forgiveness. 
51|19| And there is an obligation from their wealth for the one who begs and the one who is deprived. 
51|20| On the earth are signs, for the ones that are certain 
51|21| and in yourselves. Will you not, then, perceive? 
51|22| And in the heaven is your provision as you are promised 
51|23| by the Lord of the heaven and the earth. It is, truly, The Truth just as you yourselves speak. 
51|24| Truly, approached thee the discourse of guests of Abraham, the ones who are honored? 
51|25| When they entered to him they said: Peace. He said: Peace, to a folk, ones who are unknown. 
51|26| Then, he turned upon his people and brought about a fattened calf 
51|27| so he brought it near to them. He said: Will you not eat? 
51|28| Then, he sensed a fear of them; they said: Be not in awe. They gave him good tidings of a knowing boy. 
51|29| Then, his woman came forward with a loud cry. She slapped her face and said: I am an old barren woman! 
51|30| They said: Thus, spoke thy Lord. Truly, He is The Wise, The Knowing. 
51|31| Abraham said: O ones who are sent, what is your business? 
51|32| They said: That we were sent to a folk, ones who sin, 
51|33| to send on them rocks of clay, 
51|34| ones distinguished by thy Lord for ones who are excessive. 
51|35| So We brought out whoever had been in it of the ones who believe. 
51|36| But We found in it nothing but a house of ones who submit to God. 
51|37| And We left a sign in it for those who fear the painful punishment. 
51|38| And in Moses, then, We sent him to Pharaoh with a clear authority. 
51|39| Then, Pharaoh turned away to his court. He said: One who is a sorcerer, one who is possessed! 
51|40| So We took him and his armies and cast them forth into the water of the sea and he is one who is answerable. 
51|41| And in Ad, when We sent against them the withering wind. 
51|42| It forsakes not anything it approached, but made it like it was decayed. 
51|43| And in Thamud, when it was said to them: Take joy for a while. 
51|44| Yet they defied the command of their Lord so the thunderbolt took them while they look on. 
51|45| They were neither able to stand up nor had they been ones who are aided. 
51|46| And the folk of Noah from before. Truly, they had been a folk, ones who disobey. 
51|47| And We built the heaven with potency. And, truly, We are ones who extend wide. 
51|48| And the earth, We spread it forth. How excellent are the ones who spread! 
51|49| And of everything We created pairs so that perhaps you will recollect. 
51|50| So run away towards God. Truly, I am to you a clear warner from Him. 
51|51| And make not with God any other god. Truly, I am to you a clear warner from Him. 
51|52| There approached not those who were before them any Messenger but that they said: One who is a sorcerer or one who is possessed! 
51|53| Counseled they this to one another? Nay! They are a folk, ones who are defiant! 
51|54| So turn thou away from them that thou be not one who is reproached. 
51|55| And remind, for, truly, the reminder profits the ones who believe. 
51|56| And I created not jinn and humankind but that they worship Me. 
51|57| I want no provision from them nor want I that they feed Me. 
51|58| Truly, God, He is The Provider, The Possessor of Strength, The Sure. 
51|59| And, truly, the impiety of those who did wrong is like the impiety of their companions. So let them not seek to hasten the Judgment. 
51|60| Then, woe to those who disbelieved in that Day of theirs that they are promised. 
52|1| By the mount 
52|2| and by a Book inscribed 
52|3| on an unrolled scroll of parchment 
52|4| and by the frequented House 
52|5| and by the exalted roof 
52|6| and that which is poured forth over the seas, 
52|7| truly, the punishment of Thy Lord is that which falls. 
52|8| There is no one who averts it. 
52|9| On a Day when the heaven will spin a spinning 
52|10| and the mountains will journey a journey. 
52|11| Then, woe on a Day to the ones who deny, 
52|12| they, those are engaging in idle talk, play, 
52|13| on a Day they will be driven away with force to the fire of hell with a driving away: 
52|14| This is the fire which you had been denying! 
52|15| Is this, then, sorcery or is it that you perceive not? 
52|16| Roast you in it! Then, have patience, or you endure patiently not, it is all the same to you. You will be only given recompense for what you had been doing. 
52|17| Truly, the ones who are Godfearing will be in Gardens and bliss, 
52|18| ones who are joyful for what their Lord gave them. And their Lord protected them from the punishment of hellfire. 
52|19| Eat and drink wholesomely because of what you had been doing. 
52|20| They will be ones who are reclining on couches arrayed. And We will give in marriage to them lovely, most beautiful eyed ones. 
52|21| And those who believed and their offspring who followed them in belief, We caused them to join their offspring. And We deprived them not of anything of their actions. Every man will be pledged for what he earned. 
52|22| And We furnished relief to them with sweet fruit and meat such as that for which they lust. 
52|23| They will contend with one another for a cup around which there is no idle talk nor accusation of sinfulness. 
52|24| And boys of theirs will go around them as if they had been well-guarded pearls. 
52|25| And some of them will come forward to some others demanding of one another. 
52|26| They would say: Truly, we had been before ones who are apprehensive among our people, 
52|27| but God showed grace to us and protected us from the punishment of the burning wind. 
52|28| Truly, we had been calling to Him before. Truly, He, He is The Source of Goodness, The Compassionate. 
52|29| So remind! Thou art not, by the divine blessing of thy Lord, a soothsayer nor one who is possessed. 
52|30| Or they say: A poet! We await for the setback of fate for him. 
52|31| Say: Await for I am with the ones who are waiting. 
52|32| Or command their faculties of understanding to this? Or are they a folk, ones who are defiant? 
52|33| Or say they: He fabricated it? Nay! They believe not. 
52|34| Then, let them bring a discourse like it, if they had been ones who are sincere. 
52|35| Or were they created out of nothing? Or are they ones who are creators of themselves? 
52|36| Or created they the heavens and the earth? Nay! They are not certain. 
52|37| Or are the treasures of thy Lord with them? Or are they ones who are registrars? 
52|38| Or have they a ladder by means of which they listen? Then, let ones who are listening bring a clear authority. 
52|39| Or has He daughters and they have sons? 
52|40| Or hast thou asked them for a compensation so that they are from something owed ones who will be weighed down? 
52|41| Or is the unseen with them and they write it down? 
52|42| Or want they cunning? But it is those who were ungrateful. They are the ones who are outwitted. 
52|43| Or have they a god other than God? Glory be to God above partners they ascribe! 
52|44| And if they consider pieces of the heaven descending, they would say: Heaped up clouds! 
52|45| So forsake them until they encounter their day in which they will be swooning. 
52|46| A Day when their cunning will avail them not at all nor will they be helped. 
52|47| And, truly, for those who did wrong there is a punishment besides that, but most of them know not. 
52|48| So have thou patience for the determination of thy Lord, for, truly, thou art under Our eyes; and glorify the praises of thy Lord when thou hast stood up at the time of dawn, 
52|49| and glorify at night and the drawing back of the stars. 
53|1| By the star when it hurled to ruin, 
53|2| neither your companion went astray, nor he erred 
53|3| nor speaks he for himself out of desire. 
53|4| It is but a revelation that is revealed, 
53|5| taught to him by The One Stronger in Strength, 
53|6| Possessor of Forcefulness. Then, he stood poised 
53|7| while he was on the loftiest horizon. 
53|8| Again, he came to pass near and hung suspended 
53|9| until he had been at a distance of two bow lengths or closer. 
53|10| Then, He revealed to His servant what He revealed. 
53|11| The mind lied not against what it saw. 
53|12| Will you altercate with him about what he sees? 
53|13| And, certainly, he saw it another time 
53|14| near the Lote Tree of the Utmost Boundary 
53|15| near which is the Garden of the Place of Shelter, 
53|16| when overcomes the Lote Tree what overcomes it. 
53|17| The sight swerved not, nor was it defiant. 
53|18| Certainly, he saw some of the greatest signs of his Lord. 
53|19| Saw you, then, al-Lat and al-Uzza 
53|20| and Manat, the third, the other? 
53|21| Have you males and has He, females? 
53|22| That, then, is an unfair division. 
53|23| They are but names that you named, you and your fathers, for which God caused not to descend any authority. They follow nothing but opinion and that for which their souls yearn. And, certainly, drew near them the guidance from their Lord. 
53|24| Or will the human being have what he coveted? 
53|25| Then, to God belongs the Last and the First. 
53|26| And how many an angel in the heavens is there whose intercession will avail nothing at all, but after God gives permission to whom He wills and He is well-pleased. 
53|27| Truly, those who believe not in the world to come naming the angels with female names, 
53|28| while they have no knowledge of it, they follow nothing but opinion. And, truly, opinion avails them not at all against The Truth. 
53|29| So turn thou aside from him who turns away from Our Remembrance and he wants nothing but this present life. 
53|30| That is their attainment of the knowledge. Truly, thy Lord, He is the One Who is greater in knowledge of whoever went astray from His way. And He is greater in knowledge of whoever were truly guided. 
53|31| And to God belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in and on the earth that He may give recompense to those who did evil for what they did and give recompense fairer to those who did good, 
53|32| those who avoid the major sins and the indecencies but the lesser offenses. Truly, thy Lord is One Who is Extensive in forgiveness. He is greater in knowledge of you when He caused you to grow from the earth and when you were an unborn child in the wombs of your mothers. So you make not pure yourselves. He is greater in knowledge of him who was Godfearing. 
53|33| Hadst thou considered him who turned away 
53|34| and gave a little, giving grudgingly? 
53|35| Is the knowledge of the unseen with him so that he sees it? 
53|36| Or is he told what is in the scrolls of Moses 
53|37| and of Abraham who paid his account in full? 
53|38| The burdened soul will not bear the heavy load of another. 
53|39| The human being is not but what he endeavored for 
53|40| and that his endeavoring will be seen. 
53|41| Again, he will be given recompense for it with a more true recompense, 
53|42| and that towards thy Lord is the Utmost Boundary, 
53|43| and that He caused laughter and caused weeping, 
53|44| and that He caused to die and gave life 
53|45| and it is He, He created the pairs, the male and the female 
53|46| from seminal fluid when it is emitted, 
53|47| and that with Him is another growth 
53|48| and it is He, He Who Enriched and made rich 
53|49| and that He, He is the Lord of Sirius 
53|50| and that He caused to perish the previous Ad 
53|51| and Thamud. He caused none to remain 
53|52| —and the folk of Noah before. Truly, they had been they who do greater wrong and ones who are defiant. 
53|53| He caused to tumble that which are cities overthrown, 
53|54| then, enwrapped them with what enwrapped. 
53|55| Then, which of the benefits of thy Lord wilt thou quarrel with? 
53|56| This is a warner among the previous warnings. 
53|57| The Impending Day is impending. 
53|58| There is not other than God, One Who Uncovers it. 
53|59| Then, at this discourse you marvel? 
53|60| And will you laugh and not weep 
53|61| while you are ones who pass life in enjoyment? 
53|62| So prostrate yourselves to God and worship Him.‡ 
54|1| The Hour neared and the moon was split. 
54|2| And if they see a sign, they turn aside and say: Incessant sorcery! 
54|3| And they denied and followed their own desires. And every affair is that which is settled. 
54|4| And, certainly, the tidings drew near them wherein was that which is to deter 
54|5| —namely, that which is far reaching wisdom— yet warnings avail not. 
54|6| So turn thou away from them• on a Day when One Who Calls will call to a horrible thing. 
54|7| Their sight will be that which is humbled and they will go forth from the tombs as if they had been dispersed locusts, 
54|8| ones who run forward with their eyes fixed in horror towards The One Who Calls. The ones who are ungrateful will say: This is a difficult Day! 
54|9| The folk of Noah denied before them. They denied Our servant and said: One who is possessed! And he was deterred. 
54|10| So he called to his Lord saying: I am one who is vanquished, so Thou help me. 
54|11| So We opened the doors of heaven with torrential water. 
54|12| And We caused the earth to gush forth with springs so the waters were to meet one another from a command that was measured. 
54|13| And We carried him on a vessel of planks and caulked, 
54|14| running under Our eyes, a recompense for Noah who had been disbelieved. 
54|15| And, certainly, We left this as a sign. Then, is there one who recalls? 
54|16| So how had been My punishment and My warning? 
54|17| And, certainly, We made the Quran easy as a Remembrance. Then, is there one who recalls? 
54|18| Ad denied. So how had been My punishment and My warning? 
54|19| Truly, We sent a raging wind against them on a day of continuous misfortune, 
54|20| tearing out humanity as if they had been uprooted palm trees, uprooted. 
54|21| So how had been My punishment and My warning? 
54|22| And, certainly, We made the Quran easy as a Remembrance. Then, is there one who recalls? 
54|23| Thamud denied the warning 
54|24| for they said: Follow we a lone mortal from among us? Truly, we would be going astray and insane. 
54|25| Is it that the Remembrance was cast down to Salih from among us? Nay! He is a rash liar! 
54|26| They will know tomorrow who the rash liar is! 
54|27| Truly, We are ones who sent the she-camel as a test for them. So thou be on the watch for them and maintain patience. 
54|28| And tell them that the division of the water is between them. Every drink was that which is divided in turn. 
54|29| But they cried out to their companion, and he took her in hand and crippled her. 
54|30| So how had been My punishment and My warning? 
54|31| Truly, We sent against them one Cry and they had been like straw for the one who is a builder of animal enclosures. 
54|32| And, certainly, We made the Quran easy as a Remembrance. Then, is there one who recalls? 
54|33| The folk of Lot denied the warning. 
54|34| Truly, We sent against them a sand storm, but the family of Lot. We delivered them at the breaking of day 
54|35| as a divine blessing from Us. Thus, We gave recompense to him who gave thanks. 
54|36| And, certainly, he warned them of Our attack but they quarreled over the warning. 
54|37| And, certainly, they solicited his guests, so We obliterated their eyes. Then, experience My punishment and My warning. 
54|38| And, certainly, it came in the morning, early morning at dawn, a settled punishment. 
54|39| Then, experience My punishment and My warning. 
54|40| And, certainly, We made the Quran easy as a Remembrance. Then, is there one who recalls? 
54|41| And, certainly, drew near the warning to the people of Pharaoh. 
54|42| They denied Our signs, all of them. So We took them with a taking, One Who is Almighty, Omnipotent. 
54|43| Are ones who are ungrateful better than those? Or have you an immunity in the ancient scrolls? 
54|44| Or say they: We are aided altogether. 
54|45| Their multitude will be put to flight and they will turn their backs. 
54|46| Nay! The Hour is what is promised them and the Hour will be more calamitous and more distasteful. 
54|47| Truly, ones who sin are going astray and insane. 
54|48| On a Day they will be dragged into the fire on their faces: Experience the touch of Saqar! 
54|49| Truly, We created all things in measure 
54|50| and Our command is not but one as the twinkling of the eye. 
54|51| And, certainly, We caused to perish their partisans. Is there, then, one who recalls? 
54|52| And everything they accomplished is in the ancient scrolls. 
54|53| And every small and great thing is that which is written. 
54|54| Truly, the ones who are Godfearing will be in Gardens and rivers, 
54|55| in positions of sincerity near an Omnipotent King. 
55|1| The Merciful. 
55|2| He taught the Quran. 
55|3| He created the human being. 
55|4| He taught him the clear explanation. 
55|5| The sun and the moon are to keep count. 
55|6| And the stars and the trees both prostrate. 
55|7| And the heaven He exalted. And He set in place the Balance 
55|8| that you be not defiant in the Balance. 
55|9| Set up the weighing with justice and skimp not in the Balance. 
55|10| And He set the earth in place for the human race. 
55|11| On and in it are many kinds of sweet fruit and date palm trees with sheathed fruit trees 
55|12| and grain possessor of husks and fragrant herbs. 
55|13| So which of the benefits of the Lord of you both will you both deny? 
55|14| He created the human being from earth mud like potter’s clay. 
55|15| He created the ones who are spirits from a smokeless flame of fire. 
55|16| So which of the benefits of the Lord of you both will you both deny? 
55|17| The Lord of the Two Easts, and the Lord of the Two Wests! 
55|18| So which of the benefits of the Lord of you both will you both deny? 
55|19| He let forth the two seas to meet one another. 
55|20| Between them is a barrier which they wrong not. 
55|21| So which of the benefits of the Lord of you both will you both deny? 
55|22| From both of them go forth pearls and coral. 
55|23| So which of the benefits of the Lord of you both will you both deny? 
55|24| His are ones that run with that which is displayed in the sea like landmarks. 
55|25| So which of the benefits of the Lord of you both will you both deny? 
55|26| All who are in or on it are ones who are being annihilated, 
55|27| yet the Countenance of thy Lord will remain forever, Possessor of The Majesty and The Splendor. 
55|28| So which of the benefits of the Lord of you both will you both deny? 
55|29| Of Him asks whoever is in the heavens and in and on the earth. Every day He is on some matter. 
55|30| So which of the benefits of the Lord of you both will you both deny? 
55|31| We will attend to you at leisure, O you two dependents. 
55|32| So which of the benefits of the Lord of you both will you both deny? 
55|33| O you both, assembly of jinn and humankind! If you were able to pass through the areas of the heavens and the earth, then, pass through them! But you will not pass through, but with an authority. 
55|34| So which of the benefits of the Lord of you both will you both deny? 
55|35| There will be sent against you both a flame of fire and heated brass. Will you not, then, help yourselves? 
55|36| So which of the benefits of the Lord of you both will you both deny? 
55|37| Then, when the heaven was split then, it had been crimson like red leather, 
55|38| so which of the benefits of the Lord of you both will you both deny? 
55|39| On that Day no one will be asked about his impiety neither humankind nor ones who are spirits. 
55|40| So which of the benefits of the Lord of you both will you both deny? 
55|41| Ones who sin will be recognized by their mark and they will be taken by their forelocks and their feet. 
55|42| So which of the benefits of the Lord of you both will you both deny? 
55|43| This is hell which the ones who sin deny! 
55|44| They will go around between it and between scalding boiling water! 
55|45| So which of the benefits of the Lord of you both will you both deny? 
55|46| For him who feared the station before his Lord are two Gardens. 
55|47| So which of the benefits of the Lord of you both will you both deny? 
55|48| Possessor of wide shade. 
55|49| So which of the benefits of the Lord of you both will you both deny? 
55|50| Two springs will be running. 
55|51| So which of the benefits of the Lord of you both will you both deny? 
55|52| In them both every kind of sweet fruit of diverse pairs. 
55|53| So which of the benefits of the Lord of you both will you both deny? 
55|54| Ones who are reclining on places of restfulness the inner linings of which are of brocade. And the fruit plucked from trees while fresh, that which draws near from the two Gardens. 
55|55| So which of the benefits of the Lord of you both will you both deny? 
55|56| In them both are ones who are restraining their (f) glance. No humankind touched them (f) sexually before nor ones who are spirits. 
55|57| So which of the benefits of the Lord of you both will you both deny? 
55|58| They are as if they were like rubies and coral. 
55|59| So which of the benefits of the Lord of you both will you both deny? 
55|60| Is the recompense for kindness other than kindness? 
55|61| So which of the benefits of the Lord of you both will you both deny? 
55|62| Besides these are two other Gardens. 
55|63| So which of the benefits of the Lord of you both will you both deny? 
55|64| Dark green. 
55|65| So which of the benefits of the Lord of you both will you both deny? 
55|66| In them both are two springs gushing. 
55|67| So which of the benefits of the Lord of you both will you both deny? 
55|68| In them both are sweet fruits and date palm trees and pomegranates. 
55|69| So which of the benefits of the Lord of you both will you both deny? 
55|70| In them both are the good deeds, fairer. 
55|71| So which of the benefits of the Lord of you both will you both deny? 
55|72| Most beautiful eyed ones who will be restrained in edifices. 
55|73| So which of the benefits of the Lord of you both will you both deny? 
55|74| No humankind touched them (f) sexually before nor ones who are spirits. 
55|75| So which of the benefits of the Lord of you both will you both deny? 
55|76| Ones who are reclining on green pillows and fairer carpets. 
55|77| So which of the benefits of the Lord of you both will you both deny? 
55|78| Blessed be the Name of thy Lord, Possessor of The Majesty and The Splendor. 
56|1| When The Inevitable came to pass, 
56|2| its descent is not like that which lies. 
56|3| It will be one that abases, one that exalts. 
56|4| When the earth will rock with a rocking 
56|5| and the mountains be crumbled to dust, crumbling, 
56|6| then, they had been dust scattered about. 
56|7| And you had been of three diverse pairs. 
56|8| Then, the Companions of the Right—who are the Companions of the Right? 
56|9| And the Companions of the Left—who are Companions of the Left? 
56|10| Ones who take the lead are the ones who take the lead. 
56|11| Those are the ones who are brought near 
56|12| in the Gardens of Bliss. 
56|13| A throng of the ancient ones 
56|14| and a few of the later ones 
56|15| are on lined couches, 
56|16| ones who are reclining on them, ones who are facing one another. 
56|17| Immortal children go around them 
56|18| with cups and ewers and goblets from a spring of water. 
56|19| Neither will they suffer headaches nor will they be intoxicated, 
56|20| and sweet fruit of what they specify 
56|21| and the flesh of birds for which they lust 
56|22| and most beautiful eyed ones, 
56|23| like the parable of the well-guarded pearls, 
56|24| a recompense for what they had been doing. 
56|25| They will not hear any idle talk in it nor accusation of sinfulness, 
56|26| but the saying of: Peace! Peace! 
56|27| And the Companions of the Right—who are the Companions of the Right? 
56|28| They will be among thornless lote-trees 
56|29| and acacias, one on another, 
56|30| and spread out shade 
56|31| and outpoured water 
56|32| and many sweet fruit. 
56|33| There will be neither that which is severed nor that which is inaccessible. 
56|34| And it is an exalted place of restfulness. 
56|35| Truly, We caused them (f) to grow, a good forming, 
56|36| and made them (f) virgins, 
56|37| full of love, of the same age, 
56|38| for the Companions of the Right. 
56|39| A throng of the ancient ones 
56|40| and a throng from the later ones, 
56|41| and the Companions of the Left—who are the Companions of the Left? 
56|42| Those who are in burning wind and scalding water 
56|43| and shade of black smoke 
56|44| neither that which is cool nor generous. 
56|45| Truly, they had been before that ones who are given ease 
56|46| and they had been persisting in tremendous wickedness. 
56|47| And they had been saying: When we died and had been earth dust and bones, will we, then, be ones who are raised up? 
56|48| And our ancient fathers? 
56|49| Say: Truly, the ancient ones and the later ones 
56|50| will be ones who will be gathered to a time appointed on a known Day. 
56|51| Again, you, O ones who go astray, are the ones who deny. 
56|52| Certainly, you will be ones who eat from the Zaqqum tree. 
56|53| Then, you will be ones who fill your bellies from it, 
56|54| then, ones who drink scalding water after it. 
56|55| So you will be ones who drink like the drinking of thirsty camels. 
56|56| This will be their hospitality on the Day of Judgment! 
56|57| We, We created you. Why establish it not as true? 
56|58| Considered you what you spill of human seed? 
56|59| Is it you who create it? Or are We the ones who are the creators? 
56|60| We ordained death among you and We will not be ones who will be outrun 
56|61| in that We will substitute your likeness and We caused you to grow in a way you know not. 
56|62| And, certainly, you knew the first growth. Will you not, then, recollect? 
56|63| Considered you the soil that you till? 
56|64| Is it you who sows it? Or are We the ones who sow? 
56|65| If We will, We would make it into chaff and you would continue to joke saying: 
56|66| We are ones who are debt-loaded! 
56|67| Nay! We are ones who are deprived. 
56|68| Considered you the water that you drink? 
56|69| Is it you who caused it to descend from the cloud vapors? Or are We the ones who caused it to descend? 
56|70| If We will, We would make it bitter. Why, then, give you not thanks? 
56|71| Considered you the fire which you strike? 
56|72| Is it you who caused the tree to grow? Or are We the ones who cause it to grow? 
56|73| We made it an admonition and sustenance for ones who are desert people. 
56|74| Then, glorify with the name of thy Lord, The Sublime. 
56|75| But no! I swear by the orbit of the stars 
56|76| and, truly, that is an oath to be sworn if you know, sublime. 
56|77| Truly, it is a generous Recitation 
56|78| in a well-guarded Book. 
56|79| None touches it but the ones who are purified, 
56|80| a sending down successively from the Lord of the worlds. 
56|81| Then, is it this discourse that you are ones who scorn? 
56|82| And you make it your provision that you, you deny the Recitation. 
56|83| Then, why not intervene when it reached the wind-pipe 
56|84| and you are looking on at the time? 
56|85| And We are nearer to him than you, yet you perceive not. 
56|86| Then, why had you not been—if you are not ones to be judged— 
56|87| returning the soul to the body, if you had been ones who are sincere? 
56|88| If he had been among the ones who are brought near, 
56|89| there is solace and fragrant herbs and a Garden of Bliss. 
56|90| And if he had been of the Companions of the Right, 
56|91| then: Peace for thee from the Companions of the Right. 
56|92| And yet if he had been of the ones who go astray, ones who deny, 
56|93| then, a hospitality of scalding water 
56|94| and broiling in hellfire. 
56|95| Truly, this is The Truth of certainty. 
56|96| So glorify the Name of thy Lord, The Almighty. 
57|1| Whatever is in the heavens glorified God and whatever is in and on the earth. And He is The Almighty, The Wise. 
57|2| To Him belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth. He gives life and causes to die. And He is Powerful over everything. 
57|3| He is The First and The Last, The One Who is Outward and The One Who is Inward. And He is Knowing of everything. 
57|4| It is He Who created the heavens and the earth in six days. Again, He turned His attention to the Throne. He knows what penetrates into the earth and what goes forth from it, and what comes down from the heaven and what goes up to it. And He is with you wherever you had been. And God is Seeing of what you do. 
57|5| To Him belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth. All commands are returned to God. 
57|6| He causes the nighttime to be interposed into the daytime and causes the daytime to be interposed into the nighttime. And He is Knowing of whatever is in the breasts. 
57|7| Believe in God and His Messenger and spend out of what He made you ones who are successors in it. Those among you who believed and spent, for them is a great compensation. 
57|8| And what is the matter with you that you believe not in God while the Messenger calls to you to believe in your Lord and He took your solemn promise, if you had been ones who believe? 
57|9| It is He Who sends down to His servant clear portents, signs, that He brings you out from the shadows into the light. And, truly, God is to you Gentle, Compassionate. 
57|10| And what is the matter with you that you spend not in the way of God while to God belongs the heritage of the heavens and the earth? Not on the same level among you are whoever spent before the victory and fought. Those are more sublime in degree than those who spent afterwards and fought. And God promised the fairer to all. And God is Aware of what you do. 
57|11| Who is he who will lend to God a fairer loan that He multiply it for him and he will have a generous compensation? 
57|12| On a Day thou wilt see the males, ones who believe and the females, ones who believe, their light coming eagerly in advance of them and on their right: Good tidings for you this Day, Gardens beneath which rivers run, ones who will dwell in them forever. That, it is the winning the sublime triumph! 
57|13| On a Day will say the males, ones who are hypocrites and females, the ones who are hypocrites to those who believed: Wait for us that we will borrow from your light. It will be said: Return behind and search out for a light. There would be a fence set up between them for which there is a door. That which is inward is mercy and that which is outward is towards the punishment. 
57|14| The hypocrites will cry out to the believers: Have we not been with you? They will say: Yea! And you let yourselves be tempted and you awaited and you were in doubt and you were deluded by following your fantasies until the command of God drew near and the deluder deluded you in regard to God. 
57|15| So this Day ransom will not be taken from you nor from those who were ungrateful. Your place of shelter will be the fire. It is your defender. And miserable will be the Homecoming! 
57|16| Is it not time for those who believed that their hearts be humbled by the Remembrance of God and to The Truth that came down to them and that they not be like those who were given the Book before? Then, the space of time was long for them so their hearts became hard. And many of them were ones who disobey. 
57|17| Know you that God gives life to the earth after its death. Surely, We made manifest the signs to you so that perhaps you will be reasonable. 
57|18| Truly, the males, ones who are charitable and the females, ones who are charitable and who lent a fairer loan to God, it will be multiplied for them and for them there is a generous compensation. 
57|19| And those who believed in God and His Messengers, those, they are the just persons. And the witnesses to their Lord. For them is their compensation and their light. And those who were ungrateful and denied Our signs, those are the Companions of Hellfire. 
57|20| Know that this present life is only a pastime, a diversion and an adornment and a mutual boasting among you and a rivalry in respect to wealth and children as the likeness of plenteous rain water. The plants impressed ones who are ungrateful. Again, it withers; then, thou hast seen it yellowing. Again, it becomes chaff while in the world to come there is severe punishment and forgiveness from God and contentment. And this present life is nothing but a delusion of enjoyment. 
57|21| Move quickly towards forgiveness from your Lord and the Garden whose depth is as the breadth of the heavens and earth. It was prepared for those who believed in God and His Messengers. That is the grace of God. He gives it to whom He wills. And God is The Possessor of the Sublime Grace. 
57|22| And no affliction lit on the earth nor on yourselves but it is in a Book that We fashion before. Truly, that is easy for God, 
57|23| so that you not grieve over what slipped away from you nor be glad because of what was given to you. And God loves not any proud, boaster, 
57|24| those who are misers and who command humanity to miserliness, and whoever turns away then, God, He is The Sufficient, The Worthy of Praise. 
57|25| Certainly, We sent Our Messengers with the clear portents and We caused the Book to descend with them and the Balance so that humanity may uphold equity. And We caused iron to descend in which is vigorous might and profits for humanity that perhaps God would know whoever helps Him and His Messengers in the unseen. Truly, God is Strong, Almighty. 
57|26| And, certainly, We sent Noah and Abraham and We assigned to their offspring prophethood and the Book. And of them are ones who are truly guided while many of them are ones who disobey. 
57|27| Again, We sent Our Messengers following their footsteps. And We sent following them Jesus son of Mary. And We gave him the Gospel. And We assigned in the hearts of those who followed him, tenderness and mercy. But as for monasticism, they made it up themselves. We prescribed it not for them but they were so looking for the contentment of God. Then, they gave it not the attention giving its right attention so We gave those who believed among them their compensation. And many of them are ones who disobey. 
57|28| O those who believed! Be Godfearing of God and believe in His Messenger. He will give you a double like part of His mercy. And He assigns you a light to walk by. And He will forgive you. And God is Forgiving, Compassionate. 
57|29| Certainly, the People of the Book know that they have no power over anything of the grace of God and that the grace of God is in the hand of God. He gives it to whomever He wills. And God is Possessor of the Sublime Grace. 
58|1| Surely, God heard the saying of she who disputes with thee about her spouse and she complains to God and God hears conversing between you both. Truly, God is Hearing, Seeing. 
58|2| Those who say to their wives: Be as my mother’s back, they (f) are not their mothers. Their mothers are only those (f) who gave them birth. And, truly, they say that which is unlawful among their sayings and an untruth. And, truly, God is Pardoning, Forgiving. 
58|3| And those who say: Be as my mother’s back, to their wives and again, retract what they said, then, the letting go of a bondsperson before they both touch one another. That is of what you are admonished. And God is Aware of what you do. 
58|4| He who finds not such means then, formal fasting for two successive months before they both touch one another. And for him who is unable to fast, the feeding of sixty needy persons. That is so that you believe in God and His Messenger. And those are the ordinances of God. And for the ones who are ungrateful, a painful punishment. 
58|5| Truly, those who oppose God and His Messenger, they were suppressed as those who before them were suppressed. And, surely, We caused clear portents, signs to descend. For the ones who are ungrateful is a despised punishment 
58|6| on a Day when God will raise them up altogether and tell them of what they did. God counted it while they forgot it. And God is a Witness over everything. 
58|7| Hast thou not considered that God knows whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in and on the earth. There will be no conspiring secretly of three, but He is their fourth nor of five, but He is the sixth, nor of fewer than that nor of more, but He is with them wherever they had been. Again, He will tell them of what they did on the Day of Resurrection. Truly, God is Knowing of everything. 
58|8| Hast thou not considered those who were prohibited from conspiring secretly? Again, they revert to what they were prohibited from and hold secret counsel in sin and deep-seated dislike and in opposition to the Messenger? And when they drew near thee they gave thee greetings with that with which God gives not as a greeting to thee and they say to themselves: Why punishes us not God for what we say? Hell will be enough for them. They will roast in it. Then, miserable will be the Homecoming! 
58|9| O those who believed! When you hold secret counsel, hold not secret counsel in sin and deep-seated dislike and in opposition to the Messenger. But hold secret counsel for virtuous conduct and God-consciousness and be Godfearing of God before Whom you will be assembled. 
58|10| Conspiring secretly is only from Satan that he dishearten those who believed. But he is not one who injures them at all, but with the permission of God. In God let the ones who believe put their trust. 
58|11| O those who believed! When it was said to you: Make ample space in the assemblies, then, make room. God will make room for you. And when it was said: Move up, then, move up. God will exalt those among you who believed and those who were given the knowledge in degrees. And God is Aware of what you do. 
58|12| O those who believed! When you consulted with the Messenger, put charity forward in advance of your conversing privately. That is better for you and purer. But if you find not the means, then, truly, God is Forgiving, Compassionate. 
58|13| Are you apprehensive to put forward charity in advance of your conversing privately? If, then, you accomplish it not, God turned in forgiveness to you. Perform the formal prayer and give the purifying alms and obey God and His Messenger. And God is Aware of what you do. 
58|14| Hast thou considered those who turned in friendship to a folk against whom God was angry? They are not of you, nor are you of them and they swear to a lie while they know. 
58|15| God prepared a severe punishment for them. Truly, they, how evil is what they had been doing! 
58|16| They took their oaths to themselves as a pretext and they barred from the way of God. So for them is a despised punishment. 
58|17| Avails them not their wealth and their children against God at all. Those will be the Companions of the Fire. They are ones who will dwell in it forever. 
58|18| On a Day when God will raise them up altogether, then, they will swear to Him as they swear to you, assuming that they are something. They, they are ones who lie. 
58|19| Satan gained mastery over them, so he caused them to forget the Remembrance of God. Those are of the Party of Satan. Regard the Party of Satan, they will be the ones who are losers. 
58|20| Truly, those who oppose God and His Messenger, those are among the humiliated in spirit. 
58|21| God prescribed: I will prevail, truly, I and My Messengers. Truly, God is Strong, Almighty. 
58|22| Thou wilt not find any folk who believe in God and the Last Day who make friends with whoever opposed God and His Messenger even if they had been their fathers or their sons or their brothers or their kinspeople. Those, He prescribed belief in their hearts, and confirmed them with a Spirit from Himself. And He will cause them to enter Gardens beneath which rivers run as ones who will dwell in them forever. God was well-pleased with them and they were well-pleased with Him. Those are the Party of God. Lo! the Party of God. They are the ones who prosper. 
59|1| Whatever is in the heavens glorified God and whatever is in and on the earth. And He is The Almighty, The Wise. 
59|2| It is He Who drove out those who were ungrateful—among the People of the Book—from their abodes at the first assembling. You thought that they would not go forth. And they thought that they are ones who are secure in their fortresses from God. But God approached them from where they anticipate not. And He hurled alarm into their hearts. They devastate their own houses with their own hands and the hands of the ones who believe. Then, take warning, O those imbued with insight! 
59|3| If God prescribed not banishment for them, He would have punished them in the present. And for them in the world to come would be the punishment of the fire. 
59|4| That is because they make a breach with God and His Messenger. And whoever made a breach with God, then, truly, God is Severe in repayment. 
59|5| Whatever palm trees you severed or left them as ones that arise from their roots, it was with the permission of God and so that He might cover with shame the ones who disobey. 
59|6| And what God gave as spoils of war to His Messenger from them, you spurred not an animal for an expedition, neither any horse nor riding camel, but God gives authority to His Messengers over whomever He wills. And God is Powerful over everything. 
59|7| What God gave to His Messenger as spoils of war from the people of the towns is for God and His Messenger and the possessors of kinship and the orphans and the needy and the traveler of the way so that it be changing not hands between the rich among you. And whatever the Messenger gave you, take it. And refrain yourselves from what he prohibited you. And be Godfearing of God. Truly, God is Severe in repayment. 
59|8| For the poor who were of the ones who emigrate, those who were driven out from their abodes and their property, looking for grace from God and His contentment and they help God and His Messenger, there is also a share. Those, they are the ones who are sincere. 
59|9| And those who took their abodes as dwellings and had belief before them, love them who emigrated to them and they find not in their breasts any need for what the emigrants were given and hold them in greater favor over themselves even though they themselves had been in destitution. And whoever is protected from his own stinginess, then, those, they are the ones who prosper. 
59|10| And those who drew near after them, they say: Our Lord! Forgive us and our brothers/sisters who preceded us in belief and make not in our hearts any grudge against those who believed. Our Lord! Truly, Thou art Gentle, Compassionate. 
59|11| Hast thou not considered those who are ones who are hypocrites? They say to their brothers—those who were ungrateful— among the People of the Book: If you were driven out, we, certainly, will go forth with you and we will never obey anyone against you ever. And if you were fought against, we will, certainly, help you. And God bears witness that they, truly, are ones who lie. 
59|12| Certainly, if they were driven out, they would not go forth with them. And if they were fought against they would not help them. And if they had helped them, they would turn their backs. Again, they would not be helped by them. 
59|13| Truly, you are a more severe fright in their breasts than God. That is because they are a folk who understand not. 
59|14| They fight not against you altogether, but in fortified towns or from behind walls. Their might among themselves is very severe. You would assume them united, but their hearts are diverse. That is because they are a folk who are not reasonable. 
59|15| As the likeness of those who were before them, they experienced the immediate mischief of their affair and for them is a painful punishment. 
59|16| As the likeness of Satan when he said to the human being: Be Ungrateful! Then, when he was ungrateful, Satan said: I am free of thee. I fear God, the Lord of the worlds. 
59|17| The Ultimate End of both of them will be that they be in the fire, ones who will dwell in it forever. And that is the recompense of the ones who are unjust. 
59|18| O those who believed! Be Godfearing of God and let every soul look on what is put forward for tomorrow. And be Godfearing of God. Truly, God is Aware of what you do. 
59|19| And be not like those who forgot God and He caused them to forget themselves. Those, they are the ones who disobey. 
59|20| The Companions of the Fire are not equal to the Companions of the Garden. The Companions of the Garden, they are the ones who are victorious. 
59|21| If We had caused this, the Quran, to descend on a mountain, thou woudst have seen it as that which is humbled, one that is split open from dreading God. And there are the parables that We propound for humanity so that perhaps they will reflect. 
59|22| He is God; there is no god but He, One Who Knows of the unseen and the visible. He is The Merciful, The Compassionate. 
59|23| He is God besides whom there is no god but He, The King, The Holy, The Peaceable, One Who is The Bestower, Preserver, The Almighty, The Compeller, The One Who is The Supreme. Glory be to God above partners they ascribe. 
59|24| He is God, the One Who is Creator, The One Who Fashions, The One Who is The Giver of Form. To Him belongs the Fairer Names. Whatever is in the heavens glorifies Him and whatever is in and on the earth and He is The Almighty, The Wise. 
60|1| O those who believed! Take not My enemies to yourselves and your enemies as protectors, giving a proposal of affection towards them while they were ungrateful for what drew near you of The Truth. They drive out the Messenger and you because you believe in God, your Lord. If you had been going forth struggling in My way and looking for My goodwill, you keep secret affection for them. Yet I am greater in knowledge of what you concealed and what you spoke openly. And whoever accomplishes that among you, surely, he went astray from the right path. 
60|2| If they come upon you, they will be enemies against you. They extend their hands against you and their tongues with evil. And they wished that you be ungrateful. 
60|3| Your blood relations will never profit you nor your children. On the Day of Resurrection, He will distinguish among you. And God is Seeing of what you do. 
60|4| Surely, there had been a fairer, good example for you in Abraham and those with him when they said to their folk: Truly, we are released from obligation to you and whatever you worship other than God. We disbelieved in you. Shown itself between us and between you was enmity and hatred eternally until you believe in One God, but for Abraham saying to his father: Truly, I will ask for forgiveness for thee and I possess not anything for thee before God. Our Lord! In Thee we put our trust and to Thee we were penitent and to Thee is the Homecoming! 
60|5| Our Lord! Make us not be a cause of their pleasure for those who were ungrateful and forgive us. Our Lord; truly, Thou, Thou alone art The Almighty, The Wise. 
60|6| Certainly, there had been a fairer, good example in them for you for whoever had been hoping for God and the Last Day. And whoever turns away, then, truly, God, He is Sufficient, Worthy of Praise. 
60|7| Perhaps God will assign between you and between those to whom you were at enmity with them, affection. And God is Powerful. And God is Forgiving, Compassionate. 
60|8| God prohibits you not from those who fight not against you because of your way of life nor drive you out of your abodes so be good and act justly towards them. Truly, God loves the ones who act justly. 
60|9| God prohibits you only from those who fought against you in your way of life and drove you out of your abodes and were behind expelling you, that you turn to them in friendship. And whoever turns to them in friendship, then, those, they are the ones who are unjust. 
60|10| O those who believed! When the females, ones who believe, drew near to you, ones who emigrate (f), put them (f) to a test. God is greater in knowledge as to their (f) belief. Then, if you knew them (f) as ones who believe (f), return them (f) not to the ones who are ungrateful. They (f) are not allowed to them (m) nor are they (m) lawful for them (f). And give them (m) what they (m) have spent. There is no blame on you that you (m) marry them (f) when you have given them (f) their compensation. And hold back conjugal ties with the ones who are ungrateful and ask for what you (m) spent and let them ask for what they (m) spent. That is the determination of God. He gives judgment among you. And God is Knowing, Wise. 
60|11| And if any slipped away from you of your spouses to the ones who are ungrateful, then, you retaliated and give the like to whose spouses went of what they (m) spent. And be Godfearing of God in Whom you are ones who believe. 
60|12| O Prophet! When drew near thee the females, ones who are believers, to take the pledge of allegiance to thee that they will ascribe nothing as partners with God nor will they steal nor will they commit adultery nor will they kill their children, nor will they approach making false charges to harm another’s reputation that they devise between their (f) hands and their (f) feet, and that they rebel not against thee in anything that is honorable. Then, take their (f) pledge of allegiance and ask forgiveness from God for them (f). Truly, God is Forgiving, Compassionate. 
60|13| O those who believed! Turn not in friendship to a folk against whom God was angry. Surely, they gave up hope for the world to come, just as gave up hope the ones who are ungrateful of the occupants of the graves. 
61|1| Whatever is in the heavens glorified God and whatever is in and on the earth. And He is The Almighty, The Wise. 
61|2| O those who believed! Why say you what you accomplish not? 
61|3| It was most troublesome, repugnant to God that you say what you accomplish not. 
61|4| Truly, God loves those who fight in His way, ranged in rows as if they were a well-compacted structure. 
61|5| And when Moses said to his folk: O my folk! Why malign me while, surely, you know that I am the Messenger of God to you? So when they swerved, God caused their hearts to swerve. And God guides not the folk, the ones who disobey. 
61|6| And when Jesus son of Mary said: O Children of Israel! I am the Messenger of God to you, one who establishes as true what was in advance of me in the Torah and one who gives good tidings of a Messenger to approach after me. His name will be Ahmad. But when he brought about the clear portents to them, they said: This is clear sorcery! 
61|7| And who does greater wrong than he who devised the lie against God while he is being called to submission to God? And God guides not the folk, ones who are unjust. 
61|8| They want to extinguish the light of God with their mouths but God is One Who Fulfills His light even though the ones who are ungrateful disliked it. 
61|9| He it is Who sent His Messenger with guidance and the way of life of The Truth to uplift it over all other ways of life even though the ones who are polytheists disliked it. 
61|10| O those who believed! Shall I point you to a transaction that will rescue you from a painful punishment? 
61|11| You believe in God and His Messenger and struggle in the way of God with your wealth and your lives. That is better for you if you had been knowing. 
61|12| He will forgive you your impieties and cause you to enter into Gardens beneath which rivers run, and into good dwellings in the Gardens of Eden, the winning the sublime triumph. 
61|13| And He gives another thing you love, help is from God and victory in the near future, so give good tidings to the ones who believe. 
61|14| O those who believed! Be helpers of God as Jesus son of Mary said to the disciples: Who are my helpers for God? The disciples said: We are the helpers for God. Then, a section believed of the Children of Israel and a section were ungrateful. So We confirmed those who believed against their enemies. And they became ones who are prominent. 
62|1| Whatever is in the heavens glorifies God and whatever is in and on the earth, The King, The Holy, The Almighty, The Wise. 
62|2| He it is Who raised up among the unlettered a Messenger from among them who recounts His signs to them and makes them pure and teaches them the Book and wisdom even though they had been before certainly, clearly going astray 
62|3| and to others among them who join them not. And He is The Almighty, The Wise. 
62|4| That is the grace of God. He gives it to whom He wills. And God is Possessor of the Sublime Grace. 
62|5| The parable of those who were entrusted with the Torah, and, again, carries it not is as the parable of a donkey who carries writings. Miserable was the parable of a folk who denied the signs of God! And God guides not the folk, the ones who are unjust. 
62|6| Say: O those who became Jews! If you claimed that you are the protectors of God to the exclusion of humanity, then, covet death if you had been ones who are sincere. 
62|7| But they will not covet it ever because of what their hands put forward. And God is Knowing of the ones who are unjust. 
62|8| Say: Truly, the death that you run away from, then, it will be, truly, that which you encounter. Again, you will be returned to the One Who Knows of the unseen and the visible and He will tell you what you had been doing. 
62|9| O those who believed! When the formal prayer was proclaimed on the day of congregation, then, hasten about to the Remembrance of God and forsake trading. That is better for you if you had been knowing. 
62|10| Then, when the formal prayer had ended, disperse through the earth looking for the grace of God. And remember God frequently so that perhaps you will prosper. 
62|11| And when they considered a transaction or a diversion, they broke away toward it, and left thee as one who is standing up. Say: What is with God is better than any diversion or than any transaction. And God is Best of the ones who provide. 
63|1| When the ones who are hypocrites drew near thee. They said: We bear witness that thou art, truly, the Messenger of God. And God knows that thou art, truly, His Messenger and God bears witness that the ones who are hypocrites are ones who lie. 
63|2| They took their oaths to themselves as a pretext. Then, they barred from the way of God. Truly, they, how evil is what they had been doing! 
63|3| That is because they believed and, again, disbelieved, so a seal was set on their hearts so they understand not. 
63|4| When thou hast seen them, their physiques impress thee. And when they speak, thou hast heard their saying. It is as if they had been propped up timber. They assume that every Cry is against them. They are the enemy so beware of them. God took the offensive. How they are misled! 
63|5| And when it was said to them: Approach now. The Messenger of God asks forgiveness for you. They twist their heads and thou hadst seen them dissuading while they are ones who grow arrogant. 
63|6| It is the same to them whether thou hadst asked for forgiveness for them or thou hadst not asked for forgiveness for them. God will never forgive them. Truly, God guides not the folk, the ones who disobey. 
63|7| They are those who say: Spend not on such ones who are with the Messenger of God until they break away. And to God belongs the treasures of the heavens and the earth but the ones who are hypocrites understand not. 
63|8| They say: If we returned to the city, certainly, would drive out the more mighty, the ones humble spirited from it. Yet to God belongs the great glory and to His Messenger and to the ones who believe. But the ones who are hypocrites know not. 
63|9| O those who believed! Let not your wealth divert you nor your children from the Remembrance of God. And whoever accomplishes that, then, those, they are the ones who are losers. 
63|10| And spend of what We provided you before approaches death to any of you. Then, he will say: My Lord! If only Thou wouldst postpone it for a little term then, I would be charitable and be among the ones in accord with morality. 
63|11| But God never postpones it for a soul when its term drew near. And God is Aware of what you do. 
64|1| Whatever is in the heavens glorifies God and whatever is in and on the earth. His is the dominion and to Him belongs all the praise. And He is Powerful over everything. 
64|2| He it is Who created you: So some of you are ones who disbelieve and some of you are ones who believe. And God is Seeing of what you do. 
64|3| He created the heavens and the earth with The Truth and He formed you and formed your forms well. And to Him is the Homecoming! 
64|4| He knows what is in the heavens and the earth and He knows what you keep secret and what you speak openly. And God is Knowing of what is in the breasts. 
64|5| Approaches you not the tiding of those who were ungrateful before? They experienced the mischief of their affair and there is a painful punishment for them. 
64|6| That had been because their Messengers approach them with the clear portents, but they said: Will mortals guide us? So they were ungrateful and turned away. And God is Self-Sufficient. And God is Rich, Worthy of Praise. 
64|7| Those who were ungrateful claimed that they will never be raised up. Say: Yea! By my Lord, you will, certainly, be raised up. Again, you will be told of what you did. And that is easy for God. 
64|8| So believe in God and His Messenger, and in the Light which We caused to descend. And God is Aware of what you do. 
64|9| On a Day when He will amass you for the Day of Gathering, that will be the day of the mutual loss and gain, and whoever believes in God and does as one in accord with morality, He will absolve him of his evil deeds and He will cause him to enter Gardens beneath which rivers run as ones who will dwell in them forever, eternally. That will be winning the sublime triumph. 
64|10| But for those who were ungrateful and denied Our signs, those are the Companions of the Fire, ones who will dwell in it forever. And miserable will be the Homecoming! 
64|11| No affliction lit but with the permission of God. Whoever believes in God, He guides his heart. And God is Knowing of everything. 
64|12| And obey God and obey the Messenger. Then, if you turned away, then, it is only for Our Messenger the delivering the clear message. 
64|13| God, there is no god but He. And in God let the ones who believe put their trust. 
64|14| O those who believed! Truly, there are among your spouses and your children enemies for you, so beware of them. And if you would pardon, overlook and forgive, then, truly, God is Forgiving, Compassionate. 
64|15| Your wealth and your children are only a test. And God, with Him is a sublime compensation. 
64|16| So be Godfearing of God as much as you were able and hear and obey and spend. That is good for yourselves, and whoever is protected from his own stinginess, then, those, they are the ones who prosper. 
64|17| If you lend to God a fairer loan, He will multiply it for you and will forgive you. And God is Ready to Appreciate, Forbearing, 
64|18| One Who Knows the unseen and the visible, The Almighty, The Wise. 
65|1| O Prophet! When you divorced your wives, then, divorce them (f) after their (f) waiting periods and count their (f) waiting periods. And be Godfearing of God, your Lord. And drive them (f) not out from their (f) houses nor let them (f) go forth unless they approach a manifest indecency. These are the ordinances of God. And whoever violates the ordinances of God, then, truly, he did wrong to himself. Thou art not informed so that perhaps God will cause to evoke something after that affair. 
65|2| Then, when they (f) reached their (f) term, either hold them (f) back as one who is honorable or part from them (f) as one who is honorable and call to witnesses from two possessors of justice from among you and perform testimony for God. That is admonished for whomever had been believing in God and the Last Day. And he who is Godfearing of God, He will make a way out for him. 
65|3| And He will provide him with where he not anticipate. And whoever puts his trust in God, then, He will be enough for him. God is One Who Reaches Through His command. Surely, God assigned a measure to everything. 
65|4| And as for those who gave up hope of menstruation among your women, if you were in doubt, their (f) waiting period is three months and for those who have not yet menstruated. As for those (f) who are imbued with pregnancy, their (f) term is that they (f) bring forth their (f) burden. And whoever is Godfearing of God, He will make his affair with ease for him. 
65|5| That is the command of God which He caused to descend to you. And whoever is Godfearing of God, He will absolve him of his evil deeds and will enhance for him a compensation. 
65|6| Cause them (f) to dwell where you inhabited according to what you are able to afford and be not pressing them (f), putting them (f) in straits. And if they (f) had been imbued with pregnancy, then, spend on them (f) until they bring forth their (f) burden. Then, if they (f) breast feed for you, give them (f) their compensation. And each of you take counsel between you as one who is honorable. But if you make difficulties for one another, then, another would breast feed on behalf of the father. 
65|7| The possessor of plenty spends from his plenty. And he whose provisions were measured, he will spend out of what God gave him. And God places not a burden on any person beyond what He gave him. God will make ease after hardship. 
65|8| How many a town defied the command of its Lord and His Messengers, so we made a reckoning, a severe reckoning and We punished it with a horrible punishment. 
65|9| So it experienced the mischief of its affair and the Ultimate End of its affair had been loss. 
65|10| God prepared for them a severe punishment. So be Godfearing of God, O those imbued with intuition, those who believed! Surely, God caused to descend to you a Remembrance, 
65|11| a Messenger who recounts to you the signs of God, ones that are made manifest, that he brings out those who believed and did as the ones in accord with morality from the shadows to the light. And whoever believes in God and does as one in accord with morality, He will cause him to enter into Gardens beneath which rivers run, ones who will dwell in them forever, eternally. Surely, God did good with provision for him. 
65|12| It is God Who created the seven heavens and of the earth, a similar number like them. The command comes forth between them so that perhaps you would know that God is Powerful over everything and that God, truly, enclosed everything in His Knowledge. 
66|1| O Prophet! Why hast thou forbidden what God permitted to thee. Looking for the goodwill of thy spouses? And God is Forgiving, Compassionate. 
66|2| God imposed on you the dissolution of such of your oaths. And God is your Defender. And He is The Knowing, The Wise. 
66|3| And mention when the Prophet confided to one of his spouses a discourse, she, then, told it to another. God disclosed to him of it. He acquainted her with some of it and turned aside some of it. When he told her about it, she said: Who communicated this to thee? He said: The Knowing, The Aware told me. 
66|4| If you two repent to God, the hearts of you both will be bent towards it. And if you helped one another against him, then, truly, God, He is his Defender and Gabriel and ones in accord with morality, the ones who believe. And the angels after that are his sustainers. 
66|5| Perhaps if he divorced you (f), his Lord will cause in exchange for him spouses better than you (f), ones who submit (f) to One God, ones who believe (f), ones who are morally obligated (f), ones who repent, ones who worship (f), ones who are inclined to fasting (f), women previously married and virgins. 
66|6| O those who believed! Protect yourselves and your people from a fire whose fuel is humanity and rocks over which are angels, harsh, severe who rebel not against whatever God commanded them and they accomplish what they are commanded. 
66|7| O those who were ungrateful! Make not excuses this Day. You are only given recompense for what you had been doing. 
66|8| O those who believed! Turn to God for forgiveness remorsefully, faithfully. Perhaps your Lord will absolve you of your evil deeds and cause you to enter into Gardens beneath which rivers run. On the Day God will not cover the Prophet with shame and those who believed with him. Their light will hasten about between them and on their right. They will say: Our Lord! Fulfill for us our light and forgive us. Truly, Thou art Powerful over everything. 
66|9| O Prophet! Struggle against the ones who are ungrateful and the ones who are hypocrites and be thou harsh against them. And their place of shelter will be hell. And miserable will be the Homecoming! 
66|10| God propounded an example for those, ones who are ungrateful like the woman of Noah and the woman of Lot. They both had been beneath two servants of Our servants, ones who are in accord with morality. But they both (f) betrayed them so they avail them not against God at all. And it was said: Enter the fire along with ones who enter. 
66|11| And God propounded an example for those who believed: Behold the woman of Pharaoh; she said: My Lord, build for me near Thee a house in the Garden and deliver Thou me from Pharaoh and his actions and deliver me from the folk, the ones who are unjust. 
66|12| And Mary, the daughter of Imran, who guarded her private parts, so We breathed into it of Our Spirit and she established as true the Words of her Lord and His Books and she had been among the ones who are morally obligated. 
67|1| Blessed be He in whose hands is the dominion and He is Powerful over everything! 
67|2| He Who created death and this life that He try you as to which of you is fairer in action. And He is The Almighty, The Forgiving, 
67|3| Who created the seven heavens one on another? Thou hast not seen any imperfection in the creation of The Merciful. Then, return thy sight! Hast thou seen any flaw? 
67|4| Again, return thy sight twice again and thy sight will turn about to thee, one that is dazzled while it is weary. 
67|5| And, certainly, We made to appear pleasing the lower heaven with lamps and We assigned them things to stone satans. We made ready for them the punishment of the blaze. 
67|6| And for those who were ungrateful to their Lord is the punishment of hell. Miserable will be the Homecoming! 
67|7| When they were cast down into it, they would hear it sighing while it is boiling 
67|8| and about to burst with rage. As often as a unit of them were cast down into it, the ones who are keepers there asked them: Approaches not a warner to you? 
67|9| They will say: Yea! A warner drew near us, but we denied him. And we said: God sent not down anything. You are not but in a great going astray. 
67|10| And they would say: If we had been hearing or are reasonable, we would not have been Companions of the Blaze. 
67|11| And they would acknowledge their impiety. Then, hell for the Companions of the Blaze! 
67|12| Truly, those who dread their Lord in the unseen, for them is forgiveness and a great compensation. 
67|13| Keep your saying secret or publish it, truly, He is Knowing of what is in your breasts. 
67|14| Would He who created not know? And He is The Subtle, The Aware. 
67|15| It is He who made the earth submissive to you, so walk in its tracts and eat of His provision. To Him is the rising. 
67|16| Were you safe from He Who is in the heaven that He will not cause the earth to swallow you up when it spins? 
67|17| Were you safe from He Who is in the heavens that He will not send against you a sand storm? You will know how My warner has been right! 
67|18| And, certainly, those who were before them denied. Then, how horrible had been My reproach! 
67|19| Consider they not the birds above them ones standing in ranks and closing their wings? Nothing holds them back but The Merciful. Truly, He is Seeing of everything. 
67|20| Who is this who would be an army for you to help you other than The Merciful? Truly, ones who are ungrateful are not but in delusion. 
67|21| Or who is this who will provide for you if He held back His provision? Nay! They were resolute, turning in disdain and aversion. 
67|22| Then is whoever walks as one who is prone on his face better guided, or he who walks without fault on a straight path? 
67|23| Say: It is He who caused you to grow and assigned you the ability to hear, sight, and minds. But you give little thanks! 
67|24| Say: It is He who made you numerous on the earth and to Him you will be assembled. 
67|25| And they say: When is this promise if you had been ones who are sincere? 
67|26| Say: The knowledge of this is only with God and I am only a clear warner. 
67|27| But when they saw the punishment nigh, the faces were troubled of those who were ungrateful. And it will be said to them: This is what you had been calling for. 
67|28| Say: Considered you if God would cause me to perish and whoever is with me or had mercy on us, who will grant protection to the ones who are ungrateful from a painful punishment? 
67|29| Say: He is The Merciful. We believed in Him and in Him we put our trust. Then, you will know who he is, one who is clearly gone astray. 
67|30| Say: Considered you? If it came to be in the morning that your water be sinking into the ground, who approaches you with assistance from water springs ? 
68|1| N]n! By the pen and what they inscribe: 
68|2| Thou art not, by the divine blessing of thy Lord, one who is possessed. 
68|3| And, truly, there is for thee certainly, compensation, that which is unfailing. 
68|4| And, truly, thou art of sublime morals. 
68|5| Thou wilt perceive and they will perceive 
68|6| which of you is the one who is demented. 
68|7| Truly, thy Lord, He is greater in knowledge of whoever went astray from His Way and He is greater in knowledge of ones who are truly guided. 
68|8| Then, obey not ones who deny. 
68|9| They wished that thou wouldst compromise with them and they would compromise with thee. 
68|10| But obey thou not every worthless swearer, defamer, 
68|11| one who goes about with slander, slandering, 
68|12| who delays good, a sinful, exceeder of limits, 
68|13| cruel and after that, ignoble, 
68|14| because he had been possessor of wealth and children. 
68|15| When Our signs are recounted to him, he said: Fables of the ancient ones! 
68|16| We will mark him on the snout! 
68|17| Truly, We tried them as We tried the Companions of the Garden when they swore an oath that they would pluck fruit, in that which is happening in the morning. 
68|18| They make no exception by saying if God wills. 
68|19| Then, a visitation from thy Lord visited it while they were ones who sleep, 
68|20| in that which is happening in the morning, it was like a plucked garden! 
68|21| And they called to one another in that which is morning: 
68|22| Set forth in the early morning dawn to your cultivation if you had been ones who pluck fruit. 
68|23| So they set out and they whisper, saying: 
68|24| There will, truly, not enter it today on you any needy person. 
68|25| And they set forth in the early morning, designing, assuming they were ones who have the power. 
68|26| But when they saw it, they said: We are, certainly, ones who go astray! 
68|27| Nay! We are ones who are deprived. 
68|28| The most moderate of them said: Say I not to you: Why glorify you not God? 
68|29| They said: Glory be to God, our Lord! Truly, we had been ones who are unjust. 
68|30| Then, they came forward, some with some others blaming one another. 
68|31| They said: O woe be to us! Truly, we had been ones who are defiant. 
68|32| Perhaps our Lord will cause to exchange for us better than it. Truly, we are ones who quest our Lord. 
68|33| Thus, this is the punishment of this present life, but the punishment of the world to come is greater, if they had been knowing! 
68|34| Truly, for ones who are Godfearing are Gardens of Bliss with their Lord. 
68|35| Will We make ones who submit to God as ones who sin? 
68|36| What is the matter with you? How you give judgment! 
68|37| Or have you a Book by which you study 
68|38| that you will have in it whatever you specify? 
68|39| Or are there oaths from Us, ones that reach through to the Day of Resurrection providing that you will have what you yourselves give as judgment? 
68|40| Ask them, then, which of them will be a guarantor for that. 
68|41| Or have they ones they ascribe as associate with God? Then, let them approach with their ascribed associates if they had been ones who are sincere. 
68|42| On a Day the great calamity will be uncovered and they will be called to prostration, then, they will not be able to do so. 
68|43| Their sight will be that which is humbled. Abasement will come over them and they had before this been called to prostration while they were ones who are healthy. 
68|44| So forsake Me and whoever denies this discourse. We will draw them on gradually from where they know not 
68|45| and I will grant indulgence to them. Truly, My cunning is sure. 
68|46| Or hast thou asked them for a compensation, so that they would be weighed down from something owed? 
68|47| Or have they knowledge of the unseen with them so that they write it down? 
68|48| So be thou patient until the determination of thy Lord and be not like the Companion of the Great Fish when he cried out, one who is suppressed by grief. 
68|49| If a divine blessing not followed him one after another, from His Lord he would be cast forth on the naked shore while he was one who is condemned. 
68|50| But his Lord elected him and made him among the ones in accord with morality. 
68|51| It was almost as if those who were ungrateful looked at thee sternly with their sight when they heard the Remembrance, and they say: He is one who is possessed! 
68|52| And it is, certainly, not but a Remembrance to the worlds. 
69|1| The Reality! 
69|2| What is The Reality? 
69|3| And what would cause thee to recognize what The Reality is? 
69|4| Thamud and Ad denied the Day of Disaster. 
69|5| Then, as for Thamud, they were caused to perish by a storm of thunder and lightning. 
69|6| As for Ad, they were caused to perish by a fierce and roaring, raging wind. 
69|7| It compelled against them for seven uninterrupted nights and eight days so wilt thou see the folk in it laid prostrate as if they had been uprooted fallen down date palm trees? 
69|8| Then, wilt thou see of them any ones who endure? 
69|9| Pharaoh and whoever draw near before him and the ones that are cities overthrown were ones of inequity 
69|10| and they rebelled against the Messenger of their Lord, so He took them with a swelling, taking. 
69|11| When the waters became turbulent, we carried you in that which runs on water, 
69|12| that We make it an admonition for you, and attentive ears would hold onto it. 
69|13| And when the trumpet will be blown with one gust, 
69|14| and the earth and the mountains will be mounted, then, will be ground to powder in one grinding, 
69|15| so on that Day will have come to pass The Reality 
69|16| and the heaven will be split. For on that day they will be as ones who are frail, 
69|17| and the angels will be at its borders. The Throne of thy Lord above them will be carried by eight on that Day. 
69|18| That Day you will be presented. Your private matters will not be hidden. 
69|19| And for him who will be given his book in his right hand he will say: Lo and behold! Recite my book! 
69|20| Truly, I thought that I would be one who encounters my reckoning. 
69|21| And he will have a well-pleasing, pleasant life 
69|22| in a magnificent Garden. 
69|23| Its clusters, that which draws near. 
69|24| Eat and drink wholesomely for what you did in the past, in the days, that which have gone by. 
69|25| But as for him who is given his book to his left he will say: O would that I was not given my book, 
69|26| and that I was not informed of my reckoning! 
69|27| O would that my death had been my expiry! 
69|28| My wealth availed me not. 
69|29| Perished from me is my authority. 
69|30| It will be said: Take him and restrict him. 
69|31| Again, broil him in hellfire 
69|32| and after that in a chain of the length of seventy cubits. So insert him in it. 
69|33| Truly, he had not been believing in God, The Sublime, 
69|34| nor did he urge food for the needy. 
69|35| This day he is not to have any loyal friend here 
69|36| and no food, but foul pus 
69|37| which none eat but ones of inequity. 
69|38| So I swear an oath by what you perceive 
69|39| and what you perceive not. 
69|40| Truly, it is the saying of a generous Messenger, 
69|41| and not the saying of a poet. Little do you believe! 
69|42| Nor is it the saying of a soothsayer. Little do you recollect! 
69|43| It is a sending down from the Lord of the worlds. 
69|44| And if he fabricated against Us some sayings, 
69|45| truly, We would have taken him by the right hand 
69|46| and, again, We would have severed his life-vein. 
69|47| And there is none of you who would be ones who hinder Us from him. 
69|48| And, truly, it is an admonition to ones who are Godfearing. 
69|49| And We well know that there are among you, ones who deny. 
69|50| And, truly, it will be a regret for ones who are ungrateful. 
69|51| And, truly, it is The Truth of certainty. 
69|52| So glorify the Name of thy Lord, The Sublime. 
70|1| One who supplicates asked for a punishment that will fall 
70|2| on the ones who are ungrateful for which there will be no one to avert 
70|3| from God, the Possessor of the Stairways of Ascent. 
70|4| The angels and the Spirit go up to Him on a Day whose measure had been fifty thousand years. 
70|5| So have thou patience with a graceful patience. 
70|6| Truly, they see it as distant, 
70|7| but We see it as near at hand. 
70|8| On a Day the heaven will become as molten copper 
70|9| and the mountains be as wool clusters 
70|10| and no loyal friend will ask a loyal friend, 
70|11| although they are given sight of them. One who sins would wish that he offer for ransom —from the punishment of that day—his children 
70|12| or his companion wife, or his brother 
70|13| or his relatives who gave him refuge, 
70|14| or whoever is on the earth altogether, again, if that would rescue him. 
70|15| No indeed. Truly, it is the furnace of hell 
70|16| removing their scalps, 
70|17| calling whoever drew back and turned away 
70|18| and gathered wealth and amassed. 
70|19| Truly, the human being was created fretful. 
70|20| When the worst afflicted him, he is impatient. 
70|21| And when the good afflicted him, begrudging. 
70|22| But the ones who formally pray, 
70|23| those, they are ones who continue with their formal prayers 
70|24| and those who in their wealth there is a known obligation towards 
70|25| the one who begs and the one who is deprived 
70|26| and those who sincerely validate the Day of Judgment. 
70|27| And those, they are ones who are apprehensive of the punishment of their Lord. 
70|28| Truly, as to the punishment of their Lord, there is no one who is safe from it. 
70|29| Those, they are ones who guard their private parts, 
70|30| but not from their spouses or what their right hands possessed. Truly, they are not ones who will be reproached. 
70|31| But whoever was looking beyond that, those, they are ones who turn away. 
70|32| And those, they who in their trusts and to their compacts are ones who shepherd. 
70|33| And those, they who, giving their testimony, are ones who uphold. 
70|34| And those, they who over their formal prayers are watchful. 
70|35| Those will be in Gardens, ones who are honored. 
70|36| What is with those who were ungrateful—ones who run forward towards thee, eyes fixed in horror, 
70|37| to the right and the left, tied in knots. 
70|38| Is not every man of them desirous of being caused to enter into a Garden of Bliss? 
70|39| No indeed. Truly, We created them out of what they know. 
70|40| So I swear an oath by the Lord of the rising places and the setting places, that We certainly are ones who have power 
70|41| to substitute better for them. And We are not ones who are outrun. 
70|42| So let them engage in idle talk and play until they encounter the Day of theirs that they are promised, 
70|43| the Day when they will go forth swiftly from their tombs as though they had been hurrying to a goal 
70|44| with their sight, that which is humbled. Abasement will come over them. That is the Day which they had been promised. 
71|1| Truly, We sent Noah to his folk saying: Warn thy folk before a painful punishment approaches them. 
71|2| He said: O my folk! Truly, I am a clear warner to you: 
71|3| Worship God and be Godfearing of Him and obey me. 
71|4| He forgives you some of your impieties and postpones for you a term, that which is determined. Truly, when the term of God drew near, it will not be postponed if you had been but knowing. 
71|5| He said: My Lord! Truly, I called to my folk nighttime and daytime, 
71|6| but my supplication increases not but their running away. 
71|7| And, truly, as often as I called to them that Thou wouldst forgive them, they laid their fingertips over their ears and covered themselves with their garments. And they maintained growing arrogant as they grew arrogant. 
71|8| Again, truly, I called to them with openness. 
71|9| Again, I spoke openly to them and confided in them, keeping secret our converse. 
71|10| And I said: Ask for forgiveness of your Lord. Truly, He had been a Forgiver. 
71|11| He sends from heaven abundant rain for you. 
71|12| He will furnish you relief with wealth and children. And He will assign for you Gardens and will assign for you rivers. 
71|13| What is it with you that you hope not for dignity from God? 
71|14| And, surely, He created you in stages? 
71|15| Consider you not how God created the seven heavens, one on another? 
71|16| And how He made the moon in them as a light and how He made the sun as a light-giving lamp? 
71|17| And how God caused you to develop, bringing you forth from the earth. 
71|18| Again, He will cause you to return into it and bring you out in an expelling. 
71|19| And how God made for you the earth as a carpet 
71|20| that you may tread in it ways through ravines. 
71|21| Noah said: My Lord! Truly, they rebelled against me. They followed such a one whose wealth and children increase him not, but in loss. 
71|22| And they planned a magnificent plan. 
71|23| And they said: You will by no means forsake your gods, nor will you forsake Wadd nor Suwa nor Yaghuth nor Yauq nor Nasr. 
71|24| And, truly, they are going much astray. And increase Thou not ones who are unjust but in causing them to go astray. 
71|25| Because of their transgressions, they were drowned and were caused to enter into a fire. And they find not for themselves any helpers other than God. 
71|26| And Noah said: My Lord! Allow not even one on the earth from among the ones who are ungrateful! 
71|27| Truly, Thou, if Thou wert to allow them, they would cause Thy servants to go astray and they will but procreate immoral ingrates. 
71|28| My Lord! Forgive me and ones who are my parents and whoever entered my house as one who believes—the males, ones who believe and the females, ones who believe and increase not the ones who are unjust, but in ruin. 
72|1| Say: It was revealed to me that a group of jinn listened to me. They said: Truly, we heard a wondrous Recitation. 
72|2| It guides to the right judgment, so we believed in it. And we will never ascribe partners with our Lord anyone. 
72|3| Truly, He, exalted be the grandeur of our Lord. He took no companion (f) to Himself, nor a son, 
72|4| and yet a foolish one among us had been saying an outrageous lie about God! 
72|5| But we, truly, thought that the humankind, nor the jinn would ever say a lie about God 
72|6| and that there had been men of humankind who would take refuge with the masculine of the jinn, but they increased them in vileness. 
72|7| And they thought as you thought, that God will never raise up anyone. 
72|8| And we stretched towards the heaven. Then, we found it was filled with stern guards and burning flames. 
72|9| And we had been sitting in positions having the ability to hear. But whoever listens now will find a burning flame and watchers for him. 
72|10| And we were not informed whether the worst was intended for those who are on earth or whether their Lord intended for them right mindedness. 
72|11| There are among us, the ones in accord with morality. And there are among us other than that. We had been of ways differing from one another. 
72|12| And we, truly, thought that we will never be able to weaken God on the earth and we will never weaken Him by flight. 
72|13| So, truly, when we heard the guidance, we believed in it. And whoever believes in his Lord, he will fear neither meagerness nor vileness. 
72|14| And, truly, we are the ones who submit to God. Among us there are the ones who swerve from justice. And whoever submitted to God, then, those sought right mindedness. 
72|15| As for the ones who swerve from justice, they had been as firewood for hell. 
72|16| If they went straight on the way, We would have satiated them with copious water 
72|17| so that We try them in it. But whoever turns aside from the Remembrance of his Lord, He will dispatch him to a rigorous punishment. 
72|18| Truly, the places of prostration belong to God so call not to anyone with God. 
72|19| And, truly, when the servant of God stood up, calling to Him, they be about to swarm upon him. 
72|20| Say: Truly, I call only to my Lord, and I ascribe not as partners with Him anyone. 
72|21| Say: Truly, I possess not the power to hurt nor to bring right mindedness for you. 
72|22| Say: Truly, none would grant me protection from God—not anyone! And I will never find other than Him that which is a haven 
72|23| unless I be delivering messages from God, His messages. And whoever disobeys God and His Messenger, then, for him is the fire of hell, ones who will dwell in it forever, eternally. 
72|24| Until when they saw what they are promised, then, they will know who is weaker of ones who help and fewer in number. 
72|25| Say: I am not informed if what you are promised is near, or if my Lord will assign for it a space of time. 
72|26| He is The One Who Knows of the unseen! And He discloses not the unseen to anyone, 
72|27| but a Messenger with whom He was content. Then, truly, He dispatches in advance of him and from behind him, watchers 
72|28| that He know that they expressed the messages of their Lord. He enclosed whatever is with them and He counted everything with numbers. 
73|1| O thou, the one who is wrapped, 
73|2| stand up during the night, but for a little part, 
73|3| for half of it or reduce it a little. 
73|4| Or increase it and chant the Quran, a good chanting, 
73|5| for We will cast on thee a weighty saying. 
73|6| Truly, one who begins in the night, is when impression is strongest and speech more upright. 
73|7| Truly, for thee in the daytime is a lengthy occupation. 
73|8| And remember thou the Name of thy Lord. And devote thyself to Him with total devotion. 
73|9| The Lord of the East and of the West, there is no god but He. So take Him to thyself as thy Trustee. 
73|10| And have thou patience with regard to what they say and abandon them with a graceful abandoning. 
73|11| Forsake to Me the ones who deny, those imbued with prosperity and respite them for a little. 
73|12| Truly, with Us are shackles and hellfire 
73|13| and food which sticks in the throat and chokes and a painful punishment. 
73|14| On a Day when the earth will quake and the mountains, and the mountains will become a poured forth heap of sand. 
73|15| Truly, We sent you a Messenger, one who bears witness to you, as We sent to Pharaoh a Messenger. 
73|16| But Pharaoh rebelled against the Messenger so We took him a taking remorselessly. 
73|17| How will you fend off a day if you were ungrateful, that will make the children gray haired? 
73|18| The heaven will be that which is split apart from it. His promise had been one that is accomplished. 
73|19| Truly, this is an admonition; so let whoever willed take himself a way to his Lord. 
73|20| Truly, thy Lord knows that thou be standing up for nearly two thirds of the nighttime, or a half of it or a third of it along with a section of those who are with thee. And God ordains the nighttime and the daytime. He knew that you would not be able to keep count of it, so He turned towards you in forgiveness, then recite of the Quran as much as was easy. He knew that some of you are sick and others travel on the earth looking for the grace of God and others fight in the way of God. So recite of it as much as was easy. And perform the formal prayer and give the purifying alms and lend to God a fairer loan. For whatever of good you put forward for your souls, you will find the same with God. It is good and a sublime compensation. And ask God for forgiveness. Truly, God is Forgiving, Compassionate. 
74|1| O thou, the one who wrapped himself in a cloak! 
74|2| Stand up and warn! 
74|3| And magnify thy Lord 
74|4| and purify thy garments 
74|5| and abandon contamination! 
74|6| And reproach not others to acquire more for yourself. 
74|7| And for thy Lord, then, have thou patience. 
74|8| Then, when the horn is sounded, 
74|9| truly, that Day will be a difficult day, 
74|10| and not easy for the ones who are ungrateful. 
74|11| Forsake to Me whom I alone created. 
74|12| I assigned to him the spreading out of wealth 
74|13| and children as ones who bear witness. 
74|14| And I made smooth for him, a making smooth. 
74|15| Again, he is desirous that I increase it. 
74|16| No indeed; he had been stubborn about Our signs. 
74|17| I will constrain him with a hard ascent. 
74|18| Truly, he deliberated and calculated. 
74|19| Then, perdition to him! How he calculated! 
74|20| Again, perdition to him! How he calculated! 
74|21| Again, he looked on 
74|22| and, again, he frowned and scowled. 
74|23| Again, he drew back and grew arrogant. 
74|24| And he said: This is nothing but fabricated old sorcery. 
74|25| This is nothing but the saying of a mortal. 
74|26| I will scorch him in Saqar. 
74|27| And how will thee recognize what Saqar is? 
74|28| It forsakes not nor causes anything to remain, 
74|29| scorching the mortal. 
74|30| Over it there are nineteen. 
74|31| We assigned none but angels to be wardens of the Fire and We made the amount of them not but as a test for those who were ungrateful. So those who were given the Book are reassured and those who believed, add to their belief. And will not doubt those who were given the Book and the ones who believe. And say to those who in their hearts is a sickness and the ones who are ungrateful: What had God wanted by this example? Thus, God causes to go astray whom He wills, and He guides whom He wills. And none knows the armies of thy Lord but He. And it is not other than a reminder for the mortals. 
74|32| No indeed! By the moon 
74|33| and the night when it drew back 
74|34| and polished is the morning. 
74|35| Truly, it is one of the greatest of all things 
74|36| as a warner to the mortals, 
74|37| to whomever willed among you that he go forward or remain behind. 
74|38| Every soul is a pledge for what it earned 
74|39| but the Companions of the Right 
74|40| will be in Gardens and will demand of one another 
74|41| about the ones who sin: 
74|42| What thrust you into Saqar? 
74|43| They would say: We be not among the ones who formally pray 
74|44| and we were not those who feed the needy. 
74|45| And we had been ones who engage in idle talk along with the ones who engage in idle talk. 
74|46| And we had been denying the Day of Judgment 
74|47| until the certainty of the Hour approached us. 
74|48| Then, intercession will not profit them from the ones who are intercessors. 
74|49| Then, what is the matter with them that they are ones who turn aside from the admonition, 
74|50| as though they had been frightened donkeys 
74|51| that ran away from a lion? 
74|52| Nay! Every man among them wants to be given unrolled scrolls. 
74|53| No indeed! Nay! They fear not the world to come. 
74|54| No indeed! Truly, it is an admonition. 
74|55| So let whoever willed, remember it. 
74|56| But they will not remember unless God wills. He is Worthy of God-consciousness and He is Worthy of granting The Forgiveness. 
75|1| I swear an oath by the Day of Resurrection. 
75|2| And I swear an oath by the reproachful soul. 
75|3| Assumes the human being that We will never gather his bones? 
75|4| Yea! We are ones who have power to shape his fingers again. 
75|5| Nay! The human being wants to act immorally in front of him. 
75|6| He asks: When is this Day of Resurrection? 
75|7| But when their sight will be astonished 
75|8| and the moon will cause the earth to be swallowed 
75|9| and the sun and the moon will be gathered, 
75|10| the human being will say on that Day: Where is a place to run away to? 
75|11| No indeed! There is no refuge. 
75|12| With thy Lord on this Day will be thy recourse. 
75|13| The human being will be told on that Day what he put forward and what he postponed. 
75|14| Nay! The human being is clear evidence against himself. 
75|15| And although he would cast his excuses, 
75|16| impel not thy tongue to hasten it. 
75|17| Truly, on Us is his amassing and its Recitation. 
75|18| But when We recited it, follow thou its Recitation. 
75|19| From Us after that is its clear explanation. 
75|20| No indeed! Nay! You love that which hastens away 
75|21| and forsake the world to come. 
75|22| Faces on that Day will be ones that beam, 
75|23| ones that look towards their Lord. 
75|24| And faces on that day will be ones that scowl. 
75|25| Thou will think that against them is wreaked a crushing calamity. 
75|26| No indeed! When it reached the collar bones at death 
75|27| and it was said: Where is one who is a wizard to save me? 
75|28| And he thought it to be his parting 
75|29| and one leg was intertwined with the other leg, 
75|30| that Day he will be driving toward thy Lord 
75|31| for he established not the true nor invoked blessings 
75|32| and he denied and turned away. 
75|33| He went to his people again, going arrogantly. 
75|34| Closer to thee! And closer to thee! 
75|35| Again closer to thee! And closer to thee! 
75|36| Assumes the human being that he will be left aimless? 
75|37| Was he not a sperm-drop to be emitted in seminal fluid? 
75|38| Again, he had been a clot and He created him and shaped him. 
75|39| Then, He made of him two pairs, the male and the female. 
75|40| Is not that One Who Has Power over that able to give life to the dead? 
76|1| Approached the human being a long course of time when he will be nothing remembered? 
76|2| Truly, We made the human being of a mingling of seminal fluid that We may test him. So We made him hearing, seeing. 
76|3| Truly, We guided him on the way, whether he be one who is thankful or ungrateful. 
76|4| Truly, We made ready for ones who are ungrateful chains and yokes and a blaze. 
76|5| Truly, the pious will drink from a cup that had been a mixture of camphor, 
76|6| a spring where the servants of God will drink, causing it to gush forth, a great gushing. 
76|7| They live up to their vows and they fear a Day when the worst will be that which flies far and wide. 
76|8| In spite of their love for it, they feed with food one who is needy and the orphan and the prisoner of war saying: 
76|9| We feed you only for the Countenance of God. We want no recompense from you nor any thankfulness. 
76|10| Truly, we fear our Lord on a frowning, inauspicious Day. 
76|11| So God would protect them from worse on that day, and would make them find radiancy and joyfulness. 
76|12| And He will give them recompense for their enduring patiently with a Garden and silk, 
76|13| and ones who are reclining in it on raised benches. In it they will see neither sun nor excessive cold of the moon. 
76|14| And that which draws near them is its shade and clusters of grapes will be subdued, a subduing. 
76|15| And are passed around among them receptacles of silver and goblets that had been of crystal, 
76|16| crystal like silver, and that they calculated a calculating. 
76|17| And they are given to drink in it a cup that had been with a mixture of ginger. 
76|18| There is a spring in it named Salsabil. 
76|19| And ones who are immortal youths will go around them whom, when thou hadst seen them, thou wouldst assume them to be scattered pearls. 
76|20| And when thou hadst seen them, again, thou wilt have seen bliss and a great dominion. 
76|21| Upon them are garments of fine green silk and brocade. And they will be adorned with bracelets of silver. Their Lord will give to drink undefiled drink. 
76|22| Truly, this had been your recompense. What had been that which is your endeavoring. 
76|23| Truly, We sent down to thee the Quran, a sending down successively. 
76|24| So have thou patience for the determination of thy Lord and obey not any one of them, not the ones who are perverted nor the ungrateful. 
76|25| And remember thou the Name of thy Lord at early morning dawn and eventide. 
76|26| And during the night, prostrate thyself to Him and glorify Him a lengthy part of the night. 
76|27| Truly, these are they who love that which hastens away and they forsake a weighty day behind them. 
76|28| We created them and We strengthened their frame. And when We willed, We will substitute their likes with a substitution. 
76|29| Truly, this is an admonition. And whoever willed, he took himself on a way to his Lord. 
76|30| But you will it not unless God wills it. For God had been Knowing, Wise. 
76|31| He causes to enter whom He wills into His mercy. And the ones who are unjust, He prepared for them a painful punishment. 
77|1| By ones who are sent successively, 
77|2| by the storm and raging tempest, 
77|3| by that which causes vegetation to revive, unfolding 
77|4| by the ones who separate a separating 
77|5| by ones who cast a remembrance 
77|6| as excusing or warning, 
77|7| truly, what you are promised will be that which falls. 
77|8| Then, when the stars will be obliterated 
77|9| and when the heaven will be cleaved asunder 
77|10| and when the mountains will be scattered 
77|11| and when the time will be set for the Messengers, 
77|12| for which Day were these appointed? 
77|13| For the Day of Decision. 
77|14| And what would cause thee to recognize what the Day of Decision is? 
77|15| Woe on that Day to the ones who deny! 
77|16| Caused We not the ancient ones to perish? 
77|17| Again, We will pursue the later ones. 
77|18| Thus, We accomplish this with the ones who sin. 
77|19| Woe on that Day to the ones who deny! 
77|20| Create We you not of despicable water? 
77|21| Then, We made it in a secure stopping place 
77|22| for a known measuring? 
77|23| And We measured. How bountiful are the ones who measure! 
77|24| Woe on that day to the ones who deny! 
77|25| Make We not the earth a place of drawing together 
77|26| the living and the lifeless? 
77|27| We made on it soaring, firm mountains. We satiated you with water of the sweetest kind. 
77|28| Woe on that Day to the ones who deny! 
77|29| Set out toward what you had been in it denying. 
77|30| Set out to the shade. It is possessor of three columns, 
77|31| having no shade nor availing you against the flaming! 
77|32| Truly, it will throw up sparks of fire like the palace, 
77|33| as though it was a string of saffron-colored male camels. 
77|34| Woe on that Day to the ones who deny! 
77|35| This Day they will not speak for themselves 
77|36| nor will they be given permission so that they make excuses. 
77|37| Woe on that Day to the ones who deny! 
77|38| This is the Day of Decision; We gathered you and the ancient ones. 
77|39| So if you had been cunning, then, try to outwit Me. 
77|40| Woe on that Day to the ones who deny! 
77|41| Truly, the ones who are Godfearing will be amidst shade and springs 
77|42| and sweet fruit for which they lust: 
77|43| Eat and drink wholesomely for what you had been doing. 
77|44| Truly, We, thus, give recompense to the ones who are doers of good. 
77|45| Woe on that Day to the ones who deny! 
77|46| Eat, take joy for a little. You are ones who sin. 
77|47| Woe on that Day to the ones who deny! 
77|48| When it will be said: Bow down, they bow not down. 
77|49| Woe on that Day to the ones who deny! 
77|50| Then, in which discourse after this will they believe? 
78|1| About what demand you of one another? 
78|2| Of the sublime tiding 
78|3| about which they are ones who are at variance in it? 
78|4| No indeed! Soon they will know. 
78|5| Again, no indeed! Soon they will know. 
78|6| Make We not the earth for a cradling 
78|7| and the mountains as stakes? 
78|8| And We created not you in pairs 
78|9| and We made your sleep as a rest. 
78|10| And We made the nighttime as a garment. 
78|11| And We made the daytime for you to earn a living. 
78|12| And We built over you seven superior ones. 
78|13| And We made a bright, light-giving lamp. 
78|14| And We caused to descend that which are clouds bringing rain, water cascading, 
78|15| with which We bring about grain and plants 
78|16| and luxuriant Gardens. 
78|17| Truly, the Day of Decision would be a time appointed, 
78|18| a Day the trumpet is blown. Then, you approach in units 
78|19| and the heaven will be let loose and will be all doors. 
78|20| And the mountains will be set in motion and will be as vapor. 
78|21| Truly, hell will be on the watch, 
78|22| a destination for the ones who are defiant, 
78|23| one who lingers in expectation in it for many years. 
78|24| They experience in it not any coolness nor any drink, 
78|25| but scalding water and filth, 
78|26| a suitable recompense! 
78|27| Truly, they had been not hoping not for a reckoning 
78|28| and they denied Our signs with a denial. 
78|29| But We counted everything in a Book. 
78|30| Experience it! We will never increase you but in punishment. 
78|31| Truly, for the ones who are Godfearing, there is a place of security, 
78|32| fertile gardens and grapevines, 
78|33| and full breasted maidens of the same age 
78|34| and a cup overflowing. 
78|35| No idle talk will they hear in it nor any denial, 
78|36| a recompense from thy Lord, a gift, a reckoning. 
78|37| from the Lord of the heavens and the earth and of whatever is between them, The Merciful. against Whom they possess no argument. 
78|38| On a Day when the Spirit and the angels will stand up ranged in rows. They will not assert themselves but he to whom the Merciful gave permission and who said what is correct. 
78|39| That is the Day of The Truth; so whoever willed took his Lord to himself as the destination. 
78|40| We warned you of a near punishment on a Day when a man will look on what his hands put forward and the ones who are ungrateful will say: O would that I had been earth dust! 
79|1| By the ones who tear out vehemently, 
79|2| by the ones who draw out a drawing out, 
79|3| by the ones who are swimmers, swimming, 
79|4| the ones who take the lead, taking the lead, 
79|5| by the ones who manage a command, 
79|6| on a Day when the quake quakes, 
79|7| succeeds the one that comes close behind it, 
79|8| hearts beating painfully on that Day, 
79|9| their sight, that which is humble. 
79|10| They say: Will we be restored to our original state 
79|11| when we had been crumbled bones? 
79|12| They said: That is a return again of one who is a loser. 
79|13| Truly, there will be but one scare. 
79|14| That is when they would be the ones awakening. 
79|15| Approached thee the discourse of Moses 
79|16| when his Lord cried out to him in the sanctified valley of Tuwa: 
79|17| Be thou gone to Pharaoh. Truly, he was defiant. 
79|18| And say: Wouldst thou purify thyself? 
79|19| And I will guide thee to thy Lord, then, thou wilt dread Him. 
79|20| And he caused him to see the greater sign. 
79|21| But Pharaoh denied and rebelled. 
79|22| Again, Pharaoh drew back, hastening about. 
79|23| Then, Pharaoh assembled them; then, proclaimed. 
79|24| Then, Pharaoh said: I am your lofty lord. 
79|25| So God took him with an exemplary punishment for the last and for the first. 
79|26| Truly, in that is a lesson for whoever dreads God. 
79|27| Is your constitution harder to create or the heaven which He built? 
79|28| He exalted its vault and shaped it 
79|29| and He made its night dark and brought out its forenoon. 
79|30| And, after that, He spread out the earth. 
79|31| He brought out from it its water and its pasture. 
79|32| And the mountains He set firm, 
79|33| an enjoyment for you and for your flocks. 
79|34| When the Greater Catastrophe would draw near, 
79|35| on that Day the human being will recollect for what he endeavored. 
79|36| Hellfire will be advanced for whoever sees. 
79|37| As for whoever was defiant 
79|38| and held this present life in greater favor, 
79|39| then, truly, hellfire will be the place of shelter! 
79|40| And as for him who feared the Station of his Lord and prohibited desire from his soul, 
79|41| truly, the Garden will be the place of shelter! 
79|42| They ask thee about the Hour. When will it berth? 
79|43| Then, what art thou about that thou remind of it? 
79|44| To thy Lord is the Utmost Boundary of it. 
79|45| And thou art only one who warns to such a one whoever dreads it. 
79|46| It will be as though a Day they see it, they linger not in expectation but an evening or a forenoon. 
80|1| He frowned and turned away 
80|2| that the blind man drew near him. 
80|3| And what will cause thee to recognize so that perhaps he will purify himself 
80|4| or yet recollect and a reminder profit him? 
80|5| But as for he who was self-complacent, 
80|6| then, thou hast attended to him 
80|7| and not upon thee is any blame if he purifies not himself. 
80|8| Yet as for him who drew near to thee, coming eagerly for knowledge 
80|9| and he dreads God, 
80|10| then, thou hast paid no heed to him? 
80|11| No indeed! Truly, this is an admonition. 
80|12| So let whoever willed, remember it 
80|13| in scrolls to be held in esteem, 
80|14| ones that are exalted and ones that are purified 
80|15| by the hands of generous writers 
80|16| and ones who are kindly, generous. 
80|17| Perdition to the human being! How ungrateful he is! 
80|18| From which thing did He create him? 
80|19| He created him from seminal fluid then, ordained that he be. 
80|20| He made the way easy for him again. 
80|21| Again, He caused him to die and be buried. 
80|22| Again, when He willed, He will revive him. 
80|23| No indeed! The human being finishes not what He commanded him. 
80|24| Then, let the human being look on his food— 
80|25| how We, truly, unloosed rain water with a pouring out. 
80|26| Again, We split the earth, a splitting. 
80|27| And We put forth in it grain 
80|28| and grapevines and reeds 
80|29| and olives and date palm trees 
80|30| and dense fertile gardens 
80|31| and sweet fruits and whatever grows on the earth, 
80|32| an enjoyment for you and your flocks. 
80|33| Then, when the blare drew near, 
80|34| that Day a man will run away from his brother 
80|35| and his mother and his father 
80|36| and his companion wife and his children. 
80|37| For every man of them on that Day will be a matter that will preoccupy him. 
80|38| Faces that Day will be ones that are polished, 
80|39| ones who are laugh and ones who rejoice at good tidings. 
80|40| And faces on that Day will be dust-stained. 
80|41| Gloom will come over them. 
80|42| Those, they are the ones who are ungrateful, ones who act immorally. 
81|1| When the sun will be darkened 
81|2| and when the stars plunge down 
81|3| and when the mountains will be set in motion 
81|4| and when the pregnant camels are ignored 
81|5| and when the savage beasts will be assembled together 
81|6| and when the seas are caused to overflow 
81|7| and when the souls will be mated 
81|8| and when the buried infant girl will be asked 
81|9| for which impiety she was slain 
81|10| and when the scrolls will be unfolded 
81|11| and when the heaven is stripped off 
81|12| and when hellfire will be caused to burn fiercely 
81|13| and when the Garden will be brought close, 
81|14| every soul will know to what it was prone. 
81|15| So no! I swear an oath by the stars that recede, 
81|16| by the ones that run, the setting stars 
81|17| and by the night when it swarmed 
81|18| and by the morning, when it sighed, 
81|19| truly, the Quran is a saying from a generous Messenger, 
81|20| possessed of strength, with the Possessor of the Throne, secure, 
81|21| one who is obeyed and, again, trustworthy. 
81|22| And your companion is not one who is possessed. 
81|23| And, certainly, he saw him on the clear horizon. 
81|24| And he is not avaricious for the unseen, 
81|25| nor is it the saying of the accursed Satan. 
81|26| So where are you going? 
81|27| Truly, it is not but a Remembrance to the worlds 
81|28| to whoever among you willed to go straight. 
81|29| But you will not, unless God wills, the Lord of the worlds. 
82|1| When the heaven will be split apart 
82|2| and when the stars will be scattered 
82|3| and when the seas will be caused to gush forth 
82|4| and when the graves will be scattered about 
82|5| every soul would know what it put forward and what it postponed. 
82|6| O human being! What deluded thee as to thy generous Lord, 
82|7| He Who created thee, then, shaped thee in proportion. 
82|8| He composed thee in whichever form He willed. 
82|9| No indeed! Nay! You deny this way of life! 
82|10| And, truly, there are ones who guard over you, 
82|11| ones who are generous scribes. 
82|12| They know whatever you accomplish. 
82|13| Truly, the pious will be in bliss. 
82|14| And, truly, the ones who act immorally will be in hellfire. 
82|15| They will roast on the Day of Judgment. 
82|16| And they will not be of ones who are absent. 
82|17| And what will cause thee to recognize what the Day of Judgment is? 
82|18| Again, what will cause thee to recognize what the Day of Judgment is? 
82|19| It is a Day whereon a soul will not possess anything to avail another soul and the command on that Day will belong to God. 
83|1| Woe be to the ones who give short measure, 
83|2| those who when they measure against humanity obtained full measure. 
83|3| Yet when they wanted to measure for them, or weigh for them, they skimp. 
83|4| Think those not that they will be ones who are raised up 
83|5| on the sublime Day, 
83|6| a Day when humanity will stand up for the Lord of the worlds? 
83|7| No indeed! Truly, the Book of the ones who act immorally is in Sijjin. 
83|8| And what will cause thee to recognize what Sijjin is? 
83|9| It is a written book. 
83|10| Woe on that Day to the ones who deny— 
83|11| those who deny the Day of Judgment! 
83|12| And none denies it but every sinful, exceeder of limits, 
83|13| who, when Our signs are recounted to him, he said: Fables of the ancient ones! 
83|14| No indeed! Nay! Their hearts will be overcome with rust from what they had been earning. 
83|15| No indeed! They will be from their Lord on that Day ones who are alienated. 
83|16| Truly, again, they will be ones who roast in hellfire. 
83|17| Again, it will be said to them after that: This is what you had been denying. 
83|18| No indeed! Truly, the book of the pious is in Illiyyun. 
83|19| And what will cause thee to recognize what Illiyyun is? 
83|20| It is a written book. 
83|21| Bearing witness to it are the ones who are brought near to God. 
83|22| Truly, the pious will be in bliss, 
83|23| on raised benches, looking on. 
83|24| Thou wilt recognize on their faces the radiancy of bliss. 
83|25| They will be given to drink sealed over exquisite wine. 
83|26| Its seal will have the lingering smell of musk. So for that, then, the ones who strive, strive. 
83|27| And the mixture will be of Tasnim, 
83|28| a spring from which will drink the ones who are brought near to it. 
83|29| Truly, those who sinned—at those who believed—had been laughing. 
83|30| And when they passed by them, they would wink at one another, 
83|31| and when they would turn about to their people, they would turn about acting as ones who are unconcerned. 
83|32| And when they saw them, they would say: Truly, these are ones who go astray. 
83|33| They were sent as ones who guard over them. 
83|34| Then, on this Day, those who believed laugh at the ones who are ungrateful, 
83|35| seated on raised benches, they look on. 
83|36| Were the ones who are ungrateful not rewarded for what they had been accomplishing? 
84|1| When the heaven was split open 
84|2| and gave ear to its Lord as it will be justly disposed to do 
84|3| and when the earth stretches out 
84|4| and cast what is in it and voided itself 
84|5| and gave ear to its Lord as it will be justly disposed to do, 
84|6| O human being! Truly, thou art one who is laboring towards thy Lord laboriously and thou wilt be one who encounters Him. 
84|7| And as for him who will be given his book in his right hand, 
84|8| then, he will be made a reckoning, an easy reckoning, 
84|9| and will turn about to his people as one who is joyous. 
84|10| But for whoever will be given his book behind his back, 
84|11| he will call for damnation 
84|12| and roast in a blaze. 
84|13| He had been one who is joyous with his people. 
84|14| Truly, he thought he would never retreat. 
84|15| Yea! Truly, his Lord had been seeing him. 
84|16| So no! I swear an oath by the twilight 
84|17| and by the night and whatever it enveloped 
84|18| and by the moon when it was full 
84|19| that you will, truly, ride plane after plane. 
84|20| Then, what is for them who believe not 
84|21| when the Quran was recited to them, they prostrate not themselves?‡ 
84|22| Nay! Those who were ungrateful deny, 
84|23| but God is greater in knowledge of what they amass. 
84|24| So give them good tidings of a painful punishment. 
84|25| But those who believed and did as the ones in accord with morality, for them is compensation, that which is unfailing. 
85|1| By the heaven possessing the constellations, 
85|2| by the promised Day, 
85|3| by ones who bear witness and ones who are witnessed, 
85|4| the Companions of the Ditch were slain, 
85|5| possessors of the fuel of the fire 
85|6| above which they were ones who sit, 
85|7| as they were, in what they accomplish against the ones who believe, ones who bore witness. 
85|8| And they sought revenge on them only because they believe in God, The Almighty, The Worthy of Praise, 
85|9| Him to whom belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth. And God is Witness over everything. 
85|10| Truly, those who persecuted the males, ones who believe and the females, ones who believe and again repent not after that, for them is the punishment of hell and for them is the punishment of the burning. 
85|11| Truly, those who believed and did as the ones in accord with morality, for them will be Gardens beneath which rivers run. That will be the Great Triumph. 
85|12| Truly, the seizing by force by thy Lord is severe. 
85|13| Truly, He causes to begin and He causes to return. 
85|14| And He is The Forgiving, The Loving, 
85|15| the Possessor of the Glorious Throne 
85|16| Achiever of what He wants. 
85|17| Approached thee the discourse of the armies 
85|18| of Pharaoh and of Thamud? 
85|19| Nay! Those who were ungrateful are belying 
85|20| and God is One Who Encloses them from behind. 
85|21| Nay! It is a glorious Recitation 
85|22| inscribed on the Guarded Tablet. 
86|1| By the heaven and the night visitor, 
86|2| what will cause thee to recognize what the night visitor is? 
86|3| It is the piercing star. 
86|4| Truly, every soul has one who guards it. 
86|5| So let the human being look on of what he was created. 
86|6| He was created of water, that which gushes forth, 
86|7| going forth from between the loins and the breast bone. 
86|8| Truly, He, in returning him, certainly is One Who Has Power. 
86|9| On a Day all secret thoughts will be tried, 
86|10| then, there will not be for him any strength nor one who helps. 
86|11| By the heaven possessing the returning 
86|12| and by the earth splitting with verdure, 
86|13| truly, the Quran is a decisive saying 
86|14| and it is not for mirth. 
86|15| Truly, they are strategizing a strategy. 
86|16| And I am strategizing a strategy. 
86|17| So respite the ones who are ungrateful! Grant thou them a delay for a while. 
87|1| Glorify the Name of thy Lord, The Lofty 
87|2| Who created and shaped 
87|3| and who ordained and, then, guided 
87|4| and who brought out the pasture 
87|5| then, made it dark colored refuse. 
87|6| We will make thee recite and thou wilt not forget 
87|7| but what God willed. Truly, He knows the openly published and whatever is hidden. 
87|8| And We will make easy for thee an easing. 
87|9| So remind if a reminder profited them. 
87|10| Whoever dreads God will recollect, 
87|11| but the disappointed will scorn it— 
87|12| even he who will roast in the great fire, 
87|13| again, neither dying in it nor living. 
87|14| He, surely, prospered, he who purified himself, 
87|15| and remembered the Name of his Lord and invoked blessings. 
87|16| Nay! You hold this present life in greater favor, 
87|17| yet the world to come is better, and one that endures. 
87|18| Truly, this is in the previous scrolls, 
87|19| the scrolls of Abraham and Moses. 
88|1| Approached thee the discourse of the Overwhelming Event? 
88|2| Faces on that Day will be ones that are humbled, 
88|3| ones that work and ones that are fatigued, 
88|4| roasting in a hot fire. 
88|5| They will be given to drink from boiling receptacles. 
88|6| Is it not that there is no food for them but a thorny fruit. 
88|7| It will not fatten nor will it avail hunger. 
88|8| Faces on that Day will be ones that are pleasant, 
88|9| ones who are well-pleased by their endeavoring 
88|10| in a magnificent Garden. 
88|11| They will hear no babble in it. 
88|12| In it is a running spring. 
88|13| In it are exalted couches 
88|14| and goblets that are set down 
88|15| and cushions arrayed 
88|16| and rugs, ones that are dispersed. 
88|17| Will they not, then, look on the camel, how it was created? 
88|18| And of the heaven, how it was lifted up? 
88|19| And the mountains, how they were hoisted up? 
88|20| And the earth, how it was stretched out? 
88|21| Then, remind for thou art only one who reminds. 
88|22| Thou art not over them one who is a register of their deeds. 
88|23| But whoever turned away and is one who is ungrateful, 
88|24| God will punish him with the greater punishment. 
88|25| Truly, to Us is their reversion. 
88|26| Again, truly, on Us is their reckoning. 
89|1| By the dawn 
89|2| and the ten nights, 
89|3| by the even number and the odd number 
89|4| and at night when it sets out. 
89|5| Is there not in that an oath to be sworn for a possessor of intelligence? 
89|6| Hast thou not considered how thy Lord accomplished with Ad, 
89|7| with Iram of the pillars 
89|8| of which are not created the likes in the land? 
89|9| And with Thamud, those who hollowed out the rocks in the valley? 
89|10| And with Pharaoh, the possessor of the stakes, 
89|11| those who were defiant in the land 
89|12| and made much corruption in it? 
89|13| So thy Lord unloosed on them a scourge of punishment. 
89|14| Truly, thy Lord is, surely, on the watch. 
89|15| Then, as for the human being, when his Lord tested him and honored him and lauded him, he says: My Lord honored me. 
89|16| But whenever He tested him and constricted his provision for him, he says: My Lord despised me. 
89|17| No indeed! Nay! You honor not the orphan 
89|18| and you encouraged not one another about food for the needy 
89|19| and you consume the inheritance, a greedy consuming, 
89|20| and you love wealth with an ardent cherishing. 
89|21| No indeed! When the earth will be ground to powder, ground to powder, ground to powder, 
89|22| and thy Lord will draw near, and the angels, ranged in rows, 
89|23| on the Day hell is brought about. On that Day the human being will recollect. And how will the reminder be for him? 
89|24| He will say: O would that I had put forward from this life for the world to come! 
89|25| Then, on that Day, He will punish no one the like of His punishment. 
89|26| And no one will bind as His restraints. 
89|27| O soul, one that is at peace! 
89|28| Return to thy Lord, one that is well-pleasing, well-pleased: 
89|29| Enter thou among My servants 
89|30| and thou enter My Garden! 
90|1| I swear an oath by this land 
90|2| thou art allowed in this land 
90|3| and by ones who are your parents and what is procreated, 
90|4| truly, We created the human being in trouble. 
90|5| Assumes he that none has power over him? 
90|6| He says: I have caused abundant wealth to perish. 
90|7| Assumes he that none sees him? 
90|8| Make we not two eyes for him 
90|9| and a tongue and two lips 
90|10| and guided him to the two open highways? 
90|11| Yet he rushed not onto the steep ascent. 
90|12| What will cause thee to recognize what the steep ascent is? 
90|13| It is the liberating of a bondsperson 
90|14| or feeding on a day possessing famine 
90|15| an orphan, possessor of kinship, 
90|16| or a needy, possessor of misery. 
90|17| Again, it had been among those who believed and counseled one another to having patience and counseled one another to clemency. 
90|18| Those will be the Companions of the Right. 
90|19| But they who were ungrateful for Our signs they will be the Companions of the Left 
90|20| and over them will be fire, that which is closing in. 
91|1| By the sun and its forenoon 
91|2| and by the moon when it related to it 
91|3| and by the daytime when it displayed it 
91|4| and by the nighttime when it overcomes it 
91|5| and by the heaven and what built it 
91|6| and by the earth and what widened it 
91|7| and by the soul and what shaped it 
91|8| and, then, inspired it to its acting immorally and God-consciousness, 
91|9| he who made it pure prospered. 
91|10| Surely, is frustrated whoever seduced it. 
91|11| Thamud denied because of their overboldness. 
91|12| When the disappointed among them were aroused, 
91|13| and the Messenger of God said to them: Allow watering to the she-camel of God. 
91|14| Then, they denied him; then, they crippled her. So their Lord doomed them for their impiety. 
91|15| Then, He leveled them. And He fears not its Ultimate End. 
92|1| By the nighttime when it overcomes, 
92|2| by the daytime when it self-disclosed, 
92|3| by Him Who created the male and the female, 
92|4| truly, your endeavoring is diverse. 
92|5| As for him who gave and was Godfearing 
92|6| and established the fairer as true, 
92|7| We will make easy for him the easing. 
92|8| And as for him who was a miser and was self-sufficient 
92|9| and denied the fairer, 
92|10| We will make falling into difficulty easy for him. 
92|11| And his wealth will not avail him when he succumbed. 
92|12| Truly, guidance is from Us 
92|13| and, truly, to Us belongs the last and the first. 
92|14| I warned you of a fire that blazes fiercely. 
92|15| It roasts none but the vile 
92|16| who denied and turned away. 
92|17| But the devout will be caused to turn aside from it. 
92|18| He who gives of his wealth to purify himself, 
92|19| and with him there is none for which recompense is expected to be given for divine blessing, 
92|20| but looking for the Countenance of his Lord, The Lofty, 
92|21| he will be well-pleased. 
93|1| By the forenoon 
93|2| and by the night when it brooded, 
93|3| thy Lord deserted thee not, nor is He in hatred of thee. 
93|4| Truly, the last will be better for thee than the first. 
93|5| And thy Lord will give to thee. Then, thou wilt be well-pleased. 
93|6| Found He thee not an orphan and He gave thee refuge? 
93|7| And found He thee one who goes astray, then, He guided thee? 
93|8| And found He thee one who wants, then, He enriched thee? 
93|9| So as for the orphan, oppress him not. 
93|10| And as for one who begs, scold him not. 
93|11| And as for the divine blessing of thy Lord, divulge it! 
94|1| Expand We not thy breast 
94|2| and lifted from thee the heavy loaded burden, 
94|3| that weighed heavily on thy back? 
94|4| Exalted We not thy remembrance? 
94|5| So, truly, with hardship, ease. 
94|6| Truly, with hardship, ease. 
94|7| When thou hadst finished thy duties, then, work on supplication, 
94|8| and quest thy Lord. 
95|1| By the fig and the olive 
95|2| and by Mount Sinai 
95|3| and by this trustworthy land, 
95|4| truly, We have created the human being of the fairer symmetry. 
95|5| Again, We returned him to the lowest of the low. 
95|6| But those who believed and did as the ones in accord with morality, for them is compensation, that which is unfailing. 
95|7| What will cause thee to deny the Judgment after that? 
95|8| Is not God The Most Just of ones who judge? 
96|1| Recite in the Name of thy Lord Who created. 
96|2| He created the human being from a clot. 
96|3| Recite: Thy Lord is the Most Generous, 
96|4| He Who taught by the pen. 
96|5| He taught the human being what he knows not. 
96|6| No indeed! The human being is, truly, defiant. 
96|7| He considered himself self-sufficient. 
96|8| Truly, to thy Lord is the returning. 
96|9| Hast thou thyself considered he who prohibits 
96|10| a servant when he invoked blessings? 
96|11| Hast thou considered if he had been on guidance 
96|12| or commanded God-consciousness? 
96|13| Hast thou considered if he denied and turned away? 
96|14| Knows he not that God sees? 
96|15| No indeed! Truly, if he refrains himself not, We will, surely, lay hold of him by the forelock, 
96|16| a lying, inequitable forelock. 
96|17| And let him call to his conclave. 
96|18| We will call to the guards of hell. 
96|19| No indeed! Truly, obey thou him not but prostrate thyself to God and be near to Him.‡ 
97|1| Truly, We caused it to descend on the night of power. 
97|2| And what will cause thee to recognize what is the night of power? 
97|3| The night of power is better than a thousand months. 
97|4| The angels come forth and the Spirit during it with their Lord’s permission, with every command. 
97|5| Peace it is until the time of the rising dawn. 
98|1| Not would those who were ungrateful from among the People of the Book, nor the ones who are polytheists to be ones who set aside their beliefs until the clear portent approaches them: 
98|2| A Messenger from God, who recounts to them purified scrolls 
98|3| wherein are truth-loving Books. 
98|4| Split up not among themselves those to whom the Book was given until after the clear portent drew near them. 
98|5| They were commanded but to worship God as ones who are sincere and devoted in the way of life to Him, as monotheists and they perform the formal prayer and they give the purifying alms. That is the truth-loving way of life. 
98|6| Truly, those who were ungrateful among the People of the Book and the ones who are polytheists will be in the fire of hell, ones who will dwell in it forever. Those are the worst of creatures. 
98|7| But those who believed and did as the ones in accord with morality, those are the best of creatures. 
98|8| Their recompense is with their Lord—Gardens of Eden, beneath which rivers run, ones who will dwell in them forever, eternally. God was well-pleased with them and they were well-pleased with Him. That is for him who dreaded his Lord. 
99|1| When the earth will be convulsed with a convulsion, 
99|2| and the earth brought out its ladings 
99|3| and the human being said: What is with it? 
99|4| On that Day it will divulge its news 
99|5| for your Lord revealed it. 
99|6| On that Day humanity will issue, separately, that they may be caused to see their actions. 
99|7| And whoever does the weight of an atom of good will see it. 
99|8| And whoever does the weight of an atom of the worst will see it. 
100|1| By the chargers, panting, 
100|2| by ones who strike a fire, striking fire, 
100|3| by the ones who are raiders in the morning, 
100|4| then, they plowed it to a trail of dust, 
100|5| and they penetrated the center with it, a multitude. 
100|6| Truly, the human being is unthankful to his Lord. 
100|7| And, truly, he is a witness to that. 
100|8| And he is more severe in the cherishing of good. 
100|9| Knows he not that when all that is in the graves will be scattered about 
100|10| and will be shown forth what is in the breasts? 
100|11| Truly, their Lord on that Day is Aware of them. 
101|1| The Disaster! 
101|2| What is the Disaster? 
101|3| And what will cause thee to recognize what the Disaster is? 
101|4| On a Day humanity will be like dispersed moths 
101|5| and the mountains will be like plucked wool clusters. 
101|6| Then, for him whose balance was heavy will be 
101|7| one whose life is pleasant, well-pleasing. 
101|8| But he whose balance was made light, 
101|9| his abode of rest will be the pit. 
101|10| What will cause thee to recognize what it is? 
101|11| It is a hot fire. 
102|1| Rivalry diverted you 
102|2| until you stopped by the cemetery. 
102|3| No indeed! You will know! 
102|4| Again, no indeed! You will know! 
102|5| No indeed! If you will know with the knowledge of certainty, 
102|6| you will, certainly, see hellfire. 
102|7| Again, you will see it with the eye of certainty. 
102|8| Again, you will, certainly, be asked on that day about the bliss. 
103|1| By time through the ages, 
103|2| truly, the human being is, surely, in a loss 
103|3| but those who believed and did as the ones in accord with morality, and counseled one another to The Truth, and counseled one another to having patience. 
104|1| Woe to every slandering backbiter 
104|2| who gathered wealth and counted it over and over! 
104|3| He assumes that his wealth made him immortal. 
104|4| No indeed! He will be cast forth into the Crusher. 
104|5| And what will cause thee to recognize what the Crusher is? 
104|6| It is the fire of God, that which is kindled eternally, 
104|7| that peruses the minds, 
104|8| that which will be closing in on them 
104|9| with its pillars, ones that are outstretched. 
105|1| Hast thou not considered what thy Lord accomplished with the Companions of the Elephant? 
105|2| Makes He not their cunning leading to nothing? 
105|3| And He sent upon them flocks of birds, 
105|4| throwing at them rocks of baked clay. 
105|5| Then, made He them like ones who are consumed by stalks of husked grain. 
106|1| For the solidarity of the Quraysh, 
106|2| their solidarity is the winter and the summer travel. 
106|3| Let them worship the Lord of this House 
106|4| Who fed them against hunger and secured them against fear. 
107|1| Hadst thou considered one who denies this way of life? 
107|2| And that is he who drives away with force the orphan 
107|3| and urges not to give food to the needy. 
107|4| So woe to ones who formally pray, 
107|5| ones who are inattentive to their formal prayers, 
107|6| those who make display, 
107|7| yet they repulse giving the assistance. 
108|1| Truly, We gave thee the abundance. 
108|2| So invoke blessings for thy Lord and make sacrifice. 
108|3| Truly, the one who detests thee, he is the one who is cut off. 
109|1| Say: O ones who are ungrateful! 
109|2| I worship not what you worship; 
109|3| and you are not ones who worship what I worship. 
109|4| And I am not one who worships what you worshipped. 
109|5| And you are not ones who worship what I worship. 
109|6| For you is your way of life, and for me is my way of life. 
110|1| When the help of God drew near and the victory 
110|2| and thou hadst seen humanity entering into the way of life of God in units, 
110|3| then, glorify the praise of thy Lord and ask for His forgiveness. Truly, He had been ever The Accepter of Repentance. 
111|1| Ruined were the hands of Abu Lahab and he was ruined. 
111|2| His wealth availed him not nor whatever he earned. 
111|3| He will roast in a fire, possessing flames 
111|4| and his woman, the carrier of firewood, 
111|5| around her long neck is a rope of palm fibers. 
112|1| Say: He is God, One, 
112|2| God, the Everlasting Refuge. 
112|3| He procreated not nor was He procreated 
112|4| and there be not anything comparable with Him. 
113|1| Say: I take refuge with the Lord of Daybreak 
113|2| from the worst of things that He created 
113|3| and from the worst of the darkness of the night when the dark intensified, 
113|4| and from the worst of the women who practice magic, blowing on the knots 
113|5| and from the worst of one who is jealous when jealous. 
114|1| Say: I take refuge with the Lord of humanity, 
114|2| King of humanity, 
114|3| God of humanity, 
114|4| from the worst of the sneaking whisperer of evil 
114|5| who whispers evil in the breasts of humanity, 
114|6| from among the genie and humanity.

{
    "author": "Dr Laleh Bakhtiar",
    "language": "English"
}