1|1| With the name of Allah, the All-Merciful, the Very-Merciful.
1|2| Praise belongs to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds.
1|3| the All-Merciful, the Very Merciful.
1|4| the Master of the Day of Requital.
1|5| You alone do we worship, and from You alone do we seek help.
1|6| Take us on the straight path.
1|7| the path of those on whom You have bestowed Your Grace, not of those who have incurred Your wrath, nor of those who have gone astray.
2|1| Alif. Lam. Mim .
2|2| This Book has no doubt in it - a guidance for the God-fearing,
2|3| who believe in the Unseen, and are steadfast in Salah (prayer), and spend out of what We have provided them;
2|4| and who believe in what has been revealed to you and what has been revealed before you; and they have faith in the Hereafter.
2|5| It is these who are guided by their Lord; and it is just these who are successful.
2|6| Surely for those who have disbelieved, it is all the same whether you warn them or you warn them not: they do not believe.
2|7| Allah has set a seal on their hearts and on their hearing; and on their eyes there is a covering, and for them awaits a mighty punishment.
2|8| And among men there are some who say, .We believe in Allah and in the Last Day., yet they are not believers.
2|9| They try to deceive Allah and those who believe, while they are not deceiving anyone except themselves, although they are unaware of it.
2|10| In their hearts there is a malady, so Allah has made them grow in their malady; and for them there is a grievous punishment, because they have been lying.
2|11| When it is said to them, .Do not spread disorder on the earth., they say, .We are but reformers.
2|12| Beware, it is, in fact, they who spread disorder, but they do not appreciate.
2|13| And when it is said to them, .Believe as people have believed,. they say, .Shall we believe as the fools have believed?. Beware, it is, in fact, they who are the fools, but they do not know.
2|14| When they meet those who believe, they say, .We have entered Faith;. but when they are alone with their satans, they say, .Indeed, we are with you; we were only mocking.
2|15| It is Allah who mocks at them, and lets them go on wandering blindly in their rebellion.
2|16| These are the people who have bought error at the price of guidance; so their trade has brought no gain, nor have they reached the right Path.
2|17| Their situation is like that of a man who kindles a fire, and when it illuminates everything around him, Allah takes away their lights and leaves them in layers of darkness, so that they see nothing.
2|18| Deaf, dumb and blind, they shall not return.
2|19| Or (it is) like a rainstorm from the sky, bringing darkness, thunder and lightning; they thrust their fingers in their ears against the thunderclaps for fear of death, - and Allah encompasses the disbelievers -
2|20| and lightning (all but) snatches away their eyesight; every time a flash gives them light, they walk by it; and when darkness falls upon them, they stand still. And if Allah willed, He would certainly take away their hearing and their eyes: surely Allah is powerful to do anything.
2|21| O people, worship your Lord who created you and those before you, so that you may become God-fearing.
2|22| He is the One who made the earth a bed for you, and the sky a roof, and sent down water from the sky, then brought forth with it fruits, as a provision for you. So, do not set up parallels to Allah when you know.
2|23| If you are in doubt about what We have revealed to Our servant, then bring a Surah similar to this, and do call your supporters other than Allah, if you are true.
2|24| But if you do not – and you will never be able to – then guard yourselves against the Fire, the fuel of which will be men and stones. It has been prepared for disbelievers.
2|25| And give good news to those who believe and do righteous deeds that for them there are gardens beneath which rivers flow. Every time they are given a fruit from there to eat, they will say, .This is what we have been given before.; and they will be given (fruits) resembling one another. And for them there shall be wives purified; and there they will live forever.
2|26| Indeed, Allah does not feel shy in citing any parable, be it that of a gnat or of something above it (in meanness). Now, as for those who believe, they know it is the truth from their Lord; while those who disbelieve say, .What could Allah have meant by this parable?. By this He lets many go astray, and by this He makes many find guidance. But He does not let anyone go astray thereby except those who are sinful
2|27| — those who break the Covenant of Allah after it has been made binding, and cut off the relations Allah has commanded to be joined, and spread disorder on the earth - it is these who are the losers.
2|28| .How is it that you deny Allah, while you were lifeless and He gave you life; then He will make you die, and then He will make you live again, and then to Him you will be returned?
2|29| It is He who created for you all that the earth contains; then He turned to the heavens and made them seven skies — and He is the knower of all things.
2|30| (Remember) when your Lord said to the angels, .I am going to create a deputy on the earth!. They said, .Will You create there one who will spread disorder on the earth and cause bloodshed, while we proclaim Your purity, along with your praise, and sanctify Your name?. He said, .Certainly, I know what you know not.
2|31| And He taught ‘Adam the names, all of them; then presented them before the angels, and said, .Tell me their names, if you are right.
2|32| They said, .To You belongs all purity! We have no knowledge except what You have given us. Surely, You alone are the All-knowing, All- wise.
2|33| He said, .O ‘Adam, tell them the names of all these. When he told them their names, Allah said, .Did I not tell you that I know the secrets of the skies and of the earth, and that I know what you disclose and what you conceal.
2|34| And when We said to the angels: .Prostrate yourselves before ‘Adam!. So, they prostrated themselves, all but Iblis (Satan). He refused, and became one of the infidels.
2|35| And We said, .O ‘Adam, dwell, you and your wife, in Paradise; and eat at pleasure wherever you like, but do not go near this tree, otherwise you will be (counted) among the transgressors.
2|36| Then, Satan caused them to slip from it, and brought them out of where they had been. And We said, .Go down, all of you, some of you the enemies of others; and on the earth there will be for you a dwelling place and enjoyment for a time.
2|37| Then ‘Adam learned certain words (to pray with) from his Lord; so, Allah accepted his repentance. No doubt, He is the Most-Relenting, the Very-Merciful.
2|38| We said, .Go down from here, all of you. Then, should some guidance come to you from Me, those who follow My guidance shall have no fear, nor shall they grieve.
2|39| As for those who disbelieve, and deny Our signs, they are the people of the Fire. They shall dwell in it forever.
2|40| O Children of Isra‘il (the Israelites), remember My blessing that I conferred upon you, and fulfill the covenant with Me, and I shall fulfill your covenant, and have awe of Me alone.
2|41| And have faith in what I have revealed, confirming what is already with you, and do not be the first to deny it, nor take a paltry price for My verses. Fear Me alone.
2|42| and do not confound truth with falsehood, and do not hide the truth when you know (it).
2|43| And be steadfast in Salah (prayer), and pay Zakah, and bow down with those who bow down.
2|44| Do you enjoin righteousness upon others while you ignore your own selves, although you keep reciting the Book? Have you then no sense?
2|45| Seek help through patience and prayer. It is indeed exacting, but not for those who are humble in their hearts,
2|46| who bear in mind that they are to meet their Lord, and that to Him they are to return.
2|47| O Children of Isra‘il (Israel), remember My blessing that I conferred upon you, and that I gave you excellence over the worlds;
2|48| and guard yourselves against a day when no one shall stand for anyone in anything, nor shall intercession be accepted on anyone‘s behalf, nor shall ransom be taken from him, and neither shall any be given support.
2|49| (Remember) when We delivered you from the people of Pharaoh! They had been inflicting on you grievous torment, slaughtering your sons and leaving your women alive. In all that, there was a great trial from your Lord.
2|50| And (recall) when We parted the sea for you; then We saved you, and drowned the people of Pharaoh while you were looking on!
2|51| And when We appointed forty nights for Musa, then you took the calf (as God) thereafter, and you were unjust.
2|52| Yet We pardoned you, even after that, so that you may show gratitude.
2|53| Then We gave Musa the Book and the Criterion (of right and wrong), so that you may find the right path.
2|54| When Musa said to his people: .My people, you have wronged yourselves by your taking the calf (as God). So, turn in repentance to your Creator, and slay yourselves. That will be better for you in the sight of your Creator. Then, He accepted your repentance. Indeed He is the Most- Relenting, the Very-Merciful.
2|55| When you said, .Musa, we will never believe you till we see Allah openly!. So, the thunderbolt took you while you were looking on.
2|56| Then, We raised you up after your death, so that you might show gratitude.
2|57| And We made the cloud give you shade, and sent down to you Mann and Salwa: .Eat of the good things We have provided to you. And they (by their ingratitude) did Us no harm, but were harming only themselves.
2|58| When We said, .Enter this town, and eat to your heart‘s content wherever you wish in it; and enter the gate prostrating yourselves and say: HiTTah (we seek forgiveness), so that We forgive your errors. And We shall give much more to those who do good.
2|59| But those who were unjust substituted another word for the one that was prescribed for them. So, We sent down a scourge from heaven upon those who were unjust, because they had acted sinfully.
2|60| When Musa sought water for his people, We said, .Strike the rock with your staff,. And twelve springs gushed forth from it. Each group of people came to know their drinking place. .Eat and drink of what Allah has provided, and do not go about the earth spreading disorder.
2|61| And when you said, .Musa , we will no longer confine ourselves to a single food: So, pray for us to your Lord that He may bring forth for us of what the earth grows — of its vegetable, its cucumbers, its wheat, its lentils and its onions. He said, .Do you want to take what is inferior in exchange for what is better? Go down to a town, and you will have what you ask for. Then they were stamped with disgrace and misery, and they returned with wrath from Allah. That was because they used to deny the signs of Allah, and would slay the prophets unjustly. That was because they disobeyed and transgressed all limits.
2|62| Surely, those who believed in Allah, and those who are Jews, and Christians, and Sabians, __whosoever believes in Allah and in the Last Day, and does good deeds – all such people will have their reward with their Lord, and there will be no reason for them to fear, nor shall they grieve.
2|63| And when We took the pledge from you, and raised high above you the (Mount of) Tur: .Hold fast to what We have given to you, and remember what is in it, so that you may become God-fearing.
2|64| Then even after that, you turned away. So, had it not been for the grace of Allah upon you, and His mercy, you would have been among the losers.
2|65| Certainly you have knowledge of those among you who transgressed in (the matter of) the Sabbath. We said to them, .Become apes, abased.
2|66| Thus, We made it a deterrent for those around and (those who came) after them — and a lesson for the God-fearing.
2|67| When Musa said to his people, .Allah commands you to slaughter a cow., they said, .Are you making fun of us?. He said, .I seek refuge with Allah from being one of the ignorant.
2|68| They said, .Pray for us to your Lord that He makes it clear to us what sort (of cow) should she be. He said, .He says she should be a cow neither too old, nor too young - of some middle age in between. Now, do what you are being asked to do.
2|69| They said, .Pray for us to your Lord that He makes it clear to us of what colour it should be. He said: .He says that she should be a yellow cow, rich yellow in her colour that should please the onlookers.
2|70| They said, .Pray for us to your Lord that He makes it clear to us of what sort should she be, for this cow has made us confused and, if Allah wills, We shall certainly take the right course.
2|71| He said, .He says that it should be a cow which is not tractable for tilling the soil or in watering the fields, (and it should be) sound and without blemish. They said, .Now, you have come up with the right description. Then they slaughtered her, although it appeared that they would not do it.
2|72| And when you killed a man, and started putting the blame for it on one another, while Allah was to bring forth what you were holding back.
2|73| So, We said, .Strike him with a part of it. This is how Allah revives the dead; and He shows you His signs, so that you may understand.
2|74| When, even after that, your hearts were hardened, as if they were rocks, or still worse in hardness. For surely among the rocks there are some from which rivers gush forth, and there are others that crack open and water flows from them, and there are still others that fall down in fear of Allah. And Allah is not unaware of what you do.
2|75| (O Muslims) do you still fancy that they will believe you, although a group of them used to hear the word of Allah, and then, having understood it, used to distort it knowingly?
2|76| When they meet those who believe, they say, .We believe. But when some of them meet others in private, they say, .Do you tell them (the Muslims) what Allah has disclosed to you so that they may thereby argue against you before your Lord? Will you, then, not use reason?.
2|77| Are they not aware that Allah knows what they conceal and what they reveal?
2|78| And some among them are illiterate who have no knowledge of the Book, but have some fancies and do nothing but conjecture.
2|79| So, woe to those who write the Book with their hands and then say, .This is from Allah., so that they may gain thereby a trifling price. Then, woe to them for what their hands have written, and woe to them for what they earn.
2|80| They say, .The fire shall not touch us for more than a few days. Say, .Have you taken a pledge from Allah, and Allah will not go against His promise? Or, do you say about Allah what you do not know?.
2|81| Why not? Those who commit evil and are besieged by their sins, those are people of the Fire - there they shall live forever.
2|82| As for those who believe, and do good deeds, they are the people of Paradise - there they will live forever.
2|83| (Remember) when We took a pledge from the children of Isra‘il (Israel): .You shall not worship anyone other than Allah; and you shall do good to the parents, and to near of kin, and to orphans and the needy. And say to the people what is good, and be steadfast in Salah (prayer), and pay Zakah . Then, you went back (on your word), all but a few among you, and you are used to turning away.
2|84| When We took a pledge from you: .You shall not shed the blood of one another, and you shall not drive one another out of your homes. Then you agreed, being yourselves the witnesses.
2|85| Yet, here you are, killing one another, and driving a group of your own people out of their homes, supporting each other against them in sin and aggression — and if they come to you as prisoners, you would ransom them, while their very expulsion was unlawful for you! Do you, then, believe in some parts of the Book, and disbelieve in others? So, what can be the punishment of those among you who do that, except disgrace in present life? And, on the Day of Judgement, they shall be turned to the most severe punishment. And Allah is not unaware of what you do.
2|86| Those are the ones who bought the worldly life at the cost of the Hereafter. So, punishment shall not be lightened for them, nor shall they be helped.
2|87| Indeed, We gave Musa the Book, and after him We sent messengers, one following the other; and We gave clear signs to ‘Isa, the son of Maryam (Jesus, the son of Mary), and supported him with the Holy Spirit. Then, how is it that every time a prophet came to you with what does not meet your desires, you grew arrogant? So, you gave the lie to a group (of the messengers) and killed others.
2|88| And they said, .Our hearts are veiled. Rather, Allah has cast damnation upon them for their disbelief. So, they believe just in very little things
2|89| And when there came to them a Book from Allah, which confirms what was with them,__ while earlier, they used to seek help against those who disbelieved, __ yet when there came to them that which they did recognize, they denied it. So the curse of Allah is upon the disbelievers.
2|90| Vile is that for which they have sold out their selves: that they should deny what Allah has revealed, grudging that Allah should send down some of His bounty to whomsoever He wills from among His servants. So, they came out with wrath upon wrath. And for the unbelievers, there is humiliating punishment.
2|91| When it is said to them, .Believe in what Allah has revealed,. they say, .We believe in what has been revealed to us. — and they deny what is beyond it, whereas that is the truth which confirms what is with them. Say, .Why then have you been slaying the prophets of Allah earlier, if you were believers?.
2|92| And certainly Musa came to you with clear signs, then you adopted the calf (as god) after his departure (to the mount of Tur) — and you were transgressors.
2|93| And when We took a pledge from you, and raised high the (mount of) Tur above you: .Hold fast to what We have given you, and listen.! They said, .We have heard and disobeyed. And, on account of their denial, they were soaked with love for the calf in their hearts. Say: .Evil is that which your faith enjoins upon you, if you are believers.
2|94| Say: .If the Last Abode near Allah is purely for you, to the exclusion of all people, then make a wish for death, if you are true.
2|95| But they will never wish for it because of what their hands have sent ahead. Allah is All-Aware of the unjust.
2|96| You shall surely find them the more avid, for life than all other men — even more than the polytheists. Every one of them would love that his life is prolonged for one thousand years. But it will not take him away from punishment that his life is (so) prolonged, and Allah is watchful of what they do.
2|97| Say, if someone is an enemy to Jibra‘il (Gabriel) (it can by no means degrade him for) it is he who has brought it (the Qur‘an) down upon your heart by the permission of Allah, confirming what has been before it, and a guidance and good tidings to the believers.
2|98| If someone is an enemy to Allah, His angels, and His messengers, and to Jibra‘il (Gabriel) and Mika‘il (Michael), then Allah is enemy to the disbelievers.
2|99| And certainly We have revealed to you clear signs. And no one denies them except the sinful.
2|100| Would it always be that every time they enter into a pact, a group from among them should throw it aside? In fact, most of them do not believe.
2|101| And when a messenger from Allah came to them, confirming what was already with them, some from among the people of the Book threw the Book of Allah behind their backs, as if they did not know.
2|102| They followed what the devils used to recite in the reign of Sulaiman (Solomon); and it was not Sulaiman who became an infidel, but the devils did become infidels, teaching people magic, and what had been sent down to the two angels, Harut and Marut, in Babylon. And these two did not teach anyone without first having said (to him), .We are but a trial, so do not go infidel. Then, they used to learn from them that with which they could cause separation between a man and his wife. But they were not to bring harm through it to anyone without the will of Allah.They used to learn what harmed them and did no good to them; and they certainly knew that he who buys it has no share in the Hereafter. And, indeed, vile is the thing for which they sold themselves away. If only they knew!
2|103| And had they accepted the faith, and been God-fearing, the reward from Allah would have always been far better. If only they knew!
2|104| O you who believe, do not say Ra‘ina, but say UnZurna, and listen, as there is a grievous punishment for the unbelievers.
2|105| Those who disbelieve from among the people of the Book and the idolaters do not like that any good should come to you from your Lord. But Allah chooses for His grace whomsoever He wills, and Allah is the Lord of great bounty.
2|106| Whenever We abrogate a verse or cause it to be forgotten, We bring one better than it or one equal to it. Do you not know that Allah is powerful over everything?
2|107| Do you not know that to Allah alone belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth? Other than Allah, you have neither a patron, nor a helper.
2|108| Or, do you rather want to question your Prophet as Musa was questioned earlier? And whoever takes infidelity in exchange for faith has certainly missed the straight path.
2|109| (O Muslims,) many among the people of the Book desire to turn you, after your accepting the faith, back into disbelievers — all out of envy on their part, even after the truth has become clear to them. So, forgive and overlook till Allah brings out His command. Certainly, Allah is powerful over everything.
2|110| And be steadfast in Salah (prayer), and give Zakah. Whatever good you send forth for yourselves, you will find it with Allah. Certainly, Allah is watchful of what you do.
2|111| They say that no one shall ever enter Paradise unless he is a Jew, or a Christian. These are their fancies. Say, .Bring your proof, if you are truthful.
2|112| Of course, whosoever submits his face to Allah, and is good in deeds, will have his reward with his Lord, and there shall be no fear for such people, nor shall they grieve.
2|113| The Jews say: .The Christians have nothing to stand on. and the Christians say .The Jews have nothing to stand on. while they both read the Book! Similarly, those who do not know have said like they (the Jews and the Christians) say. So, Allah will judge between them on the Day of Resurrection in what they used to dispute.
2|114| Who is more cruel than the one who prevents the mosques of Allah from His name being recited therein, and strives for their destruction? It was not for such men to enter them except in awe. For them there is disgrace in this world, and for them there is a mighty punishment in the other world.
2|115| To Allah belongs the East and the West. So, whichever way you turn, there is the Face of Allah. Indeed, Allah is All-Embracing, All-Knowing.
2|116| They say: .Allah has got a son. Pure is He. Instead, to Him belongs all that there is in the heavens and the earth. All stand obedient to Him.
2|117| (He is the) Originator of the heavens and the earth. When He decides a matter, He simply says to it: .Be., and it comes to be.
2|118| Those who do not know say: .Why is it that Allah does not speak to us, nor does a sign come to us?. So spoke those before them as these people do. Their hearts resemble each other. We have indeed made the signs clear for the people who have certitude.
2|119| Surely, We have sent you with the truth, as a bearer of good tidings, and a warner, and you will not be asked about the people of Hell.
2|120| The Jews will never be pleased with you, nor will the Christians, unless you follow their faith. Say: .Guidance of Allah is, indeed, the guidance. Were you to follow their desires despite the knowledge that has come to you, there shall be no friend for you against Allah, nor a helper.
2|121| Those to whom We have given the Book and they recite it observing the rights of its recitation — they are the ones who believe in it. And those who disbelieve in it, they are the losers.
2|122| O children of Isra‘il (Israel), remember My blessing that I conferred upon you, and that I gave you excellence over the worlds.
2|123| And guard yourselves against a day when no one shall stand for anyone for anything, nor shall ransom be accepted from anyone, nor shall intercession be of benefit to him, nor shall any support be given to such people.
2|124| When his Lord put Ibrahim to a test with certain Words, and he fulfilled them, He said, .I am going to make you an Imam for the people.He said, .And from among my progeny?. He replied, .My promise does not extend to the unjust.
2|125| When We made the House (Ka‘bah of Makkah) a frequented place for men, and a place of peace! Make from the Station of Ibrahim a place of prayer. We gave the (following directive) to Ibrahim and Isma‘il (Ishmael): .Purify My House for those who are to circumambulate (make Tawaf) and those who stay in I‘tikaf, and those who bow down or prostrate themselves (in prayers).
2|126| (Recall) when Ibrahim said, .My Lord, make this a city of peace, and provide its people with fruits - those of them who believe in Allah and the Last Day. He (Allah) said, .As for the one who disbelieves, I shall let him enjoy a little, then I shall drag him to the punishment of the Fire. How evil an end it is!
2|127| When Ibrahim was raising up the foundations of the House, along with Isma‘il (Ishmael) (supplicating): .Our Lord accept (this service) from us! Indeed, You - and You alone - are the All-Hearing, the All-Knowing!
2|128| Our Lord, make us both submissive to You, and (make) of our progeny as well, a people submissive to You and show us our ways of Pilgrimage and accept our repentance. Indeed, You - and You alone - are the Most-Relenting, the Very-Merciful.
2|129| And, our Lord, raise in their midst a Messenger from among them, who should recite to them Your verses, and teach them the Book and the wisdom, and cleanse them of all impurities. Indeed You, and You alone, are the All-Mighty, the All-Wise.
2|130| Who can turn away from the faith of Ibrahim except the one who has debased himself in folly? Indeed We have chosen him in this world. And he is certainly among the righteous in the Hereafter.
2|131| When his Lord said to him, .Submit!. He said, .I submit myself to the Lord of all the worlds.
2|132| And Ibrahim exhorted the same to his sons, and so did Ya‘qub (Jacob): .My sons, Allah has certainly chosen for you the Faith. So, let not death overtake you but as Muslims.
2|133| Is it that you were present when death approached Ya‘qub, when he said to his sons: .What will you worship after me.? They said, .We will worship your God and the God of your fathers, Ibrahim, Isma‘il (Ishmael) and IsHaq (Isaac), the one God, and to Him we submit ourselves.
2|134| Those are a people who have passed away. For them is what they earned, and for you is what you earned. Nor shall you be questioned as to what they have been doing.
2|135| They said, .Become Jews or Christians, and you will find the right path. Say: .Instead, (we follow) the faith of Ibrahim, the upright, - and he was not one of those who associate partners with Allah.
2|136| Say (O, Muslims): .We believe in Allah, and in what has been revealed to us, and in what has been revealed to Ibrahim, Isma‘il (Ishmael), IsHaq (Isaac), Ya‘qub and his children, and in what has been given to Musa and ‘Isa (Jesus) and what has been given to the prophets from their Lord: We make no difference between any of them, and to Him we submit ourselves.
2|137| So, if they believe in the same way as you believe, they will have certainly found the right path, and if they turn away, then the fact is that they are in antagonism. Then Allah will suffice you against them, and He is the All-Hearing, the All-Knowing.
2|138| (We dye ourselves with) the colouring of Allah! For who is better in colouring than Allah? We are to worship none but Him.
2|139| Say: .Would you argue with us about Allah, when He is our Lord as well as your Lord? For us our deeds, and for you your deeds! And we are faithful to Him.
2|140| Or, would you say that Ibrahim, Isma‘il, IsHaq, Ya‘qub and their children were Jews or Christians?. Say: .Do you know better or does Allah?. Who can be more unjust than the one who conceals the testimony he has from Allah? Allah is not unaware of what you do.
2|141| Those are a people who have passed away. For them is what they earned, and for you is what you earned, and you shall not be questioned about what they have been doing.
2|142| The foolish among the people will say: .What has turned them away from their Qiblah which they used to observe?. Say: .To Allah belong the East and the West. He guides whom He wills to a straight path.
2|143| In the same way We made you a moderate Ummah (community), so that you should be witnesses over the people, and the Messenger a witness to you. And We did not prescribe the Qiblah which you used to observe except to know the one who follows the Messenger as distinct from the one who turns on his heels. It was burdensome indeed, but not on those whom Allah guided. Allah will not allow your faith go to waste. Certainly Allah is very kind, very merciful to the people.
2|144| We have been seeing you turning your face to the heavens. So, We will certainly assign to you a Qiblah that you would like. Now, turn your face in the direction of the Sacred Mosque (Al-Masjid-ul-Haram), and (O Muslims), wherever you are, turn your faces in its direction. Even those who have been given the Book know well that it is the truth from their Lord, and Allah is not unaware of what they do.
2|145| Even if you bring every sign to those who have been given the Book, they would not follow your Qiblah, and you are not to follow their Qiblah, nor are they to follow each other‘s Qiblah. If you were to follow their desires despite the knowledge that has come to you, you will then certainly be among the unjust.
2|146| Those whom We have given the Book recognize him (the Holy Prophet) as they recognize their own sons. In fact, a group of them conceals the truth, while they know (it).
2|147| The truth is from your Lord. So, never be among those who doubt (it).
2|148| For everyone there is a direction to which he turns his face. Strive, then, to excel each other in good deeds. Wherever you are, Allah will bring you all together. Allah is certainly powerful over everything.
2|149| From wherever you set out, turn your face in the direction of the Sacred Mosque (Al-Masjid-ul-Haram). That, indeed, is the truth from your Lord, and Allah is not unaware of what you do.
2|150| And from wherever you set out, turn your face in the direction of the Sacred Mosque (Al-Masjid-ul-Haram), and (O Muslims), wherever you are, turn your faces in its direction, so that people should have no argument against you, except for those among them who are unjust,__ do not fear them, but fear Me__, and so that I should perfect My blessings upon you, and that you may take the right path.
2|151| As also We have sent in your midst a messenger from among you, who recites to you Our verses, and purifies you, and teaches you the Book and the wisdom, and teaches you what you did not know.
2|152| So Remember Me, and I will remember you, and be thankful to Me, and be not ungrateful to Me.
2|153| O you who believe, seek help through patience and prayer. Surely, Allah is with those who are patient.
2|154| Do not say of those who are slain in the way of Allah that they are dead. Instead, they are alive, but you do not perceive.
2|155| Surely We will test you with a bit of fear and hunger, and loss in wealth and lives and fruits, and give good tidings to the patient.
2|156| who, when a suffering visits them, say: .We certainly belong to Allah, and to Him we are bound to return.
2|157| Those are the ones upon whom there are blessings from their Lord, and mercy as well; and those are the ones who are on the right path.
2|158| Indeed Safa and Marwah are among the marks of Allah. So whoever comes to the House for Hajj or performs ‘Umrah, there is no sin for him if he makes rounds between them; whoever comes up with good on his own, then Allah is Appreciating, All-Knowing.
2|159| Surely, those who conceal the clear signs and the guidance We have revealed, even after We have explained them for people in the Book, upon them Allah casts damnation, and they are cursed by all those who curse.
2|160| Yet, those who repent and correct and declare (what they used to conceal), their repentance is accepted by Me. I am the Most-Relenting, the Most-Merciful.
2|161| Indeed, those who disbelieved and died while they were disbelievers, upon them is the curse of Allah, and of angels, and of all human beings together,
2|162| in a way that they will remain in it forever. Neither the punishment will be lightened for them, nor will they be given respite.
2|163| Your god is one God: There is no god but He, the All-Merciful, the Very-Merciful.
2|164| Surely, in the creation of heavens and earth, and the alternation of night and day, and the ships that sail in the sea, carrying that which benefits men, and in the water Allah sent down from the sky, then revived with it the earth after it was dead, and in every creature He has scattered on it, and in turning of winds, and in the clouds employed to serve between heaven and earth, there are signs for those who have sense.
2|165| Among the people there are some who set up co-gods beside Allah whom they love like the love due to Allah. But those who believe are most firm in their love for Allah. Would that the unjust people could perceive - when they see the torment (i.e. any calamity in this world) - that all power belongs to Allah alone, and that Allah is severe in punishment!
2|166| (Imagine the time) when those who were followed will disown their followers, and they (all) will see the punishment, and the bonds between them will be cut asunder,
2|167| and those who followed will say, .We wish we had another (chance to) return (to the world), so that we may disown them as they had disowned us. Thus Allah will show them that their deeds were (nothing but) causes of remorse for them, and they are not to come out of the Fire.
2|168| O people, eat permissible good things out of what lies in the earth, and do not follow the footsteps of ShaiTan (Satan); indeed, he is an open enemy for you.
2|169| He orders you only to (do) evil and immodest acts, and that you ascribe to Allah what you do not know.
2|170| When it is said to them: .Follow what Allah has sent down,. they say: .Instead, we would follow that (religion) on which we have found our fathers. Is it so, even though their fathers had no understanding at all, nor had they been on the right path?
2|171| The example of (calling) those who disbelieve is such as someone is shouting at an animal that hears nothing but a call and cry. They are deaf, dumb and blind, so they do not understand
2|172| O you who believe, eat of the good things We have provided to you and be grateful to Allah, if it is He whom you worship (in real terms).
2|173| He has only prohibited for you carrion, blood, the flesh of swine and that upon which a name of someone other than ‘Allah‘ has been invoked. Then, whoever is compelled by necessity, neither seeking pleasure nor transgressing, there is no sin on him. Verily, Allah is Most-Forgiving, Very-Merciful.
2|174| Verily, those who conceal the Book Allah has revealed, and earn thereby a small price, they eat nothing into their bellies but fire, and Allah will not speak to them on the Day of Judgment, nor will He purify them, and for them there is painful punishment.
2|175| They are those who have bought the wrong way at the price of the right way, and punishment at the price of pardon. How well they endure the Fire!
2|176| All that is because Allah revealed the Book with the truth. Yet, those who have opted for dissension about the Book are in extreme division (among themselves)
2|177| Righteousness is not (merely) that you turn your faces to the East and the West; but righteousness is that one believes in Allah and the Last Day and the angels and the Book and the Prophets, and gives wealth, despite (his) love for it, to relatives, and to orphans, the helpless, the wayfarer, and to those who ask, and (spends) in (freeing) slaves and observes the Salah (prayers) and pays Zakah___and (the act of) those who fulfill their covenant when they enter into a covenant, and, of course, those who are patient in hardship and suffering and when in battle! Those are the ones who are truthful, and those are the God-fearing.
2|178| O you who believe, QiSaS has been prescribed for you in the case of murdered people: The freeman (will be killed) for the freeman, the slave for the slave, and the female for the female. However, if one is somewhat forgiven by his brother, the recourse (of the latter) is to pursue the former (for blood money) with fairness, and the obligation (of the former) is to pay (it) to the latter in a nice way. That is a relief from your Lord, and a mercy. So, whoever transgresses after all that will have a painful punishment.
2|179| There is life for you in QiSaS, O people of wisdom, so that you may refrain (from killing).
2|180| It is enjoined upon you, when death approaches any one of you and he leaves some wealth, that he must bequeath for the parents and the nearest of kin in the approved manner, being an obligation on the God-fearing.
2|181| Then, whoever changes it after he has heard it, its sin will only be on those who change it. Surely, Allah is All-hearing, All-knowing.
2|182| But, whoever apprehends a mistake (unintentional) or a sin (intentional) from a testator, and puts things right between them, then there is no sin on him. Surely, Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.
2|183| O you who believe, the fasts have been enjoined upon you as they were enjoined upon those before you, so that you may be God-fearing,
2|184| for days few in number. However, should any one of you be sick or on a journey, then (he should fast) a number of other days (equal to the missed ones); and those who have the strength, (still, they do not opt for fasting,) on them there is a fidyah (compensation), that is, the feeding of a poor person. Then whoever does good voluntarily, that is better for him. However, that you fast is better for you, if you only knew.
2|185| The month of Ramadan is the one in which the Qur‘an was revealed as guidance for mankind, and as clear signs that show the right way and distinguish between right and wrong. So those of you who witness the month must fast in it. But the one who is sick, or is on a journey (should fast) as much from other days (as he missed). Allah intends (to provide) ease for you and does not intend (to create) hardship for you. All this is so that you may complete the number (of fasts as prescribed) and proclaim the Takbir of Allah for having guided you, and (so) that you may be grateful.
2|186| When My servants ask you about Me, then (tell them that) I am near. I respond to the call of one when he prays to Me; so they should respond to Me, and have faith in Me, so that they may be on the right path.
2|187| It is made lawful for you, in the nights of fasts, to have sex with your women. They are apparel for you, and you are apparel for them. Allah knows that you have been betraying yourselves, so He relented towards you and pardoned you. So now you can have sexual intimacy with them and seek what Allah has destined for you and eat and drink until the white thread of the dawn becomes distinct from the black thread; then complete the fast up to the night. But do not have sexual intimacy with them while you are staying in mosques for I‘tikaf. These are the limits set by Allah, so do not go near them. Thus Allah manifests His signs to the people, so that they may be God-fearing.
2|188| Do not eat up each other‘s property by false means, nor approach with it the authorities to eat up a portion of the property of the people sinfully, while you know (that you are unjust in doing so).
2|189| They ask you about the new moons. Say: They are indicative of time for the people, and of the Hajj. It is not righteousness that you come into your houses from their backs, but righteousness is that one fears Allah. So come into houses through their doors; and fear Allah so that you may be successful.
2|190| Fight in the way of Allah against those who fight you, and do not transgress. Verily, Allah does not like the transgressors.
2|191| Kill them wherever you find them, and drive them out from where they drove you out, as Fitnah (to create disorder) is more severe than killing. However, do not fight them near Al-Masjid-ul-Haram (the Sacred Mosque in Makkah) unless they fight you there. However, if they fight you (there) you may kill them. Such is the reward of the disbelievers.
2|192| But if they desist, then indeed, Allah is Most-Forgiving, Very- Merciful.
2|193| Fight them until there is no Fitnah any more, and obedience remains for Allah. But, if they desist, then aggression is not allowed except against the transgressors.
2|194| The holy month for the holy month, and the sanctities are subject to retribution. So when anyone commits aggression against you, be aggressive against him in the like manner as he did against you, and fear Allah, and be sure that Allah is with the God-fearing.
2|195| Spend in the way of Allah and do not put yourselves into destruction, and do good. Of course, Allah loves those who do good.
2|196| Accomplish the Hajj and the ‘Umrah for Allah, but if you are restricted, then (sacrifice) whatever animal of offering is available, and do not shave your heads until the offering reaches its place. But if anyone of you is ill, or has some trouble with his scalp, then there is a ransom through fasting or alms giving. And when you are safe, then, whoever avails the advantage of the ‘Umrah along with the Hajj shall make an offering of whatever animal is available. However, any one who finds none shall fast for three days during Hajj, and for seven days when you return; thus they are ten in all. This is for him whose family folk are not residents of Al-Masjid-ul-Haram. Fear Allah and be aware that Allah is severe in punishment.
2|197| The Hajj is (to be performed in) the months that are well-known. So whoever undertakes Hajj in them, there should be no obscenity, no sin, no quarrel in the Hajj. Whatever good you do, Allah will know it. Take provisions along, for the merit of (having) provision is to abstain (from begging), and fear Me, O men of understanding!
2|198| There is no sin on you that you seek the grace of your Lord (by trading). Later, when you flow down from ‘Arafat, recite the name of Allah near Al-Mash‘ar-ul-Haram (the Sacred Monument), and recite His name as He has guided you, while before it, you were among the astray.
2|199| Then flow down from where the people flow, and seek forgiveness from Allah. Certainly Allah is Most-Forgiving, Very-Merciful.
2|200| Once you have fulfilled your modes of worship in Hajj, recite the name of Allah, as you would speak of your forefathers or even with greater fervor. Now among the people there is one who says: .Our Lord, give to us in this world.. and he has no share in the Hereafter.
2|201| Yet there is another among them who says: .Our Lord, give us good in this world and good in the Hereafter, and save us from the punishment of Fire.
2|202| For them there is a share of what they have earned; and Allah is swift at reckoning.
2|203| Recite the name of Allah during the given number of days. Then whoever is early in leaving after two days, there is no sin on him, and whoever leaves later, there is no sin on him, if he is God-fearing. Fear Allah and be sure that you are going to be gathered before Him.
2|204| Among men there is one whose speech, in this life, attracts you; he even makes Allah his witness on what is in his heart, while he is extremely quarrelsome.
2|205| Once he turns back, he moves about in the land trying to spread disorder in it, and to destroy the tillage and the stock; and Allah does not like disorder.
2|206| When it is said to him, .Fear Allah., he is tempted by arrogance to (commit) sin. Hell is then enough for him, and it is indeed an evil bed to rest.
2|207| And among men there is one who sells his very soul to seek the pleasure of Allah, and Allah is Very-Kind to His servants.
2|208| O you who believe, enter Islam completely, and do not follow the footsteps of Satan. Surely, he is an open enemy for you;
2|209| and if you slip, even after clear signs have come to you, then you must know that Allah is Mighty, Wise.
2|210| They are looking for nothing (to accept the truth) but that Allah (Himself) comes upon them in canopies of cloud with angels, and the matter is closed. To Allah shall all matters be returned.
2|211| Ask the Children of Isra‘il (Israel) how many a clear sign We have given to them; and whoever changes the blessing of Allah after it has come to him, then Allah is severe in punishment.
2|212| Adorned is the present life for those who disbelieve, and they laugh at those who believe, while those who fear Allah shall be above them on the Day of Resurrection. Allah gives provision to whom He wills without measure.
2|213| All men used to be a single ‘Ummah (i.e. on a single faith). Then (after they differed in matters of faith), Allah sent prophets carrying good news and warning, and sent down with them the Book with Truth to judge between people in matters of their dispute. But it was no other than those to whom it (the Book) was given who, led by envy against each other, disputed it after the clear signs had come to them. Then Allah, by His will, guided those who believed to the truth over which they disputed; and Allah guides whom He wills to the straight path.
2|214| Do you think that you will enter Paradise while you have not yet been visited by (difficult) circumstances like those that were faced by the people who passed away before you? They were afflicted by hardship and suffering, and were so shaken down that the prophet, and those who believed with him, started saying: .When (will come) the help of Allah?. (Then, they were comforted by the Prophet who said to them) ‘Behold, the help of Allah is near.‘
2|215| They ask you as to what they should spend. Say: .Whatever good you spend should be for parents, kinsmen, orphans, the needy and the wayfarer; and whatever good you do, Allah is all-aware of it.
2|216| Fighting is enjoined upon you, while it is hard on you. It could be that you dislike something, when it is good for you; and it could be that you like something when it is bad for you. Allah knows, and you do not know.
2|217| They ask you about the Sacred Month, that is, about fighting in it. Say, .Fighting in it is something grave, but it is much more grave, in the sight of Allah, to prevent (people) from the path of Allah, to disbelieve in Him, and in Al-Masjid-ul-Haram, and to expel its people from there, and Fitnah (to create disorder) is more grave than killing. They will go on fighting you until they turn you away from your faith if they could, while whoever of you turns away from his faith and dies an infidel, such people are those whose deeds will go to waste in this world and in the Hereafter, and they are people of the Fire. They shall be there forever
2|218| As for those who believed and those who migrated and carried out Jihad in the way of Allah, they hope for Allah‘s mercy: and Allah is Forgiving, Very-Merciful.
2|219| They ask you about wine and gambling. Say, .In both there is great sin, and some benefits for people. And their sin is greater than their benefit. And they ask you as to what they should spend. Say, .The surplus. This is how Allah makes His verses clear to you, so that you may ponder
2|220| on this world and the Hereafter. They ask you about the orphans. Say, .To work for their good is good. And if you live with them jointly, they are, after all, your brethren.; and Allah knows the one who makes mischief, as distinct from the one who promotes good. And if Allah had wished, He would have put you in trouble. Surely, Allah is Mighty, Wise.
2|221| Do not marry the polytheist women, unless they come to believe (in Islam); a Muslim slave-girl is better than a polytheist woman, even though she may attract you; and do not give (your women) in marriage to polytheist men, unless they come to believe; a Muslim slave is better than a polytheist, even though he may attract you. They invite to the Fire when Allah invites, by His will, to Paradise, and to forgiveness. He makes His verses clear to the people, so that they may heed the advice.
2|222| They ask you about menstruation. Say: .It is an impurity. So, keep away from women during menstruation; and do not have intimacy with them until they are cleansed. But when they are cleansed, then go to them from where Allah has commanded you. Surely Allah loves those who are most repenting, and loves those who keep themselves pure.
2|223| Your women are tillage for you to cultivate. So, come to your tillage from where you wish, and advance something for yourselves, and fear Allah, and know that you are to meet Him, and give good news to the believers.
2|224| Do not make (the name of) Allah the subject of your oaths against your doing good, fearing Allah and setting things right between people. Allah is All-Hearing, All-Knowing.
2|225| Allah does not hold you accountable for what is laghw (ineffectual) in your oaths, but He holds you accountable for what your hearts have produced. Allah is Forgiving, Forbearing.
2|226| Those who swear to abstain from their wives have four months of waiting. Therefore, if they revert back, Allah is Most-Forgiving, Very- Merciful,
2|227| and if they resolve to divorce, Allah is All-Hearing, All-Knowing.
2|228| Divorced women shall keep themselves waiting for three periods, and it is not permissible for them to conceal what Allah has created in their wombs, if they believe in Allah and in the Last Day. Their husbands are best entitled to take them back in the meantime, if they want a settlement. Women have rights similar to what they owe in recognized manner though for men there is a step above them. Allah is Mighty, Wise.
2|229| Divorce is twice; then either to retain in all fairness, or to release nicely. It is not lawful for you to take back anything from what you have given them, unless both apprehend that they would not be able to maintain the limits set by Allah. Now, if you apprehend that they would not maintain the limits set by Allah, then, there is no sin on them in what she gives up to secure her release. These are the limits set by Allah. Therefore, do not exceed them. Whosoever exceeds the limits set by Allah, then, those are the transgressors.
2|230| Thereafter, if he divorces her, she shall no longer remain lawful for him unless she marries a man other than him. Should he too divorce her, then there is no sin on them in their returning to each other, if they think they would maintain the limits set by Allah. These are the limits set by Allah that He makes clear to a people who know (that Allah is alone capable of setting these limits).
2|231| When you have divorced women, and they have approached (the end of) their waiting periods, then, either retain them with fairness or release them with fairness. Do not retain them with wrongful intent, resulting in cruelty on your part, and whoever does this, actually wrongs himself. Do not take the verses of Allah in jest, and remember the grace of Allah on you and what He has revealed to you of the Book and the wisdom, giving you good counsel thereby, and fear Allah, and be sure that Allah is the One who knows everything.
2|232| When you have divorced women, and they have reached (the end of) their waiting period, do not prevent them from marrying their husbands when they mutually agree with fairness. Thus the advice is given to everyone of you who believes in Allah and in the Hereafter. This is more pure and clean for you. Allah knows and you do not know.
2|233| Mothers (should) suckle their children for two full years, for one who wants to complete the (period of) suckling. It is the obligation of the one to whom the child belongs that he provides food and clothing for them (the mothers) with fairness. Nobody is obligated beyond his capacity. No mother shall be made to suffer on account of her child, nor the man to whom the child belongs, on account of his child. Likewise responsibility (of suckling) lies on the (one who may become an) heir (of the child). Now, if they want to wean, with mutual consent and consultation, there is no sin on them. And If you want to get your children suckled (by a wet-nurse), there is no sin on you when you pay off what you are to give with fairness, and fear Allah, and be assured that Allah is watchful of what you do.
2|234| Those among you who pass away and leave wives behind, their wives keep themselves waiting for four months and ten days. So, when they have reached (the end of) their waiting period, there is no sin on you in what they do for themselves in recognized manner. Allah is All-Aware of what you do.
2|235| There is no sin on you if you hint as a proposal to the women, or conceal it in your hearts. Allah knows that you will make mention of them. But do not make a promise to them secretly, except that you speak in a recognized manner. Nor resolve upon a contract of marriage until the prescribed time is reached. Be assured that Allah knows what is in your hearts. So, fear Him and be assured that Allah is most Forgiving, Forbearing.
2|236| There is no liability (of dower) on you if you divorce women when you have not yet touched them, nor fixed for them an amount. So, give them mut‘ah (a gift), a rich man according to his means and a poor one according to his means – a benefit in the recognized manner, an obligation on the virtuous.
2|237| If you divorce them before you have touched them, while you have already fixed for them an amount (of dower), then there is one half of what you have fixed, unless they (the women) forgive, or forgives the one in whose hand lies the marriage tie, and it is closer to Taqwa (righteousness) that you forgive, and do not forget to be graceful to one another. Surely, Allah is watchful of what you do.
2|238| Take due care of all the prayers, and the middle prayer, and stand before Allah in total devotion.
2|239| But if you are in fear, then (pray) on foot or riding. But when you are in peace, recite Allah‘s name as He has taught you what you did not know.
2|240| Those among you who pass away and leave wives behind are (commanded) to make a will in favour of their wives to be maintained for one year without being expelled (from husband‘s home). Then, if they move out, there is no sin on you in what they have done for themselves according to the fair practice. Allah is Mighty, Wise.
2|241| The divorced women deserve a benefit according to the fair practice, being an obligation on the God-fearing.
2|242| This is how Allah makes His verses clear to you, so that you may understand.
2|243| Have you not seen those who left their homes, while they were in thousands, to escape death? So, Allah said to them, .Be dead. Then He raised them alive. Surely, Allah is gracious to people, but most of the people are not grateful.
2|244| Fight in the way of Allah, and know that Allah is All-Hearing, All-Knowing.
2|245| Who is the one who would give Allah a good loan so that Allah multiplies it for him many times? Allah withholds and extends, and to Him you are to be returned.
2|246| Did you not see a group from the children of Isra‘il (Israel), after (the time of) Musa when they said to their prophet: .Appoint for us a king, so that we may fight in the way of Allah. He said: .Is it (not) likely, if fighting is enjoined upon you, that you would not fight. They said: .What is wrong with us that we would not fight while we have been driven away from our homes and our sons?. But, when fighting was enjoined upon them, they turned away, except a few of them, and Allah is Aware of the unjust.
2|247| Their prophet said to them: .Allah has appointed Talut as a king for you. They said: .How could he have kingship over us when we are more entitled to the kingship than him? He has not been given affluence in wealth. He said: .Allah has chosen him over you and has increased his stature in knowledge and physique, and Allah gives His kingship to whom He wills. Allah is All-Embracing, All-Knowing.‘
2|248| Their prophet said to them: .The sign of his kingship is that the Ark shall come to you, carried by the angels, having therein tranquillity from your Lord, and the remains of what the House of Musa and the House of Harun (Aaron) had left. Surely, in it there is a sign for you, if you are believers.
2|249| So, when Talut set out along with the troops, he said: .Allah is going to test you by a river, so, whoever drinks from it is not my man, and whoever does not taste it is surely a man of mine, except the one who scoops a little with his hand. Then they drank from it, except a few of them. So, when it (the river) was crossed by him and by those who believed with him, they said: .There is no strength with us today against Jalut and his troops. Said those who believed in their having to meet Allah: .How many small groups have overcome large groups by the will of Allah. Allah is with those who remain patient.
2|250| And when they faced Jalut and his troops, they said: .Our Lord, pour out endurance on us, make firm our feet and help us against the disbelieving people.
2|251| So, they defeated them by the will of Allah, and Dawud (David) killed Jalut, and Allah gave him the kingdom and the wisdom and taught him what He willed. Had Allah not been pushing back some people by means of others, the earth would have been spoiled. But Allah is All-Gracious to all the worlds.
2|252| These are the verses of Allah that We recite to you (O Prophet), with all veracity, and certainly you are among the Messengers.
2|253| Those are the messengers some of whom We have given excellence over some others. Among them there are ones to whom Allah spoke (directly) and He raised some of them steps higher (in other respects), and We gave clear signs to ‘Isa (Jesus), the son of Maryam (Mary) and supported him with the Holy Spirit. If Allah so willed, those succeeding him would have not fought against each other after clear signs had come to them. But they disagreed among themselves. So, there were some who believed and there were some who disbelieved, and if Allah so willed, they would have not fought against each other. But Allah does what He intends
2|254| O you who believe! Spend from what We have given to you before a day comes when there will be no trading, no friendship and no intercession, and it is the disbelievers who are unjust.
2|255| Allah: There is no god but He, the Living, the All-Sustaining. Neither dozing overtakes Him nor sleep. To Him belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is on the earth. Who can intercede with Him without His permission? He knows what is before them and what is behind them; while they encompass nothing of His knowledge, except what He wills. His Kursiyy (Chair) extends to the Heavens and to the Earth, and it does not weary Him to look after them. He is the All-High, the Supreme.
2|256| There is no compulsion in Faith. The correct way has become distinct from the erroneous. Now, whoever rejects the Taghut (the Rebel, the Satan) and believes in Allah has a firm grasp on the strongest ring that never breaks. Allah is All-Hearing, All-Knowing.
2|257| Allah is the Protector of those who believe. He brings them out of the depths of darkness into the light. As for those who disbelieve, their friends are the Rebels. They bring them out from the light into the depths of darkness. Those are people of the Fire. There they will remain forever.
2|258| Do you not know the one who argued with Ibrahim about his Lord, because Allah had given him kingship? When Ibrahim said: .My Lord is the One Who gives life and brings death,. he said: .I give life and I bring death. Said Ibrahim: .Allah brings the sun out from the East; now, you bring it out from the West. Here, baffled was the one who disbelieved, and Allah does not bring the wrongdoers to the right path.
2|259| Or, (do you not know) the example of the one who passed through a town that had collapsed on its roofs. He said: .How shall Allah revive this after it is dead?. So, Allah made him dead for a hundred years, then raised him saying: .How long did you remain (in this state)?. He said: .I remained for a day or part of a day. Said He: .Rather, you remained (dead) for a hundred years. Just look at your food and your drink; it has not spoiled. Now look at your donkey. (We did) this to make you a sign for people! Look at the bones, how We raise them, then dress them with flesh. So, when it was clear to him, he said: .I know that Allah is Powerful over everything.
2|260| (Remember) when Ibrahim said: .My Lord, show me how You give life to the dead. He said: .Is it that you do not believe?‘‘ He said: .Of course, I do, but it is just to make my heart at peace.‘‘ He said: .Then take four birds and tame them to your call, then put on every mountain a part from them, then give them a call, and they shall come to you rushing, and know that Allah is Mighty, Wise.‘‘
2|261| The example of those who spend in the way of Allah is just like a grain that produced seven ears, each ear having a hundred grains, and Allah multiplies (the reward) for whom He wills. Allah is All-Embracing, All-Knowing.
2|262| Those who spend their wealth in the way of Allah, then do not make their spending followed by boasting about favour, or with causing hurt,__ they have their reward with their Lord and there is no fear for them nor shall they grieve.
2|263| A graceful word and forgiving is better than charity followed by causing hurt. Allah is All-Independent, Forbearing.
2|264| O you who believe, do not nullify your acts of charity by boasting about (doing people a) favour and by causing (them) hurt, like the one who spends his wealth to show off before people and does not believe in Allah and in the Last Day. So, his example is like a rock on which there is dust, then a heavy rain came over it and left it barren. They have no ability to gain anything out of what they have done, and Allah does not give guidance to the people who disbelieve.
2|265| The example of those who spend their wealth to seek the pleasure of Allah and to make firm (their faith) from (the depths of) their souls is like a garden on a foothill on which came a heavy rain, and it yielded its produce twofold. Even if a heavy rain does not come to it, a light drizzle is enough, and Allah is watchful of what you do.
2|266| Would any of you wish to have a garden of dates and grapes, with rivers flowing beneath it, in which there are all kinds of fruit for him, and old age befalls him, and he has children who are (too) weak (to earn livelihood), then a whirlwind comes upon it with fire in it, and it is all burnt? This is how Allah makes the signs clear to you, so that you may ponder.
2|267| O you who believe, spend of the good things you have earned, and of what We have brought forth for you from the earth, and do not opt for a bad thing, spending only from it, while you are not going to accept it (if such a thing is offered to you), unless you close your eyes to it, and know well that Allah is All-Independent, Ever-Praised.
2|268| Satan frightens you with poverty, and bids you to commit indecency, and Allah promises you forgiveness from Him, and grace as well. And Allah is All-Embracing, All-Knowing.
2|269| He gives wisdom to whom He wills, and whoever is given wisdom is certainly given a lot of good. Only the people of understanding observe the advice.
2|270| Whatever expenditure you spend and whatever vow you make, Allah knows all of it, and for the unjust, there are no supporters.
2|271| If you make Sadaqat (alms) openly, it is good enough, and if you keep it secret and give it to the needy, it is much better for you, and this will write off part of your sins. Allah is All-Aware of what you do.
2|272| It is not for you to put them on the right path. Rather, Allah puts on the right path whom He wills. Whatever good you spend is for your own selves, and you shall not spend but to seek the pleasure of Allah, and whatever good thing you spend shall be repaid to you in full, and you shall not be wronged.
2|273| (Your charities should be preferably meant) for the needy who are confined in the way of Allah, unable to travel in the land. An ignorant person takes them as free of need because of their abstinence. You know them by their appearance (from begging). They do not beg people importunately, and whatever good thing you spend, Allah is All-Aware of it.
2|274| Those who spend their wealth night and day, secretly and openly,__ they have their reward with their Lord, and there is no fear for them, nor shall they grieve.
2|275| Those who take riba (usury or interest) will not stand but as stands the one whom the demon has driven crazy by his touch. That is because they have said: .Sale is but like riba.‘‘, while Allah has permitted sale, and prohibited riba. So, whoever receives an advice from his Lord and desists (from indulging in riba), then what has passed is allowed for him, and his matter is up to Allah. As for the ones who revert back, those are the people of Fire. There they will remain forever.
2|276| Allah destroys riba and nourishes charities, and Allah does not like any sinful disbeliever.
2|277| Surely those who believe and do good deeds, and establish Salah (prayer) and pay Zakah will have their reward with their Lord, and there is no fear for them, nor shall they grieve.
2|278| O you who believe, fear Allah and give up what still remains of riba, if you are believers.
2|279| But if you do not (give it up), then listen to the declaration of war from Allah and His Messenger. However, If you repent, yours is your principal. Neither wrong, nor be wronged.
2|280| If there is one in misery, then (the creditor should allow) deferment till (his) ease, and that you forgo it as alms is much better for you, if you really know.
2|281| Be fearful of a day when you shall be returned to Allah, then every person shall be paid, in full, what he has earned, and they shall not be wronged.
2|282| O you who believe, when you transact a debt payable at a specified time, put it in writing, and let a scribe write it between you with fairness. A scribe should not refuse to write as Allah has educated him. He, therefore, should write. The one who owes something should get it written, but he must fear Allah, his Lord, and he should not omit anything from it. If the one who owes is feeble-minded or weak or cannot dictate himself, then his guardian should dictate with fairness. Have two witnesses from among your men, and if two men are not there, then one man and two women from those witnesses whom you like, so that if one of the two women errs, the other woman may remind her. The witnesses should not refuse when summoned. And do not be weary of writing it down, along with its due date, no matter whether the debt is small or large. That is more equitable in Allah‘s sight, and more supportive as evidence, and more likely to make you free of doubt. However, if it is a spot transaction you are effecting between yourselves, there is no sin on you, should you not write it. Have witnesses when you transact a sale. Neither a scribe should be made to suffer, nor a witness. If you do (something harmful to them), it is certainly a sin on your part, and fear Allah. Allah educates you, and Allah is All-Knowing in respect of everything.
2|283| If you are on a journey, and find no scribe, then (you may have resort to holding something as) mortgage, taken into possession. However, if one of you trusts the other, then the one who has been trusted should fulfill his trust, and should fear Allah, his Lord. Do not conceal testimony. Whoever conceals it, his heart is surely, sinful. Allah is All-Aware of what you do.
2|284| To Allah belongs what is in the heavens and what is in the earth. If you disclose what is in your hearts or conceal it, Allah shall hold you accountable for it, then He will forgive whom He wills and punish whom He wills. Allah is powerful over everything.
2|285| The Messenger has believed in what has been revealed to him from his Lord, and the believers as well. All have believed in Allah and His angels and His Books and His Messengers. .We make no division between any of His Messengers,. and they have said: .We have listened, and obeyed. Our Lord, (we seek) Your pardon! And to You is the return.
2|286| Allah does not obligate anyone beyond his capacity. For him is what he has earned, and on him what he has incurred. .Our Lord, do not hold us accountable, if we forget or make a mistake, and, Our Lord, do not place on us such a burden as You have placed on those before us, and, Our Lord, do not make us bear a burden for which we have no strength. And pardon us, and grant us forgiveness, and have mercy on us. You are our Lord. So then help us against the disbelieving people.
3|1| Alif. Lam. Mim.
3|2| Allah: There is no god but He, the Alive, the All-Sustaining.
3|3| He has revealed to you the Book with the truth, confirming what has been before it, and has sent down the Torah and the Injil
3|4| earlier to give guidance to mankind, and has sent down the Furqan (the Criterion of right and wrong). Surely, those who have rejected the verses of Allah, for them there is severe punishment. Allah is Mighty, the Lord of Retribution.
3|5| Surely, Allah is such that nothing is hidden from Him, neither in the earth nor in the sky.
3|6| He is the One Who shapes you in the wombs as He likes. There is no god but He, the Mighty, the Wise.
3|7| He is the One who has revealed to you the Book (the Qur‘an). Out of it there are verses that are MuHkamat (of established meaning), which are the principal verses of the Book, and some others are Mutashabihat (whose definite meanings are unknown). Now those who have perversity in their hearts go after such part of it as is mutashabih, seeking (to create) discord, and searching for its interpretation (that meets their desires), while no one knows its interpretation except Allah; and those well-grounded in knowledge say: .We believe therein; all is from our Lord. Only the men of understanding observe the advice.
3|8| .Our Lord, do not let our hearts deviate from the right path after You have given us guidance, and bestow upon us mercy from Your own. Surely, You, and You alone, are the One who bestows in abundance.
3|9| Our Lord, You are going to assemble all the people on a day in (the occurrence of) which there is no doubt. Verily, Allah does not back out of His promise.
3|10| Surely, those who disbelieve, their wealth and their children shall not suffice them in the least against Allah. Those are the fuel of the Fire
3|11| a case similar to that of the House of Pharaoh and those before them. They denied our signs. So, Allah seized them for their sins. Allah is severe in punishment.
3|12| Say to those who disbelieve: .You shall soon be overcome and shall be gathered into Hell. Indeed, it is an evil bed (in which) to rest.
3|13| .There was a sign for you in the two groups who confronted each other: One group fighting in the way of Allah, and the other disbelieving, seeing themselves as twice their number, with open eyes. And Allah gives strength with His help to whomsoever He wills. Indeed, there is a lesson therein for those who have eyes.
3|14| It has been made attractive for people to love the desired things; that is, women, children, hoarded heaps of gold and silver, branded horses, cattle and tillage. That is an enjoyment of the worldly life; but with Allah lies the beauty of the final resort.
3|15| Say: .Shall I tell you what is far better than that? For those who fear (Allah), there are gardens with their Lord, beneath which rivers flow, where they shall live forever, with purified wives, and approval from Allah. Allah is watchful over His servants.
3|16| Those (are the ones) who say: .Our Lord, surely we have believed, so forgive us our sins and save us from the punishment of the Fire,.
3|17| (and those who are) the patient, the truthful and the devout, who spend (in Allah‘s way) and who seek forgiveness in pre-dawn hours.
3|18| Allah bears witness that there is no god but He __ and (so do) the angels and the men of knowledge __ being the One who maintains equity. There is no god but He, the Mighty, the Wise.
3|19| Truly, the (recognized) religion in the sight of Allah is Islam . Those who have been given the Book did not differ (among themselves) until after the knowledge had come to them, (and all this) due to envy against each other. Whoever denies the verses of Allah, then, Allah is swift at reckoning.
3|20| Then, if they argue with you, say: .I have submitted myself to Allah, and (so did) those who have followed me. And say to those who have been given the Book, and to the unlettered: .Do you submit?. If they submit, they will be on the right path. Yet, if they turn back, then you have only to convey the message. Allah is watchful over (all of) His servants.
3|21| Surely, those who reject the verses of Allah and slay the prophets unjustly, and slay those of the people who bid justice, give them ‘the good news‘ of a painful punishment.
3|22| Those are the ones whose deeds have gone to waste in this world and in the Hereafter. For them there are no helpers.
3|23| Did you not observe those who have been given a share from the Book? They are invited to the Book of Allah, so that it may decide between them. Then, a group from them goes back, turning their faces away.
3|24| That is because they have said: .The Fire shall not touch us except for a few days. Thus they are deceived in their faith by what they themselves used to invent.
3|25| Then, how (will it be) when We will gather them together on a day about which there is no doubt, and everybody will be paid in full for what he has earned, and they shall not be wronged?
3|26| Say: .O Allah, O Lord of the Kingdom, You give kingdom to whom You will, and take kingdom away from whom You will; and You bestow honor on whom You will, and bring disgrace to whom You will. In your hand lies the betterment (of everyone). You are surely powerful over everything.
3|27| You make the night enter into the day, and make the day enter into the night; and You bring the living out from the dead, and bring the dead out from the living, and You give to whom You will beyond measure.
3|28| The believers must not take the disbelievers as friends instead of the believers. And whoever does that has no relation with Allah whatsoever, unless you (do so) as a protective measure (in order to) save yourself from them. Allah warns you of Himself, for unto Allah is the return.
3|29| Say: .Whether you conceal what is in your hearts or reveal it, Allah will know it. He knows what is in the heavens and what is in the earth. Allah is powerful over everything.
3|30| On the day when everybody shall find present before him whatever good he did and whatever evil he wrought, he will wish there would have been a wide space between him and that (day). Allah warns you of Himself, and Allah is compassionate to (His) servants.
3|31| Say (O Prophet): .If you really love Allah, then follow me, and Allah shall love you and forgive you your sins. Allah is Most-Forgiving, Very- Merciful.
3|32| Say: .Obey Allah and the Messenger. Then, should they turn back, Allah does not love the disbelievers.
3|33| Verily, Allah has chosen ‘Adam and NuH (Noah) and the House of Ibrahim and the House of ‘Imran over all the worlds
3|34| – a progeny some of whom resembles the others (in faith). Allah is All-Hearing, All-Knowing.
3|35| (Remember) when ‘Imran‘s wife said: .O my Lord, I have vowed that what is in my womb will be devoted exclusively for You. So, accept (it) from me. You, certainly You, are the All-Hearing, the All-Knowing.
3|36| So, when she delivered her, she said: .O my Lord, I have delivered her, a female child.__And Allah knew better what she had delivered, and the male was not like the female ___. I have named her Maryam, and I place her and her progeny under Your shelter against Satan, the rejected.
3|37| So, her Lord accepted her, a good acceptance, and made her grow, a good growth, and made Zakariyya her guardian. Whenever Zakariyya visited her at the place of worship, he found food with her. He said: .Maryam, from where did you have this?. She said: .It is from Allah. Surely, Allah gives whom He wills without measure.
3|38| Thereupon, Zakariyya prayed to his Lord. He said: .O my Lord, grant me from Your own (power) a goodly progeny. Verily, You are the One who listens to the prayer.
3|39| So then, when he stood praying in the place of worship, the angels called out to him saying: .Allah gives you the good news of YaHya who shall come to confirm a word of Allah and shall be a chief, abstinent (from women), a prophet and one of the righteous.
3|40| He said: .O my Lord, how shall I have a boy when old age has come upon me and my wife is barren?. Said He: .That is how Allah does what He wills.
3|41| He said: .O my Lord, set for me a sign. Said He: .Your sign is that you shall not be able to speak to people for three days except through gestures. Remember your Lord much; and proclaim His purity in the evening and the morning.
3|42| And when the angels said: .O Maryam, Allah has chosen you and purified you and chosen you over the women of all the worlds.
3|43| O Maryam, stand in devotion to your Lord and prostrate yourself and bow down in Ruku‘ with those who bow.
3|44| This is a part of the news of the unseen We reveal to you (O Prophet!). You were not with them when they were casting their pens (to decide) who, from among them, should be the guardian of Maryam, nor were you with them when they were quarrelling.
3|45| (Remember the time) when the angels said: .O Maryam, Allah gives you the good news of a Word from Him whose name is MasiH ‘Isa , the son of Maryam (the Messiah, Jesus, son of Mary) a man of status in this world and in the Hereafter, and one of those who are near (to Allah).
3|46| He shall speak to people while (he is still) in the cradle, and also later, when he is of mature age; and he shall be one of the righteous.
3|47| She said: .O my Lord, how shall I have a son while no human has ever touched me?. Said He: .That is how Allah creates what He wills. When He decides a matter, He simply says to it ‘Be‘, and it comes to be.
3|48| He shall teach him the Book and the Wisdom, and the Torah and the Injil,
3|49| and (shall make him) a messenger to the Children of Isra‘il (who will say to them): .I have come to you with a sign from your Lord, that is, I create for you from clay something in the shape of a bird, then I blow in it, and it becomes a living bird by the will of Allah; and I cure the born- blind and the leper, and I cause the dead to become alive by the will of Allah; and I inform you of what you eat and what you store in your homes. In this there is surely a sign for you, if you are (truly) believers.
3|50| (I have come to you) confirming that (book) which is (sent down) prior to me, that is, the Torah, and to make permissible for you some of what was prohibited to you. I have come to you with a sign from your Lord. So, fear Allah and obey me.
3|51| Allah is surely my Lord and your Lord. So, worship Him. This is the straight path.
3|52| So, when ‘Isa sensed disbelief in them, he said: .Who are my helpers in the way of Allah?. The disciples said: .We are helpers of Allah. We believe in Allah; so be our witness that we are Muslims.
3|53| .Our Lord, we have believed in what You have revealed, and we have followed the messenger. So, record us with those who bear witness (to the Truth).
3|54| They (the opponents of ‘Isa ) devised a plan, and Allah devised a plan. And Allah is the best of all planners.
3|55| When Allah said: .O ‘Isa , I am to take you in full and to raise you towards Myself, and to cleanse you of those who disbelieve, and to place those who follow you above those who disbelieve up to the Day of Doom. Then to Me is your return, whereupon I shall judge between you in that over which you have differed.
3|56| As for those who disbelieve, I shall punish them a severe punishment in this world and in the Hereafter; and for them there are no helpers.
3|57| As for those who believe and do good deeds, He (Allah) will give them their rewards in full. Allah does not like transgressors.
3|58| This We recite to you of the Verses and the Message that is full of wisdom.
3|59| Surely, the case of ‘Isa , in the sight of Allah, is like the case of ‘Edam . He created him from dust, then He said to him, .Be., and he came to be.
3|60| The truth is from your Lord. So, do not be of those who doubt.
3|61| If someone argues with you (O Prophet) over this after the knowledge that has come to you, say (to him), .Come, let us call our sons and your sons, our women and your women, ourselves and yourselves, then (let us) pray and invoke the curse of Allah upon the liars.
3|62| This is, indeed, the true narration. There exists no god but Allah. Allah is surely the Almighty, the All-Wise.
3|63| So, should they turn back, Allah is fully aware of the mischievous people.
3|64| Say, .O people of the Book, come to a word common between us and between you, that we worship none but Allah, that we associate nothing with Him and that some of us do not take others as Lords instead of Allah. Then, should they turn back, say, .Bear witness that we are Muslims.
3|65| O people of the Book, why do you argue about Ibrahim, while the Torah and the Injil were not revealed until after him? Have you, then, no sense?
3|66| Look, this is what you are — you have already argued about matters concerning which you have knowledge; why then do you argue about matters of which you have no knowledge? Allah knows and you do not know.
3|67| Ibrahim was neither a Jew nor a Christian. But he was upright, a Muslim, and was not one of those who associate partners with Allah.
3|68| The closest of people to Ibrahim are those who followed him, and this prophet, and those who believe; and Allah is the Guardian of all believers.
3|69| A group from the people of the Book loves to mislead you, while they mislead none but themselves, and they do not realize.
3|70| O people of the Book, why do you disbelieve in the verses of Allah (revealed in the former Scriptures to foretell about the advent of the Holy Prophet ?) while you are yourselves witnesses (to those verses)?
3|71| O People of the Book, why do you confound the truth with falsehood, and conceal the truth when you know (the reality)?
3|72| And a group from the people of the Book said (to their people), .Believe in what has been revealed to the believers in the early part of the day, and disbelieve at the end of it, so that they may turn back.
3|73| But do not believe (for real) except in those who follow your faith. Say, .(Real) guidance is the guidance of Allah. (But all that you do is due to your envy) that someone is given what is similar to that which you have been given, or that they argue against you before your Lord. Say, .The bounty is in the hands of Allah. He gives it to whom He wills. Allah is All-Embracing, All-Knowing.
3|74| He chooses for His grace whom He wills. Allah is the Lord of great bounty.
3|75| Among the people of the Book there is one who, if you entrust him with a heap (of gold or silver), will give it back to you; and among them there is one who, if you entrust him with a single dinar (a coin of gold), he will not give it back to you, unless you keep standing over him. This is because they have said, .There is no way we can be blamed in the matter of the unlettered.And they tell lies about Allah knowingly.
3|76| Why (will they) not (be blamed)? Whoever fulfils his pledge and fears Allah, then, Allah loves the God-fearing.
3|77| Surely, those who take a small price by (breaking) the covenant of Allah and their oaths, for them there is no share in the Hereafter, and Allah will neither speak to them, nor will He look towards them on the Day of Judgment, nor will He purify them. For them there is a painful punishment.
3|78| Among them there is indeed a group who twist their tongues while (reading) the Book, so that you may deem it to be from the Book, while it is not from the Book. They say, .It is from Allah., while it is not from Allah; and they tell lies about Allah knowingly.
3|79| It is not (possible) for a man that Allah gives him the Book, the wisdom and the prophethood, then he starts saying to the people .Become my worshippers, aside from Allah. rather, (he would say), .Be men of the Lord; as you have been teaching the Book, and as you have been learning it.
3|80| Nor is it (possible for him) that he bids you to hold the angels and the prophets as Lords. Shall he bid you to disbelieve, after your having become Muslims?
3|81| When Allah made the prophets enter into a covenant: (saying) .If I give you a book and wisdom, then comes to you a messenger verifying what is with you, you shall have to believe in him, and you shall have to support him. He said, .Do you affirm and accept my covenant in this respect?. They said, .We affirm. He said, .Then, bear witness, and I am with you among the witnesses.
3|82| Then those who turn back after this, they are the sinful.
3|83| Are they, then, seeking a religion other than that of Allah, while to Him alone submit all those in the heavens and the earth, willingly or unwilling, and to Him they shall be returned?
3|84| Say, .We believe in Allah and in what has been revealed to us and in what was revealed to Ibrahim, Isma‘il, IsHaq , Ya‘qub and the descendants, and in what has been given to Musa, ‘Isa and the prophets, from their Lord: We do not differentiate between any of them; and to Him we submit ourselves.
3|85| Whoever seeks a faith other than Islam, it will never be accepted from him, and he, in the Hereafter, will be among the losers.
3|86| How shall Allah give guidance to a people who disbelieved after they had accepted Faith and testified that the Prophet is true and the clear signs had come to them? Allah does not give guidance to the unjust people.
3|87| The punishment of such people is that upon them is the curse of Allah, of the angels and of the human beings altogether.
3|88| They will remain under it forever. Neither will the punishment be lightened for them, nor will they be given respite,
3|89| except those who repent afterwards and mend their ways. Then, Allah is All-Forgiving, Very-Merciful.
3|90| Those who disbelieve after having accepted Faith and then increase in disbelief, their repentance shall never be accepted. They are the ones who have lost the right path.
3|91| Those who disbelieve and die as disbelievers, even an Earth-full of gold shall never be accepted from any of them, even if one were to offer it as ransom. They are the ones for whom there is a painful punishment, and for them there are no helpers.
3|92| You shall never attain righteousness unless you spend from what you love. Whatsoever you spend, Allah is fully aware of it.
3|93| Every (kind of) food was lawful for the children of Isra‘il, except what Isra‘il had made unlawful for himself, well before the Torah was revealed. Say, .Then, bring the Torah and recite it, if you are true.
3|94| Then those who forge the lie against Allah, after all this,__ they are the transgressors.
3|95| Say, .Allah has told the truth. So, follow the Faith of Ibrahim, the upright one. He was not one of those who ascribe partners to Allah.
3|96| The first house set up for the people is surely the one in Makkah having blessings and guidance for all the worlds.
3|97| In it there are clear signs: The Station of Ibrahim! Whoever enters it is secure. As a right of Allah, it is obligatory on the people to perform Hajj of the House – on everyone who has the ability to manage (his) way to it. If one disbelieves, then Allah is independant of all the worlds.
3|98| Say, .O people of the Book, why do you reject the verses of Allah while Allah is witness to what you do?.
3|99| Say, .O people of the Book, why do you hinder the believers from the way of Allah, trying to create crookedness in it, while you yourselves are witnesses (to its being the right way)? Allah is not oblivious of what you do.
3|100| O you who believe, if you obey a group from those who have been given the Book (i.e. the Christians and the Jews), they will turn you into infidels after you have embraced the faith.
3|101| How could you disbelieve while you are the ones to whom the verses of Allah are recited, and present amidst you is His Messenger? Whoever holds on to Allah, is surely led to the straight path.
3|102| O you who believe, fear Allah, as He should be feared, and let not yourself die save as Muslims.
3|103| Hold fast, all of you, to the cord of Allah, and be not divided. Remember the blessing of Allah upon you: When you were enemies to each other, and He brought your hearts together, so that, you became brothers through His blessing. You were at the brink of a pit of Fire, then He saved you from it. This is how Allah makes His signs clear to you, so that you may take the right path.
3|104| There has to be a group of people from among you who call towards the good, and bid the Fair and forbid the Unfair. And it is these who are successful.
3|105| Do not be like those who became divided and fell into disputes after the clear signs had come to them. Those are the ones for whom there is a grave punishment
3|106| on a day when some faces shall turn bright, and some faces shall turn dark. As for those whose faces turn dark, (they shall be questioned): .Did you disbelieve after you had accepted the Faith? Now taste the punishment, because you used to disbelieve.
3|107| As for those whose faces turn bright, they will rest in Allah‘s mercy. They will live there forever.
3|108| These are the verses of Allah We recite to you with all veracity. Allah does not intend to do injustice to (anyone in) the worlds.
3|109| To Allah belongs what is in the heavens and what is in the earth. To Allah all matters are returned.
3|110| You are the best ‘Ummah ever raised for mankind. You bid the Fair and forbid the Unfair, and you believe in Allah. If the people of the Book had believed, it would have been better for them. Among them, there are believers, while most of them are sinners.
3|111| They shall never (be able to) cause you any harm except a little hurt. If they fight you, they will turn their backs on you, then they shall not be helped.
3|112| Disgrace has been stamped over them wherever they are found, unless (saved) through a source from Allah and through a source from men, and they have returned with wrath from Allah, and misery has been stamped over them. All this is because they used to deny the signs of Allah, and to slay the prophets unjustly. All this is because they disobeyed and transgressed the limits.
3|113| Not all of them are alike: Among the people of the Book there are those who are steadfast; they recite the verses of Allah in the night hours, and they prostrate themselves;
3|114| they believe in Allah and the Hereafter, and bid the Fair and forbid the Unfair, and hasten towards good deeds. They are among the righteous.
3|115| Whatever good they do, they shall never go unappreciated for it. Allah is All-Aware of the God-fearing.
3|116| Surely, those who disbelieve, neither their wealth nor their children shall help them against Allah; and they are the people of the Fire. They shall be there forever.
3|117| The example of what they spend in this worldly life is just like a wind that, having chill within, struck the tillage of those who wronged themselves, and destroyed it. Allah has not wronged them; rather, they did wrong to themselves.
3|118| O you who believe, do not take anyone as an insider but those from among your own selves. They would spare no effort to do you mischief. They want you to be in trouble. Malice has come out of their mouths while what is concealed in their hearts is still worse. We have made the signs clear to you, if only you understand.
3|119| Look, you are the ones who love them and they do not love you. You believe in all the books; (On the other hand,) when they meet you, they say, .We believe., and when they are alone, they bite their finger-tips out of rage against you. Say, .May you perish in your rage. Surely, Allah is All-Aware of what lies in the hearts.
3|120| If something good happens to you, it annoys them, and if something evil befalls you, they are delighted with it. If you keep patience and fear Allah, their cunning shall not harm you at all. Allah is All-Encompassing of what they do.
3|121| Recall the time when you left your house in the morning in order to place the believers in positions for fighting. Allah is All-Hearing, All- Knowing.
3|122| When two of your groups were about to lose heart, while Allah was their guardian! It is in Allah alone that the believers must place their trust.
3|123| Allah certainly supported you at Badr when you were weak. So, fear Allah that you may be grateful
3|124| When you were saying to the believers, .Shall it not suffice you that your Lord should help you with three thousand of the angels sent down (for you)?.
3|125| Of course, if you stay patient and fear Allah, and they come upon you even in this heat of theirs, your Lord will reinforce you with five thousand of the angels, each having distinct marks.
3|126| And Allah did this solely to make it a good news for you, and so that your hearts may be at rest with it. Otherwise, victory is from none but Allah, the All-Powerful, the All-Wise.
3|127| (Allah helped you) so that He may cut off a flank of disbelievers or throw them down in disgrace, and they go back frustrated.
3|128| You have no authority in the matter, unless Allah forgives them or punishes them, as they are unjust.
3|129| To Allah belongs what is in the heavens and what is in the earth. He forgives whomsoever He wills and punishes whomsoever He wills. Allah is Most-Forgiving, Very-Merciful.
3|130| O you who believe, do not eat up the amounts acquired through Riba (interest), doubled and multiplied. Fear Allah, so that you may be successful,
3|131| and fear the Fire that has been prepared for the disbelievers.
3|132| Obey Allah and the Messenger, so that you may be blessed.
3|133| Race with one another towards Forgiveness from your Lord and towards a paradise the width of which spans the heavens and the earth. It has been prepared for the God-fearing,
3|134| __the ones who spend (for Allah‘s sake) in prosperity and adversity, and those who control anger and forgive people. And Allah loves those who are good in their deeds,
3|135| __and those who, when they happen to commit a shameful act or wrong themselves, remember Allah, then, seek forgiveness for their sins__and who is there to forgive sins except Allah?___and do not persist in what they have done, knowingly.
3|136| Their reward is forgiveness from their Lord and gardens beneath which rivers flow where they shall live forever. And excellent is the reward of those who work.
3|137| Many patterns of behavior have passed before you. So, traverse the land and see what was the fate of those who rejected (the prophets).
3|138| This is a declaration for mankind, and guidance, and a lesson for the God-fearing.
3|139| Do not lose heart and do not grieve, and you are the upper-most if you are believers.
3|140| If you have received a wound, they have received a similar wound. Such days We rotate among the people, so that Allah may know those who believe and let some of you be martyrs — and Allah does not like the unjust
3|141| — and so that Allah may purify those who believe and eradicate the disbelievers.
3|142| Do you think that you shall enter Paradise even before Allah knows those of you who carry out Jihad and those who are steadfast.
3|143| You had longed for death before you faced it. Now, you have seen it with your eyes wide open.
3|144| MuHammad is but a messenger, there have been messengers before him. So, if he dies or is killed, would you turn back on your heels? Whoever turns back on his heels can never harm Allah in the least. Allah shall soon reward the grateful.
3|145| It is not the choice of a person to die without the will of Allah, death being a time-bound destiny. Whoever seeks a reward in this world, We shall give him out of it, and whoever seeks a reward in the Hereafter, We shall give him out of it. We shall soon reward the grateful.
3|146| There have been many prophets with whom many men of Allah have fought; they did not lose heart for what they suffered in the way of Allah, nor did they become weak, nor did they yield. Allah loves the steadfast.
3|147| They had nothing else to say except that they said: .Our Lord, forgive us our sins and our excesses in our conduct, make firm our feet and help us against the disbelieving people.
3|148| So, Allah gave them the return in this world and also the better rewards in the Hereafter. Allah loves those who do good.
3|149| O you who believe, if you obey those who disbelieve, they will make you turn back on your heels, then you shall turn into losers.
3|150| Instead, Allah is your Lord, and He is the best of all helpers.
3|151| We shall put awe into the hearts of those who disbelieve, since they have associated with Allah something for which He has not sent any authority. Their ultimate place is the Fire; and evil is the abode of the unjust.
3|152| Allah has surely fulfilled His promise to you when you, with His will, were killing them off, until you showed weakness and disputed in the matter and disobeyed after He had shown you what you liked. Among you there were some who were seeking the mundane, and among you there were others who were seeking the Hereafter. After that, He reversed your position against them, so that He may test you. Of course, He has forgiven you. Allah is All-Gracious to the believers.
3|153| When you were going away, not even turning to look at anyone, and the Messenger was calling you from behind you. He awarded you sorrow for sorrow, so that you should not grieve (in future) over what you lost, or for what you suffered. Allah is All-Aware of what you do.
3|154| Then, after the grief, He poured tranquility upon you - a drowsiness overtaking a group of you. Another group was worrying about their own selves, harboring thoughts about Allah that were untrue - thoughts of ignorance. They were saying, .Is there anything in our hands?. Say, .The whole thing belongs to Allah. They conceal in their hearts what they do not disclose to you. They say, .If we had any say in the matter, we would not have been killed here.Say, .If you were in your homes, those destined to be killed would have come out all the way to their (final) resting -places. (All this was done) so that Allah may test your inner qualities and may purify what is in your hearts. Allah is All-Aware of what lies in the hearts.
3|155| Surely, those of you who turned back on the day when the two troops faced each other, Satan had but made them slip for some of their deeds. Of course, Allah has forgiven them. Certainly, Allah is Most-Forgiving, Very-Forbearing.
3|156| O you who believe, do not be like those who disbelieved and said about their brethren while they travelled on the earth or had to fight, .Had they been with us, they would have not died, nor would they have been killed. The result is that Allah makes it a remorse resting in their hearts. Allah gives life and brings death; Allah is watchful of what you do.
3|157| If you are killed in the way of Allah or die, the forgiveness from Allah and the mercy is far better than what they accumulate
3|158| If you die or get killed, it is towards Allah that you shall be gathered.
3|159| So, (O Prophet) it is through mercy from Allah that you are gentle to them. Had you been rough and hard-hearted, they would have dispersed from around you. So, pardon them, and seek Forgiveness for them. Consult them in the matter and, once you have taken a decision, place your trust in Allah. Surely, Allah loves those who place their trust in Him.
3|160| If Allah helps you, there is none to overcome you. And if He abandons you, then, who is there to help you after that? In Allah the believers should place their trust.
3|161| It is not conceivable from a prophet to misappropriate the spoils. Whoever misappropriates shall bring forth, on Doomsday, what he misappropriated. Then, everybody shall be paid, in full, for what he has earned, and they shall not be wronged.
3|162| How then, could one who submits to the pleasure of Allah be equal to him who returns with displeasure from Allah? His ultimate place is the Fire; and what an evil end it is!
3|163| They are of various ranks with Allah. Allah is watchful of what they do.
3|164| Allah has surely conferred favor on the believers when He raised in their midst a messenger from among themselves who recites to them His verses and makes them pure and teaches them the Book and the Wisdom, while earlier, they were in open error.
3|165| How is it that, when you suffered a hardship the twice of which you had inflicted upon them, you say, .Where did this come from?. Say, .This is from your own selves. Allah is surely Powerful over everything.
3|166| Whatever you suffered on the day when the two troops faced each other was by the will of Allah, and in order to know the believers,
3|167| and in order to know those who are hypocrites. It was said to them, .Come on, fight in the way of Allah, or defend. They said, .Had we known it to be a fight we would have certainly followed you. That day, they were nearer to disbelief than they were to Belief. They utter from their mouths what is not in their hearts. Allah knows well what they conceal.
3|168| Those who said about their brethren, while themselves sitting, .Had they obeyed us, they would have not been killed. Say, .Then avert death from yourselves if you are true.
3|169| Never take those killed in the way of Allah as dead. Rather, they are alive with their Lord, well-provided,
3|170| happy with what Allah has given them of His grace; and they feel pleased with the good news, about those left behind them who could not join them, that there shall be no fear for them nor shall they grieve.
3|171| They feel pleased with blessing from Allah, and grace, and with the fact that Allah would not let the reward of the believers be lost.
3|172| Those who responded to the call of Allah and the Messenger, even after they had received the wound, for those of them who did good deeds and feared Allah there is a great reward
3|173| – (that is) those to whom people said, .The people have gathered against you; so, fear them. It increased them in Faith and they said, .Allah is fully sufficient for us, and the best One in whom to trust.
3|174| So, they returned with bounty from Allah, and grace, with no evil having even touched them, and submitted to the pleasure of Allah. Allah is the Lord of great bounty.
3|175| It is none but Satan who frightens (you) of his friends. So, do not fear them; but fear Me, if you are believers.
3|176| Those who hasten towards disbelief should not make you grieve. They cannot harm Allah at all. Allah intends not to spare for them any share in the Hereafter. For them there is a mighty punishment.
3|177| Certainly, those who bought disbelief in exchange for Belief cannot harm Allah at all. For them there is a painful punishment.
3|178| Those who disbelieve should not think that the respite We give them is good for them. In fact, We give them respite only that they may increase in sin, and for them there is a humiliating punishment.
3|179| Allah is not to leave the believers in the state you are in, unless He separates the impure from the pure. Allah is not to inform you of the Unseen. But Allah selects from His messengers whom He wills. So, believe in Allah and His messengers. If you believe, and fear Allah, you will deserve a great reward.
3|180| Those who withhold in miserliness what Allah has given them out of His grace should not take it as good for them. Instead, it is bad for them. They shall be forced, on the Doomsday, to put on what they withheld, as iron-collars round their necks. To Allah belongs the inheritance of the heavens and the earth. Allah is All-Aware of what you do.
3|181| Allah has surely heard the words of those who said, .Allah is poor, and we are rich.We shall write down what they said, and their killing of the prophets unjustly; and We shall say, .Taste the punishment of the flaming fire.
3|182| This is due to what your hands sent ahead and that Allah is not cruel to His servants.
3|183| (There are) those who have said, .Allah has directed us that we should not believe in a messenger unless he comes to us with an offering to be eaten up by the fire.Say, .A number of messengers have come to you, before me, with clear signs and with what you have said. So, why did you kill them, if you are true?
3|184| Then if they reject you, then messengers have been rejected before you. They came with clear signs and the Scriptures and the enlightening Book.
3|185| Every soul has to taste death. It is on the Day of Judgement that you shall be paid your rewards in full. So, whoever has been kept away from the Fire and admitted to Paradise has really succeeded. The worldly life is nothing but an illusionary enjoyment.
3|186| Of course, you shall be tested in your wealth and yourselves; and, of course, you shall hear hurting statements from those who have been given the Book before you, and from those who associate (others with Allah in His divinity). If you observe patience and fear Allah, then this (observance) is among the matters of firm resolution.
3|187| When Allah took a pledge from those who were given the Book: .You shall make it known to people, and you shall not conceal it,. they threw it away behind their backs, and acquired a small price for it. So, evil is what they acquire.
3|188| Do not think of those who are delighted with what they did, and love to be praised for what they never did - do not think they are secure from the punishment. For them there is a painful punishment.
3|189| To Allah belongs the Kingdom of the heavens and the earth. Allah is powerful to do every thing.
3|190| Surely, in the creation of the heavens and the earth, and in the alternation of night and day, there are signs for the people of wisdom,
3|191| who remember Allah standing and sitting, and (lying) on their sides, and ponder on the creation of the heavens and the earth (and say) .Our Lord, You have not created all this in vain. We proclaim Your purity. So, save us from the punishment of Fire.
3|192| Our Lord, whomsoever You admit into the Fire, he is disgraced by You indeed, and for the unjust there are no supporters.
3|193| Our Lord, We heard a herald calling towards Faith: ‘Believe in your Lord.‘ So we believed. Our Lord, forgive us, then, our sins, and write off our evil deeds, and make us die only when we have joined the righteous.
3|194| Our Lord, give us what You have promised us through Your messengers, and do not put us to disgrace on the Day of Judgement. Surely you do not go back on Your promise.
3|195| So, their Lord answered their prayer: .I do not allow the labour of any worker from among you, male or female, to go to waste. You are similar to one another. So, those who emigrated, and were expelled from their homes, and were tortured in My way, and fought, and were killed, I shall certainly write off their evil deeds, and shall certainly admit them into gardens beneath which rivers flow, as a reward from Allah. It is Allah with Whom lies the beauty of the reward.
3|196| The strutting of the disbelievers about the land should not deceive you.
3|197| It is just a little enjoyment. After that, their resort is Hell; and it is an evil abode.
3|198| But those who fear their Lord, for them there are Gardens beneath which rivers flow, where they will live forever – as hospitality from Allah. What is with Allah is best for the righteous.
3|199| Surely, among the people of the Book there are those who believe in Allah, and in what has been sent down to you and what has been sent down to them, humbling themselves before Allah. They do not barter away the verses of Allah for paltry (worldly) gains. They have their reward with their Lord. Surely, Allah is swift at reckoning.
3|200| O you who believe, be patient, compete with each other in patience, and guard your frontiers and fear Allah, so that you may be successful.
4|1| O men, fear your Lord who created you from a single soul, and from it created its match, and spread many men and women from the two. Fear Allah in whose name you ask each other (for your rights), and fear (the violation of the rights of) the womb-relations. Surely, Allah is watchful over you.
4|2| Give the orphans their property, and do not substitute what is bad for what is good, and do not eat up their property along with your own. It is, surely, a great sin.
4|3| If you fear that you will not do justice to the orphans, then, marry the women you like, in twos, in threes and in fours. But, if you fear that you will not maintain equity, then (keep to) one woman, or bondwomen you own. It will be closer to abstaining from injustice.
4|4| Give women their dower in good cheer. Then, if they forego some of it, of their own will, you may have it as pleasant and joyful.
4|5| Do not give the feeble-minded your property that Allah has made a means of support for you, and do feed them from it, and clothe them, and speak to them in fair words.
4|6| Test the orphans until they reach the marriageable age. Then, if you perceive in them proper understanding, hand their property over to them, and do not consume it extravagantly and hastily, lest they should grow up. Whoever is rich should abstain (from using it for himself), and whoever is poor may have from it (to the extent of his necessary need) with fairness. So, when you hand their property over to them, make witnesses upon them. Allah is sufficient for reckoning
4|7| For men there is a share in what the parents and the nearest of kin have left. And for women there is a share in what the parents and the nearest of kin have left, be it small or large__a determined share.
4|8| If the relatives (who are not heirs) and the orphans and the needy are present at the time of distribution, give them some of it, and speak to them in fair words.
4|9| Those people should be fearful (in their behavior towards orphans) who, if they leave behind some helpless children, would remain anxious for them. So, they should fear Allah and say what is right.
4|10| Surely, those who unjustly devour the property of the orphans do nothing but devour fire into their bellies, and soon they shall enter a blazing Hell.
4|11| Allah directs you concerning your children: for a male there is a share equal to that of two females. But, if they are (only) women, more than two, then they get two-thirds of what one leaves behind. If she is one, she gets one-half. As for his parents, for each of them, there is one-sixth of what he leaves in case he has a child. But, if he has no child and his parents have inherited him, then his mother gets one-third. If he has some brothers (or sisters), his mother gets one-sixth, all after (settling) the will he might have made, or a debt. You do not know who, out of your fathers and your sons, is closer to you in benefiting (you). All this is determined by Allah. Surely, Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise.
4|12| For you there is one-half of what your wives leave behind, in case they have no child. But, if they have a child, you get one-fourth of what they leave, after (settling) the will they might have made, or a debt. For them (the wives) there is one-fourth of what you leave behind, in case you have no child. But, if you have a child, they get one eighth of what you leave, after (settling) the will you might have made, or a debt. And if a man or a woman is Kalalah (i.e. has neither parents alive, nor children) and has a brother or a sister, then each one of them will get one-sixth. However, if they are more than that, they will be sharers in one-third, after (settling) the will that might have been made, or a debt, provided that the will must not be intended to harm anyone. This is a direction from Allah. Allah is All-Knowing, Forbearing.
4|13| These are the limits set by Allah. Whoever obeys Allah and His Messenger, He will admit him to gardens beneath which rivers flow, where he will live forever. That is a great success.
4|14| Whoever disobeys Allah and His Messenger and transgresses the limits set by Him, He shall admit him to the Fire, where he will remain forever. For him there is a humiliating punishment.
4|15| Those of your women who commit the shameful act, have four witnesses (against them) from among you. So, if they testify, then confine those women to their homes until death overcomes them, or Allah prescribes a way for them.
4|16| Those two of you who commit it, chastise both of them. However, if they repent and make amends, then, overlook them. Surely, Allah is Most- Relenting, Very-Merciful.
4|17| The relenting taken by Allah upon Himself is for those who do evil in ignorance, then repent shortly thereafter. So, Allah relents towards them. Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise.
4|18| The relenting is not for those who do the evil deeds, until when the time of death approaches one of them, he says, .Now I repent., nor for those who die while they are still disbelievers. For them We have prepared a painful punishment
4|19| O you who believe, it is not lawful for you that you should forcibly take women as inheritance. Do not hold on to them so that you may take away some of what you have given them, unless they commit a clearly shameful act. Live with them in the recognized manner. If you dislike them, then it is quite likely that you dislike something and Allah has placed a lot of good in it.
4|20| If you want to take a wife in place of the one (you have), and you have given her plenty of wealth, then do not take any of it back. Would you take it through imputation and open sin?
4|21| How can you take it when you have had access to each other and they have taken a firm covenant from you?
4|22| Do not marry those women whom your fathers had married except what has passed. It is indeed shameful and detestable, and it is an evil practice.
4|23| Prohibited for you are your mothers, your daughters, your sisters, your paternal aunts, your maternal aunts, daughters of brother, daughters of sister, your mothers who suckled you, your sisters through suckling, mothers of your wives and your step-daughters under your care who are born of your women with whom you have had intercourse,_though if you have not had intercourse with them, there is no sin on you,_and the wives of your sons from your loins, and that you combine two sisters (in wedlock), except what has passed. Surely, Allah is Most-Forgiving, Very-Merciful.
4|24| (Also prohibited are) the women already bound in marriage, except the bondwomen you come to own. It has been written by Allah for you. All (women), except these, have been permitted for you to seek (to marry) through your wealth, binding yourself, (in marriage) and not only for lust. So, to those of them whose company you have enjoyed, give their dues (dower) as obligated. There is no sin on you in what you mutually agree upon after the (initial) agreement. Surely, Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise.
4|25| If one cannot afford to marry the free Muslim women, then (he may marry) the one you people own of your Muslim girls. Allah knows best about your faith. You are similar to each other. So, marry them with the permission of their masters, and give them their dues, as recognized, they being bound in marriage, not going for lust, nor having paramours. So, once they have been bound in marriage, then, if they commit a shameful act, they shall be liable to half of the punishment prescribed for the free women. That is for those of you who apprehend to indulge in sin. But that you be patient is better for you. Allah is Most-Forgiving, Very-Merciful.
4|26| Allah intends (through this Qur‘an) to explain to you (the rules) and to guide you to the ways of those (prophets who passed) before you, and to turn graciously towards you. Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise.
4|27| Allah intends to turn graciously towards you, while those who follow desires want you to deviate (from the right path), a huge deviation.
4|28| Allah intends to make things easy on you. And man has been created weak.
4|29| O you who believe, do not devour each other‘s property by false means, unless it is trade conducted with your mutual consent. Do not kill one another. Indeed, Allah has been Very-Merciful to you.
4|30| Whoever does that out of aggression and injustice, We shall cast him into the Fire. This is an easy thing for Allah.
4|31| If you abstain from the major (sins) out of what you have been forbidden from, We shall write off your minor sins, and shall admit you to a noble entrance.
4|32| Do not covet something in which Allah has made some of you superior to others. For men there is a share of what they earned, and for women, a share of what they earned. Pray to Allah for His grace. Surely, Allah is All-Aware of everything.
4|33| For everyone We have made heirs in what the parents and the nearest of kin have left. As for those with whom you have made a pledge, give them their shares. Surely, Allah is Witness over everything.
4|34| Men are caretakers of women, since Allah has made some of them excel the others, and because of the wealth they have spent. So, the righteous women are obedient, (and) guard (the property and honor of their husbands) in (their) absence with the protection given by Allah. As for women of whom you fear rebellion, convince them, and leave them apart in beds, and beat them. Then, if they obey you, do not seek a way against them. Surely, Allah is the Highest, the Greatest.
4|35| If you fear a split between them (the spouses), send one arbitrator from his people and one from her people. If they desire to set things right, Allah shall bring about harmony between them. Surely, Allah is All-Knowing, All-Aware
4|36| Worship Allah, and do not associate with Him anything, and be good to parents and to kinsmen and orphans and the needy and the close neighbor and the distant neighbor and the companion at your side and the wayfarer and to those (slaves who are) owned by you. Surely, Allah does not like those who are arrogant, proud,
4|37| __those who are miserly and bid people to be miserly, and conceal what Allah has given them of His grace — and We have prepared for the disbelievers a humiliating punishment,
4|38| and (for) those who spend their wealth only to show people, and do not believe in Allah and the Last Day. Anyone for whom Satan is companion, evil he is as a companion.
4|39| What harm was there for them if they had believed in Allah and the Last Day, and spent out of what Allah had given them. Allah knows all about them.
4|40| Surely, Allah does not wrong (anyone), even to the measure of a particle. If it is a good deed, He multiplies it, and gives a great reward out of His Own pleasure.
4|41| Then, how (awful a spectacle) would it be when We shall bring a witness from every community, and shall bring you over them as a witness.
4|42| On that Day, those who have disbelieved and disobeyed the Messenger shall wish that the earth were leveled with them. They shall not (be able to) conceal anything from Allah.
4|43| O you who believe! Do not go near Salah when you are intoxicated, until you know what you say, nor in a state of ‘major impurity‘., __save when you are traversing a way__until you take a bath. If you are sick, or in travel, or if one of you has come after relieving himself, or you have had contact with women, and you find no water, go for some clean dust and wipe your faces and hands (with it). Surely, Allah is Most- Pardoning, Most-Forgiving.
4|44| Have you not observed those who have been given a share from the Book? They buy misguidance and wish that you (too) lose the way.
4|45| But Allah knows your enemies very well. Allah is enough as a friend, and Allah is enough as a supporter.
4|46| Among the Jews there are some who distort the words against their contexts, and say, .We hear and disobey,. and .Hear. May you not be made to hear,. and .Ra‘ina., twisting their tongues and maligning the Faith. If they had said, .We hear and obey,. and .Hear,. and .Look after us,. it would have been better for them, and more proper, but Allah has cast His curse on them due to their disbelief. So, they do not believe except a few.
4|47| O you who have been given the Book, believe in what We have revealed confirming what is with you, before We rub off faces and turn them shaped like their backs, or lay a curse upon them, as We cursed the People of the Sabbath. Whatever Allah orders is destined to occur.
4|48| Surely, Allah does not forgive that a partner is ascribed to Him, and He forgives anything short of that for whomsoever He wills. Whoever ascribes a partner to Allah commits a terrible sin.
4|49| Have you not seen those who claim sanctity for themselves? In fact, Allah sanctifies whom He wills, and they shall not be wronged even to the measure of a thread of a date-stone.
4|50| See how they fabricate a lie against Allah, and it is enough to be an open sin.
4|51| Have you not seen those who have been given a share from the Book? They believe in Jibt and Taghut and say concerning those who disbelieve, .They are better guided in their way than those who believe.
4|52| Those are the ones whom Allah has cursed, and the one whom Allah has cursed, for him you shall find no helper.
4|53| Is it that they have a share in the kingdom? If so, they would give nothing to the people, not even to the measure of a tiny pit on the back of a date-stone?
4|54| Or, is it that they are jealous of people over what Allah has given them of His bounty, while We have given to the House of Ibrahim the Book and the wisdom, and We have given to them a great kingdom?
4|55| So, there were some among them who believed in it, and there were others among them who turned away from it. Enough (for the latter) is Jahannam, a fire ablaze!
4|56| Those who have disbelieved in Our verses, We shall certainly make them enter a fire. Whenever their skins are burnt out, We shall give them other skins in their place, so that they may taste the punishment. Surely, Allah is All-Mighty, All-Wise.
4|57| As for those who have believed and have done good deeds, We shall admit them to gardens beneath which rivers flow, where they will live forever. For them there are wives purified. We shall admit them to an umbrageous shade.
4|58| Surely, Allah commands you to deliver trusts to those entitled to them, and that, when you judge between people, judge with justice. Surely, excellent is the exhortation Allah gives you. Surely, Allah is All-Hearing, All-Seeing.
4|59| O you who believe, obey Allah and obey the Messenger and those in authority among you. Then, if you quarrel about something, revert it back to Allah and the Messenger, if you believe in Allah and the Last Day. That is good, and the best at the end.
4|60| Have you not seen those who claim that they have believed in what was revealed to you and what was revealed before you? They want to take their disputes to the Taghut, while they were ordered to reject it. Satan wants to mislead them to a remote wrong way.
4|61| When it is said to them, .Come to what Allah has revealed and to the Messenger,. you will see the hypocrites turning away from you in aversion.
4|62| But, how (apologetic) they are when they suffer a calamity because of the acts of their own hands, and they come to you swearing by Allah, .We meant nothing but to promote good and bring about harmony.
4|63| Those are the ones Allah knows what is in their hearts. So, ignore them, and give them good counsel, and speak to them about themselves in appealing words.
4|64| We did not send any Messenger but to be obeyed by the leave of Allah. Had they, after having wronged themselves, come to you and sought forgiveness from Allah, and had the Messenger prayed for their forgiveness, they would certainly have found Allah Most-Relenting, Very- Merciful.
4|65| So, never by your Lord! Never shall they become believers, unless they make you the judge in the disputes that arise between them, then find no discomfort in their hearts against what you have decided, and surrender to it in total submission.
4|66| If We had prescribed for them that they should kill themselves or that they should migrate from their homeland, they would have not done it, except a few of them. If they had done what they were advised to do, it would have been better for them, and more effective in making (them) firm.
4|67| In that case, We would certainly have given them a great reward
4|68| and we would certainly have led them to a straight path.
4|69| Those who obey Allah and the Messenger are with those whom Allah has blessed, namely, the prophets, the Siddiqin, the Shuhada‘ and the righteous. And excellent are they as companions.
4|70| That grace is from Allah; and Allah is sufficient as being the One who knows.
4|71| O you who believe, be on your guard, and march in groups, or march all together.
4|72| Among you there is one who shall invariably fall back; then, if some calamity befalls you, he would say, .Allah has shown His favor to me, as I was not present with them.
4|73| And if some bounty comes to you from Allah, he will certainly say,_as if there was no friendship between you and him_ .Oh, would that I had been with them; then I would have secured a handsome gain.
4|74| So, those who sell the worldly life for the Hereafter should fight in the way of Allah. Whoever fights in the way of Allah, then gets killed or prevails, We shall give a great reward to him.
4|75| What has happened to you that you do not fight in the way of Allah, and for the oppressed among men, women and children who say, .Our Lord, take us out from this town whose people are cruel, and make for us a supporter from Your own, and make for us a helper from Your own.
4|76| The believers fight in the way of Allah, and the disbelievers fight in the way of Taghut. So, fight the friends of Satan. No doubt, the guile of Satan is feeble.
4|77| Have you not seen those to whom it was said, .Hold your hands (from fighting) and be steadfast in Salah and pay Zakah. However, when fighting is enjoined upon them, then surprisingly, a group from them starts fearing people, as one would fear Allah, or fearing even more. They say, .Our Lord, why have you enjoined fighting upon us? Would you have not spared us for a little more time?. Say, .The enjoyment of the world is but a little, and the Hereafter is far better for the one who fears Allah, and you shall not be wronged, even to the measure of a fiber.
4|78| Wherever you will be, Death will overtake you, even though you are in fortified castles. If some good comes to them, they say, .This is from Allah. But if some evil visits them, they say, .This is from you. Say, .All is from Allah. So, what is wrong with these people, they do not seem to understand anything?
4|79| Whatever good comes to you, it is from Allah and whatever evil visits you, it comes from your own selves. We have sent you to be a Messenger for the people. Allah is enough to be a witness.
4|80| Whoever obeys the Messenger obeys Allah, and whoever turns away, then, We did not send you to stand guard over them.
4|81| They say, .Obedience (we observe). But when they go away from you, a group of them conspires at night contrary to what they say. Allah records what they conspire. So ignore them and put your trust in Allah. Allah is enough to trust in.
4|82| Do they not, then, ponder about the Qur‘an? Had it been from someone other than Allah, they would have found in it a great deal of discrepancy.
4|83| When news concerning peace or fear comes to them, they go about spreading it. Had they referred it to the Messenger and to those having authority among them, the truth of the matter would have come to the knowledge of those of them who are able to investigate. But for Allah‘s grace upon you, and mercy, you would have followed the Satan, save a few.
4|84| So, fight in the way of Allah. You are not responsible but for yourself, and persuade the believers (to fight in Allah‘s way). It is likely that Allah will prevent the mischief of those who disbelieve. Allah is the strongest in power and the mightiest in punishing.
4|85| Whoever makes a good recommendation, there shall be for him a share from it (in the Hereafter), and whoever makes a bad recommendation, there shall be for him a share from it. Allah is powerful over everything.
4|86| When you are greeted with a salutation, greet with one better than it, or return the same. Surely, Allah is the One who takes account of everything.
4|87| Allah: There is no god but He. He shall certainly gather you towards the Day of Doom. There is no doubt about it. Who is more truthful in his word than Allah?
4|88| So, what is the matter with you that you have become two groups about the hypocrites, while Allah has reverted them because of what they did. Do you want to guide the one whom Allah has let go astray? The one whom Allah lets go astray, you shall never find a way for him.
4|89| They wish that you should disbelieve, as they have disbelieved, and thus you become all alike. So, do not take friends from among them unless they migrate in the way of Allah. Then, if they turn away, seize them, and kill them wherever you find them, and do not take from among them a friend or helper.
4|90| Except those who join a group between whom and you there is a treaty, or who come to you with their hearts feeling discomfort in fighting either against you or against their own people. If Allah had so willed, He would have given them power over you, then they would have fought you — so, if they stay away from you, and do not fight you and offer you peace, then Allah has not given you any authority against them.
4|91| You will find others who want to be secure from you, and secure from their own people. (But) whenever they are called back to the mischief, they are plunged into it. So, if they do not stay away from you, and do not offer peace to you, and do not restrain their hands, then seize them, and kill them wherever you find them, and, We have given you an open authority against them.
4|92| It is not for a believer (Muslim) to kill any believer, except by mistake. Whoever kills a believer by mistake, then, a believing slave has to be freed, and the blood money must be paid to his family, unless they forgo it. If he (the victim) belongs to a people hostile to you and is a believer, then, a believing slave has to be freed. If he (the victim) belongs to a people between whom and you there is treaty, then, blood money is to be paid to his family, and a believing slave to be freed. Whoever does not find one has to fast for two consecutive months. This is repentance prescribed from Allah‘s side. Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise.
4|93| Whoever kills a believer deliberately, his reward is Jahannam (Hell) where he shall remain forever, and Allah shall be angry with him and shall cast curse upon him, and He has prepared for him a mighty punishment.
4|94| O you who believe, when you go out in the way of Allah, be careful, and do not say to the one who offers you the Salam (salutation), .You are not a believer. to seek stuff of the worldly life. So, with Allah there are spoils in abundance. In the same state you were before; then Allah favored you. So, be careful. Surely, Allah is All-Aware of what you do.
4|95| Those among the believers who sit back, except the handicapped, are not equal to those who fight in the way of Allah with their riches and their lives. Allah has raised the rank of those who fight with their riches and their lives, over those who sit; and to each, Allah has promised good. Allah has given precedence to those who fight over those who sit in giving them a great reward
4|96| — high ranks from Him and forgiveness and mercy. Allah is Most-Forgiving, Very-Merciful.
4|97| Those whose souls the angels take while they had wronged themselves, the angels say (to them), .In what business were you (involved)?. They say, .We were oppressed in the earth. They say, .Was not the earth of Allah wide enough for you to emigrate to it?. Those people are such that their refuge is Jahannam . It is an evil place to return;
4|98| except the oppressed men and women and children, who cannot have means (to emigrate), nor can find a way.
4|99| As for such, it is likely that Allah would pardon them. Allah is Most-Pardoning, Most-Forgiving.
4|100| Whoever migrates in the way of Allah shall find on the earth many a place to settle, and a wide dimension (of resources). Whoever leaves his home migrating for the sake of Allah and His Messenger, and death overtakes him, then, his reward is established with Allah. Allah is Most- Forgiving, Very-Merciful.
4|101| When you travel on the earth, there is no sin on you in shortening your Salah, if you fear that the disbelievers would put you in trouble. Surely, the disbelievers are an open enemy for you.
4|102| When you (O prophet) are in their midst, and arrange for them the Salah, then, a party from them should stand with you, and should take their arms along. Then, once they performed Sajdah, they should move away from you, and the other party, that has not yet performed Salah, should come and perform Salah with you, and should take their precautionary measures and their arms. Those who disbelieve would want you to become heedless to your arms and your belongings, so that they come down upon you in a single move. There is no sin on you, if you have some inconvenience due to rain, or you are sick, in putting your arms aside, but take your precautionary measures. Surely, Allah has prepared for the disbelievers a humiliating punishment.
4|103| Once you have finished your Salah, then, remember Allah while standing, sitting and reclining. As soon as you are secure, perform Salah as due. Surely, Salah is an obligation on the believers that is tied up with time.
4|104| Do not show weakness in pursuing these people. If you are suffering, they are suffering as you are suffering, while you hope from Allah what they do not hope. Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise.
4|105| Surely, We have revealed to you the Book with the truth, so that you may judge between people according to what Allah has shown you. Do not be an advocate for those who breach trust.
4|106| Seek forgiveness from Allah. Surely, Allah is All-Forgiving, Very-Merciful.
4|107| Do not argue on behalf of those who betray themselves. Surely, Allah does not like anyone who is a sinful betrayer.
4|108| They feel shy before people, but do not feel shy before Allah. He (Allah) is with them when they make plans at night to give a statement He (Allah) does not like. Allah encompasses whatever they do.
4|109| Look, this is what you are! You have argued for them in the worldly life, but who shall argue for them with Allah on the Day of Judgement, or who shall be their defender?
4|110| Whoever acts evil or wrongs himself, then seeks forgiveness from Allah, shall find Allah Most-Forgiving, Very-Merciful.
4|111| Whoever commits a sin, commits it only against himself. Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise.
4|112| Whoever commits a vice or a sin, then shifts its blame to an innocent person, he indeed takes the burden of a false imputation and a glaring sin.
4|113| If the grace of Allah and His mercy had not been with you, a group from them had resolved to mislead you, while they mislead none but themselves; and they can do you no harm. Allah has revealed to you the Book and the wisdom, and has taught you what you did not know. The grace of Allah on you has always been great.
4|114| There is no good in most of their whisperings, unless one bids charity or a fair action, or reconciliation between people. The one who does this, to seek Allah‘s pleasure, We shall give him a great reward.
4|115| Whoever breaks away with the Messenger after the right path has become clear to him, and follows what is not the way of the believers, We shall let him have what he chose, and We shall admit him to Jahannam, which is an evil place to return.
4|116| Surely, Allah does not forgive that a partner is ascribed to Him, and forgives anything short of that for whomsoever He wills. Whoever ascribes a partner to Allah has indeed gone far astray.
4|117| They invoke none, besides Him, but feminine objects; and they invoke none but Satan, the rebel
4|118| whom Allah has cursed. He (the Satan) said, .Surely I will take an appointed share from Your slaves,
4|119| and I will lead them astray, and I will tempt them with false hopes, and I will command them, whereby they shall slit the ears of cattle, and I will command them, whereby they shall alter the creation of Allah. Whoever takes the Satan for friend, instead of Allah, incurs an obvious loss.
4|120| He (the Satan) makes promises to them, and he tempts them with hopes. The Satan does not make a promise to them but to deceive.
4|121| As for such people, their refuge is Jahannam, and they shall find no escape from it.
4|122| Those who believe and do good deeds, We shall admit them to the gardens beneath which rivers flow. They shall live there forever, it being a real promise from Allah; and who is more truthful than Allah in his word?
4|123| This is not (a matter of) your fancies or the fancies of the People of the Book. Whoever does evil shall be requited for it, and he shall find neither a friend for himself, besides Allah, nor a helper.
4|124| Whoever, male or female, does good deeds and is a believer, then such people shall enter Paradise, and they shall not be wronged in the least.
4|125| Who is better in Faith than one who has surrendered his self to Allah and is good in deeds, and has followed the creed of Ibrahim, the upright. Allah has made Ibrahim a friend.
4|126| To Allah belongs what is in the heavens and what is in the earth. Allah encompasses every thing.
4|127| They ask you about women. Say, .Allah answers you about them, and so does what is recited to you from the Book regarding orphaned women whom you do not give what is prescribed for them and tend to marry them, and regarding the weak from the children, and that you should maintain justice for the orphans. Whatever good you do Allah is aware of it.
4|128| If a woman fears ill treatment or aversion from her husband, then, there is no sin on them in entering into a compromise between them. Compromise is better. Avarice is made to be present in human souls. If you do good and fear Allah, then, Allah is All-Aware of what you do.
4|129| You shall never be able to maintain real equality between wives, even though you are eager to. So, do not lean totally (towards one) and leave the other as suspended. If you act righteously and fear Allah, then, Allah is Most-Forgiving, Very-Merciful.
4|130| If they separate, Allah shall, through His capacity, make each of them need-free (of the other). Allah is All-Embracing, All-Wise.
4|131| To Allah belongs what is in the heavens and what is in the earth. We have ordered those who were given the Book before you, and (ordered) you yourselves to fear Allah. If you disbelieve, then, surely to Allah belongs what is in the heavens and what is in the earth. Allah is All-Independent, Ever-Praised.
4|132| To Allah belongs what is in the heavens and what is in the earth, and Allah is enough to trust in.
4|133| If He so wills, He can remove you, O men, and bring others (in your place). Allah has the power to do that.
4|134| Whoever seeks the reward of this world, then, with Allah is the reward of this world and of the Hereafter. Allah is All-Hearing, All-Seeing.
4|135| O you who believe, be upholders of justice - witnesses for Allah, even though against (the interest of) your selves or the parents, and the kinsmen. One may be rich or poor, Allah is better caretaker of both. So do not follow desires, lest you should swerve. If you twist or avoid (the evidence), then, Allah is all-aware of what you do.
4|136| O you who believe, do believe in Allah and His Messenger and in the Book He has revealed to His Messenger and in the Books He has revealed earlier. Whoever disbelieves in Allah and His angels and His Books and His Messengers and the Last Day has indeed gone far astray.
4|137| Surely, those who believed and then disbelieved, believed again and then disbelieved, then went on increasing in their disbelief - Allah is not to forgive them nor lead them on the path.
4|138| Give the hypocrites the ‘good news‘ that for them there is a painful punishment
4|139| - those who take the disbelievers for friends rather than the believers. Are they seeking honor in their company? But, indeed, all honor belongs to Allah,
4|140| and He has revealed to you in the Book that when you hear the verses of Allah being disbelieved and ridiculed, you should not sit with them unless they enter into some other discourse. You, in that case, would be like them. Surely, Allah is to gather all hypocrites and disbelievers in Jahannam .
4|141| - those who look for (a misfortune for) you, so, if there is a victory for you, they say, .Were we not with you?. But if there is a gain for the disbelievers, they say (to them), .Had we not overpowered you, still protected you from the believers?. So, Al
4|142| Surely, the hypocrites (try to) deceive Allah while He is the One who leaves them in deception. And when they stand for Salah, they stand up lazily, only to show people, and do not remember Allah but a little,
4|143| wavering between (this and) that, neither here nor there. Whomsoever Allah lets go astray, you shall never find a way for him.
4|144| O you who believe, do not take the disbelievers for friends instead of the believers. Do you want to produce before Allah a clear evidence against yourselves?
4|145| Surely, the hypocrites are in the lowest level of the Fire, and you shall never find for them a helper
4|146| -except those who repent and correct themselves and hold on to Allah and make their Faith pure for Allah. so, those Are with the believers, and Allah will give the believers a great reward.
4|147| What would Allah get by punishing you, if you are grateful and believe? Allah is Appreciating, All-Knowing.
4|148| Allah does not like the evil words to be said openly except from anyone wronged. Allah is All-Hearing, All-Knowing.
4|149| If you do a good act openly or do it in secret, or forgive an evil deed, then, Allah is All-Forgiving, All-Powerful.
4|150| Surely those who disbelieve in Allah and His Messengers, and wish to make division between Allah and His Messengers, and say, .We believe in some (messengers) and disbelieve in some others. and wish to take a way in between that,__
4|151| __ those are the disbelievers in reality, and We have prepared a humiliating punishment for the disbelievers.
4|152| Those who have believed in Allah and His Messengers, and have made no division between any of them, to them He will give their rewards. Allah is Most-Forgiving, Very-Merciful.
4|153| The People of the Book ask you to bring down upon them a Book from the heavens, (which is not strange,) as they had asked Musa something greater than that when they said, .Make us see Allah openly. So, the thunderbolt took them for the wrong they did. Later, they took to themselves the calf, even after the clear signs had come to them. Then, We forgave them, and gave Musa an open authority.
4|154| We raised the (Mount of) Tur high over them for binding them to the pledge, and We said to them, .Do not transgress in (the matter of) the Sabbath. We took from them a firm pledge.
4|155| So, (they met their fate) for breaking their pledge, and for their disbelief in the verses of Allah, and for their slaying of the prophets unjustly, and for their saying, .Our hearts are sealed. - rather, Allah has set a seal over them for their disbelief, so they do not believe but a little
4|156| - and for their disbelief and for what they said against Maryam as a grim imputation,
4|157| and for their saying, .We have certainly killed the MasiH ‘Isa the son of Maryam, the Messenger of Allah., while in fact they did neither kill him, nor crucify him, but they were deluded by resemblance. Those who disputed in this matter are certainly in doubt about it. They have no knowledge of it, but they follow whims. It is absolutely certain that they did not kill him,
4|158| but Allah lifted him towards Himself. Allah is All-Mighty, All-Wise.
4|159| No one will remain from among the People of the Book but will certainly believe in him before he dies, and on the Day of Doom, he shall be a witness against them.
4|160| So, because of the transgression of those who became Jews, We prohibited for them good things which were made lawful for them earlier and for their preventing (people), very often, from the way of Allah,
4|161| and for their charging Riba (usury or interest) while they were forbidden from it, and for their devouring of the properties of the people by false means. We have prepared, for the disbelievers among them, a painful punishment.
4|162| But those well-grounded in knowledge among them, and the believers, believe in what has been revealed to you and what has been revealed before you, __as well as those observing Salah and paying Zakah, and those believing in Allah and the Last Day. To them we shall give a great reward.
4|163| Surely, We have revealed to you as We have revealed to NuH and to the prophets after him; and We have revealed to Ibrahim, Isma‘il, IsHaq, Ya‘qub and their children, and to ‘Isa, Ayyub, Yunus, Harun and Sulaiman, and We have given Zabur to Dawud .
4|164| (We have sent) some Messengers We have already told you about, and some other Messengers We did not tell you about, and Allah has spoken to Musa verbally
4|165| - Messengers giving good tidings and warning, so that people may have no plea against Allah after the Messengers (have come). Allah is All- Mighty, All-Wise.
4|166| But Allah bears witness that what He has revealed to you, has revealed it with His knowledge. The angels too, bear witness, (though) Allah is sufficient as witness.
4|167| Surely, those who disbelieved and prevented (people) from the way of Allah have gone far astray.
4|168| Surely, those who disbelieved and transgressed, Allah is not going to forgive them, nor to lead them to a way
4|169| other than the way of Jahannam where they are to remain for ever. That is easy for Allah.
4|170| O people, the Messenger has come to you with the truth from your Lord. So, believe. That is good for you. If you disbelieve then, to Allah belongs what is in the heavens and the earth. Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise.
4|171| O people of the Book, be not excessive in your Faith, and do not say about Allah anything but the truth. The Masih 'Isa, the son of Maryam, is only a Messenger of Allah, and His Word that He had delivered to Maryam, and a spirit from Him. So, believe in Allah and His Messengers. Do not say "Three". Stop it. That is good for you. Allah is the only One God. He is far too pure to have a son. To Him belongs what is in the heavens and what is in the earth. And Allah is enough to trust in.
4|172| The Masih shall never spurn to be a slave of Allah, nor shall the angels who are stationed near to Him. And whoever spurns to worship Him, and shows arrogance, ___then, He shall gather all of them before Himself.
4|173| As for those who believe and do good deeds, He shall give them their reward in full, and give them more out of His grace. But, to those who spurn and show arroagance, He shall give a painful punishment, and they shall find for themselves neither a friend other than Allah, nor a helper.
4|174| O people, a proof has come to you from you Lord, and We have sent down to you a vivid light.
4|175| Now those who believe in Allah and hold on to Him - He shall admit them into Mercy from Him, and Grace, and shall lead to Himself through a straight path.
4|176| They seek a ruling from you. Say, "Allah gives tou the ruling concerning Kalalah. If a person dies having no son, but he does have a sister, then she will get one half of what he leaves. (On the other hand) He will inherit her if she has no child. If there are two (sisters), they will get two third of what he leaves. If they are brothers and sisters, both male and female, then, the male will get a share equal to that of two females." Allah explains to you, lest you should go astray. Allah has full knowledge of everything.
5|1| O you who believe, fulfill the contracts. The animals from the cattle have been made lawful for you, except that which shall be read over to you, provided that you do not treat hunting as lawful while you are in IHram. Surely, Allah ordains what He wills.
5|2| O you who believe, do not violate (the sanctity) of the Marks of Allah, nor of the sacred month, nor of the sacrificial animal, nor of the garlands, nor of those proceeding to the Sacred House, seeking the grace of their Lord and (His) Pleasure. When you are out of IHram, you may hunt. Malice against a people for their having prevented you from Al-Masjid-ul-Haram, should not cause you to cross the limits. Help each other in righteousness and piety, and do not help each other in sin and aggression. Fear Allah. Surely, Allah is severe at punishment.
5|3| Prohibited for you are: carrion, blood, the flesh of swine, and those upon which (a name) other than that of Allah has been invoked (at the time of slaughter), animal killed by strangulation, or killed by a blow, or by a fall, or by goring, or that which is eaten by a beast unless you have properly slaughtered it; and that which has been slaughtered before the idols, and that you determine shares through the arrows. (All of) this is sin. Today those who disbelieve have lost all hope of (damaging) your faith. So, do not fear them, and fear Me. Today, I have perfected your religion for you, and have completed My blessing upon you, and chosen Islam as Din (religion and a way of life) for you. But whoever is compelled by extreme hunger, having no inclination towards sin, then Allah is Most-Forgiving, Very-Merciful.
5|4| They ask you as to what has been made lawful for them. Say, .Made lawful for you are good things, and (hunting through) birds and beasts of prey that you train, teaching them out of what Allah has taught you. So, eat of what they hold for you, and recite the name of Allah upon it. Fear Allah. Surely, Allah is swift at reckoning.
5|5| This day, good things have been made lawful for you. The food of the people of the Book is lawful for you, and your food is lawful for them, and good women from among believers, and good women from among those who were given the Book before you, provided you give them their dowers, binding yourself in marriage, neither going for lust, nor having paramours. Whoever rejects Faith, his effort will go to waste and, in the Hereafter, he will be among the losers.
5|6| O you who believe, when you rise for Salah, (prayer) wash your faces and your hands up to the elbows, and make MasH (wiping by hands) of your heads and (wash) your feet up to the ankles. If you are in a state of major impurity, cleanse yourselves well (by taking bath). If you are sick, or on a journey, or if one of you has come after relieving himself, or you have had sexual contact with women, and you find no water, then, go for some clean dust and wipe your faces and hands with it. Allah does not like to impose a problem on you; He, rather likes to cleanse you and to complete His favour upon you, so that you may be grateful.
5|7| Remember Allah‘s favour upon you and His covenant that He has taken from you when you said, .We have listened and obeyed. Fear Allah. Allah is all-Aware of what lies in the hearts.
5|8| O you who believe, be steadfast for (obeying the commands of) Allah, (and) witnesses for justice. Malice against a people should not prompt you to avoid doing justice. Do justice. That is nearer to Taqwa. Fear Allah. Surely, Allah is All-Aware of what you do.
5|9| Allah has promised those who believe and do good deeds: For them there is forgiveness and a great reward.
5|10| Those who disbelieve and deny Our signs - they are the people of the Fire.
5|11| O you who believe, remember Allah‘s favour upon you, when some people planned to lay their hands on you, and He kept their hands away from you. Fear Allah; and in Allah the believers should place their trust.
5|12| Allah has made the Children of Israel take a pledge. We appointed twelve chiefs from among them. Allah said, .I am surely with you. If you establish Salah, and pay Zakah, and believe in My Messengers, and hold them in reverence, and advance to Allah a goodly loan, I shall certainly write off your evil deeds, and I shall certainly admit you into Gardens beneath which rivers flow. So, whoever from you disbelieves after that has lost the straight path.
5|13| So, because they broke their pledge, We cursed them and made their hearts hardened. They change words from their places, and they have overlooked a good deal of the Advice they were given. Every now and then you come across a certain treachery from all of them, except a few. So, forgive them and forego. Indeed, Allah loves those who are good in deeds.
5|14| And from those who say, .We are Christians,. We took a pledge. So, they have overlooked a good deal of the Advice they were given. So, We had them stuck with enmity and malice among them right through the Day of Doom, and (then) Allah will tell them what they were doing.
5|15| O people of the Book, there has come to you Our Messenger disclosing to you much of what you have been concealing of the Book, while He overlooks much. There has come to you, from Allah, a Light and a clear Book;
5|16| with it Allah guides those who follow His pleasure to the pathways of peace, and brings them out, by His will, from the depths of darkness into the light, and guides them to a straight path.
5|17| Certainly, infidels are those who say, .God is the MasiH, son of Maryam (Jesus son of Mary). Say, .Who then has the power to do anything against Allah, if He wills to eliminate the MasiH son of Maryam and his mother and all those on earth?. Unto Allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and what lies between them. He creates what He wills. Allah is powerful over everything.
5|18| The Jews and the Christians say, .We are the sons of Allah and His favourites. Say, .Why then would He punish you for your sins? In fact, you are just human, among those He has created. He forgives whom He wills and punishes whom He wills. Unto Allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and what lies between them, and unto Him is the return.
5|19| O people of the Book, Our Messenger has come to you making things clear to you after a gap between Messengers, lest you were to say, .There has not come to us a bearer of good news, and a warner. So, now there has come to you a bearer of good news, and a warner. Allah is powerful over everything.
5|20| (Recall) when Musa said to his people, .O my people, remember the blessing of Allah upon you when He made prophets from among you, made you kings and gave you what He did not give to anyone in the worlds.
5|21| O my people, enter the Holy Land which Allah has destined for you, and do not turn back, lest you should turn losers.
5|22| They said, .O Musa, there is a nation of tyrants over there, and we shall never enter it until they get out of it. If they do get out of it, we are ready to go in.
5|23| Said two men from among the God-fearing, on whom Allah had bestowed His favour, .Enter the gate (charging) upon them. Once you have entered it, you will be the ones who will prevail. In Allah you must place your trust, if you are believers.
5|24| They said, .O Musa, we shall never enter it, in any case, so long as they are there. So go, you and your Lord, and fight. As for us, we are sitting right here.
5|25| He said, .O my Lord, I have no control except over myself and my brother. So, make a distinction between us and the sinning people.
5|26| He (Allah) said, .This (land) is prohibited to them for forty years. They shall be wandering around the earth. So, do not grieve for the sinning people.
5|27| And recite to them the story of the two sons of ‘Adam rightly: When both of them offered a sacrifice, it was accepted from one of them, and was not accepted from the other. He said, .I will kill you. He said, .Allah accepts only from the God-fearing.
5|28| If you stretch your hand towards me to kill me, I am not going to stretch my hand towards you to kill you. Indeed, I fear Allah, the Lord of the worlds.
5|29| I would rather let you bear my sin and your sin, and then become one of the people of the Fire. That is the punishment of the unjust.
5|30| His self, however, prompted him to kill his brother, so he killed him and became one of the losers.
5|31| Then, Allah sent a crow that scratched the earth to show him how he should conceal the corpse of his brother. He said, .Alas! Was I not even able to be like this crow so that I could conceal the corpse of my brother? So, he stood regretful.
5|32| For this reason, We decreed for the children of Isra‘il that whoever kills a person not in retaliation for a person killed, nor (as a punishment) for spreading disorder on the earth, is as if he has killed the whole of humankind, and whoever saves the life of a person is as if he has saved the life of the whole of humankind. Certainly, Our messengers have come to them with clear signs. Then, after all that, many of them are there to commit excesses on the earth.
5|33| Those who fight against Allah and His Messenger and run about trying to spread disorder on the earth, their punishment is no other than that they shall be killed, or be crucified, or their hands and legs be cut off from different sides, or they be kept away from the land (they live in). That is a humiliation for them in this world, and for them there is a great punishment in the Hereafter;
5|34| except those who repent before you overpower them. Then, be sure that Allah is Most-Forgiving, Very-Merciful.
5|35| O you who believe, fear Allah and seek means of nearness to Him, and carry out Jihad in His way, so that you may succeed.
5|36| Surely, if the disbelievers have all that is in the earth, and more as much besides it, to pay it as ransom against the punishment of the Day of Judgment, it shall not be accepted from them, and they will have a painful punishment.
5|37| They will wish to come out of the Fire, but they will not be able to come out from there. For them there will be a lasting punishment.
5|38| As for a man or a woman who commits theft, cut off the hands of both to punish them for what they earned,_a deterrent punishment from Allah. Allah is Mighty, Wise.
5|39| Whoever repents after his transgression and corrects himself, then Allah shall relent towards him. Surely, Allah is Most-Forgiving, Very- Merciful.
5|40| Do you not know that to Allah alone belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth? He punishes whomsoever He wills and forgives whomsoever He wills. Allah is powerful over everything.
5|41| O Messenger, those who race towards disbelief should not be a cause of grief for you, be they from those who say with their mouths, .We believe., while their hearts do not believe, or from those who are (pronounced) Jews. They are listeners to the fallacy, listeners to other people who did not come to you. They distort the words after they had been properly placed. They say, .If you are given this, take it, and if you are not given this, then avoid it. The one whom Allah wills to put to trial, you cannot do anything for him against Allah. They are the ones whose hearts Allah did not intend to purify. For them there is humiliation in this world, and for them there is a great punishment in the Hereafter.
5|42| They are listeners to the fallacy, devourers of the unlawful. So, if they come to you, judge between them or turn away from them. If you turn away from them, they can do you no harm. But if you judge, judge between them with justice. Surely, Allah loves those who do justice.
5|43| How do they ask you to judge while the Torah is with them, having the ruling of Allah? Still, they turn away, after all that. They are no believers.
5|44| Surely We have sent down the Torah, in which there was guidance and light by which the prophets, who submitted themselves to Allah, used to judge for the Jews, and (so did) the Men of Allah and the Men of knowledge, because they were ordained to protect the Book of Allah, and they stood guard over it. So, (O Jews of today,) do not fear people. Fear Me, and do not take a paltry price for My verses. Those who do not judge according to what Allah has sent down are the disbelievers.
5|45| We prescribed for them therein: A life for a life, an eye for an eye, a nose for a nose, an ear for an ear and a tooth for a tooth; and for wounds, an equal retaliation. Then, if one forgives it, that will be expiation for him. Those who do not judge according to what Allah has sent down, they are the unjust.
5|46| We sent ‘Isa son of Maryam after those prophets, confirming the Torah that was (revealed) before him, and We gave him the Injil having guidance and light therein, and confirming the Torah that was (revealed) before it; a guidance and a lesson for the God-fearing.
5|47| And the people of the Injil must judge according to what Allah has sent down therein. Those who do not judge according to what Allah has sent down, they are the sinners.
5|48| We have sent down to you the Book with truth, confirming the Book before it, and a protector for it. So, judge between them according to what Allah has sent down, and do not follow their desires against the truth that has come to you. For each of you We have made a law and a method. Had Allah willed, He would have made a single community of people, but (He did not), so that He may test you in what He has given to you. Strive, then, to excel each other in good deeds. To Allah is the return for all of you. Then Allah shall tell you about that in which you disputed.
5|49| We order you to judge between them according to what Allah has sent down. Do not follow their desires, and beware of them, lest they should turn you away from some of what Allah has sent down to you. If they turn away, be assured that Allah intends to make them suffer for some of their sins. Surely, many of the people are sinners.
5|50| Is it, then, the judgement of (the days of) Ignorance that they seek? Who is better in judgement than Allah, for a people who believe?
5|51| O you who believe, do not take the Jews and the Christians for intimate friends. They are friends to each other. Whoever takes them as intimate friends is one of them. Surely, Allah does not take the unjust people to the right path.
5|52| Now, you see those who have disease in their hearts race towards them saying, .We apprehend that some misfortune may overtake us. So, it is likely that Allah may bring victory or something else from His own side, whereupon they will become regretful over what they concealed in their hearts.
5|53| Those who believe will say, .Are these the ones who swore their solemn oaths by Allah that they were with you?. Their deeds have gone to waste, and they became losers.
5|54| O you who believe, if anyone from you turns back from his Faith, then Allah will bring a people whom He loves and who love Him, humble toward the believers, hard on the disbelievers, who fight in the way of Allah and are not afraid of the reproach of any critic. That is a grace of Allah. He confers it on whom He wills. Allah is All-Embracing, All-Knowing
5|55| Your only friend is Allah, then His Messenger and those who believe, who establish Salah and pay Zakah and bow before Allah.
5|56| Whoever maintains friendship with Allah and His Messenger and those who believe (must know that) it is the (members of the) Party of Allah that are the triumphant.
5|57| O you who believe, do not take those who have taken your Faith in jest and fun for friends from those who have been given the Book prior to you, and the disbelievers. Fear Allah, if you are believers.
5|58| When you call for Salah, they take it in jest and fun. That is because they are a people who do not understand
5|59| Say, .O People of the Book, do you accuse us of anything else except that we have believed in Allah and in what has been sent down to us and what has been sent down earlier while most of you are sinners (and we do not follow you in your sins)
5|60| Say, .Shall I tell you about the ones whose retribution with Allah is worse than that (which you deem bad)? They are those whom Allah has subjected to His curse and to His wrath; and He has turned some of them into apes and swine, those who worshipped Taghut (Satan, the Rebel). Those are worse in their situation, and far more astray from the straight path.
5|61| When they come to you, they say, .We believe., while with disbelief they came in, and with the same (disbelief) they went out. Allah knows best what they used to conceal.
5|62| You will see many of them rushing towards sin and aggression, and (towards) devouring what is unlawful. Evil indeed is what they have been doing.
5|63| Why do the Men of Allah and the Men of Knowledge not forbid them from saying what is sinful and devouring what is unlawful? Evil indeed is what they have been working.
5|64| The Jews said, .Allah‘s hand is fettered. Fettered are their own hands, and cursed are they for what they said. In fact, His hands are outspread. He spends as He wills. What has been sent down to you from your Lord shall certainly increase many of them in rebellion and disbelief. We have put enmity and hatred amongst them lasting to the Day of Doom. Whenever they lit the flame of war, Allah puts it out. They run about on the earth spreading mischief, and Allah does not like the mischief-makers.
5|65| If the People of the Book had believed and feared Allah, We would have written off their evil deeds and would have surely admitted them to the Gardens of Bliss.
5|66| If they had upheld the Torah and the Injil and what had been sent down to them from their Lord, they would surely have had plenty to eat from above them and from beneath them. Among them are moderate people. As for most of them, evil is what they do.
5|67| O Messenger, convey all that has been sent down to you from your Lord. If you do not, then you shall not have conveyed His message (at all). Allah shall protect you from the people. Surely, Allah does not lead the disbelieving people to the right path.
5|68| Say, .O people of the Book, you have nothing to stand on, unless you uphold the Torah and the Injil and what has been sent down to you from your Lord. What has been sent down to you from your Lord will certainly make many of them more persistent in rebellion and disbelief. So, do not grieve over the disbelieving people.
5|69| Surely, those who believe, and those who are Jews, and the Sabians, and the Christians - whoever believes in Allah and the Last Day, and acts righteously, shall have no fear, nor shall such people grieve.
5|70| Certainly We took a pledge from the children of Isra‘il and sent Messengers to them. Whenever a Messenger went to them with what did not meet their desires, they cried lie to some, and killed others.
5|71| They thought that no harm would follow. Therefore, they became blind and deaf. Then, Allah accepted their repentance, but again they turned blind and deaf, many of them. Allah is watchful of what they do.
5|72| Surely, disbelievers are those who say, .Allah is the MasiH, son of Maryam. while the MasiH had said, .O children of Isra‘il , worship Allah, my Lord and your Lord. In fact, whoever ascribes any partner to Allah, Allah has prohibited for him the Jannah (the Paradise), and his shelter is the Fire, and there will be no supporters for the unjust.
5|73| Surely, disbelievers are those who say, .Allah is the third of the three. while there is no god but One God. If they do not desist from what they say, a painful punishment shall certainly befall such disbelievers.
5|74| Why then do they not turn to Allah in repentance and seek His forgiveness, while Allah is most forgiving, very merciful?
5|75| The MasiH, son of Maryam, is no more than a Messenger. There have been messengers before him. His mother was very truthful. Both of them used to eat food. Look how We explain signs to them, then see how far they are turned away.
5|76| Say, .Do you worship, besides Allah, what has no power to do you harm or bring you benefit?. Allah is the All-Hearing, the All-Knowing.
5|77| Say, O people of the Book, be not excessive in your religion unjustly, and do not follow the desires of a people who have already gone astray, misled many and lost the right path.
5|78| On those who disbelieve from among the children of Isra‘il , a curse was pronounced by Dawud and ‘Isa, Son of Maryam. All this because they disobeyed and used to cross the limits
5|79| They did not forbid each other from any evil they committed. Evil indeed is what they have been doing.
5|80| You see many of them take the infidels (the pagans) for friends. Indeed, evil is what they have sent ahead for themselves, for Allah is angry with them, and they are to remain in torment for ever.
5|81| If they believed in Allah, in the prophet, and in what had been sent down to him, they would have not taken them (the pagans) for friends, but many of them are sinners.
5|82| And you will certainly find that the people most hostile against the believers are the Jews and the ones who ascribe partners to Allah. You will certainly find that the closest of them in friendship with the believers are those who say, .We are Christians.That is because among them there are priests and monks, and because they are not arrogant.
5|83| When they hear what has been sent down to the Messenger, you will see their eyes overflowing with tears because of the truth they have recognized. They say, .Our Lord, we have come to believe. So, record us along with those who bear witness.
5|84| What excuse do we have if we do not believe in Allah and in the truth that has come to us, while we hope that our Lord will admit us to the company of the righteous people?.
5|85| So, because of what they said, Allah has awarded them gardens beneath which rivers flow, wherein they will live forever. That is the reward of those who are good in their deeds.
5|86| But those who disbelieved and denied Our signs, they are the people of the Fire.
5|87| O you who believe, do not hold as unlawful the good things that Allah has made lawful for you, and do not transgress. Verily, Allah does not like the transgressors.
5|88| Eat from what Allah has provided you as good and lawful, and fear Allah in whom you believe.
5|89| Allah does not hold you accountable for your laghw (ineffectual) oaths, but He does hold you accountable for the oath with which you have bound yourself. Its expiation is to feed ten poor persons at an average of what you feed your family with, or to clothe them, or to free a slave. However, if someone cannot afford, he has to fast for three days. That is expiation for the oaths that you have sworn. Take care of your oaths. That is how Allah makes His signs clear to you, so that you may be grateful.
5|90| O you who believe! Wine, gambling, altars and divining arrows are filth, made up by Satan. Therefore, refrain from it, so that you may be successful.
5|91| Satan wishes only to plant enmity and malice between you through wine and gambling, and to prevent you from the remembrance of Allah and from Salah. Would you, then, abstain?
5|92| Obey Allah, obey the Messenger, and be heedful. If you still turn back, be assured that the duty of Our Messenger is only to convey the Message clearly.
5|93| There is no sin, for those who believe and do good deeds, in what they might have partaken earlier, if they fear Allah, and believe, and do good deeds; and again fear Allah, and believe, and still again fear Allah and do good deeds. Allah loves those who are good in their deeds.
5|94| O you who believe, Allah shall certainly test you with some of the game coming in the range of your hands and spears, so that Allah may know those who fear Him, even though He is Unseen. Whoever transgresses the limit after all this, for him there is a painful punishment.
5|95| O you who believe, do not kill game when you are in IHram (state of consecration for Hajj or ‘Umrah). If someone from among you kills it deliberately, then compensation (will be required) from cattle equal to what one has killed, according to the judgement of two just men from among you, as an offering due to reach the Ka‘bah, or an expiation, that is, to feed the poor, or its equal in fasts, so that he may taste the punishment of what he did. Allah has forgiven what has passed, but whoever does it again, Allah shall subject him to retribution. Allah is Mighty, Lord of Retribution.
5|96| Made lawful for you is the game of the sea and eating thereof, as a benefit for you and for travellers. But the game of the land has been made unlawful for you as long as you are in the state of IHram. Fear Allah (the One) towards Whom you are to be brought together.
5|97| Allah has made the Ka‘bah, the Sacred House, a source of stability for people, and also the sacred month and the sacrificial animal and the garlands. All this is because you may learn that Allah knows what is in the heavens and what is in the earth. Allah is All-Knowing in respect of everything.
5|98| Be sure that Allah is severe in punishment and that Allah is Very-Forgiving, Very-Merciful.
5|99| The duty of Our Messenger is only to convey the Message. Allah knows what you disclose and what you conceal.
5|100| Say, .The evil and the good are not equal, even though the abundance of (what is) evil may attract you. So, fear Allah, O people of understanding, so that you may be successful.
5|101| O you who believe, do not ask about things which, if disclosed, would displease you. If you ask about them while the Qur‘an is being revealed, they will be disclosed to you. Allah has pardoned you for it. Allah is Most-Forgiving, Forbearing.
5|102| People before you asked such questions, and then, as a result, became disbelievers.
5|103| Allah has made no BaHirah, no Sa‘ibah, no WaSilah and no Hami (names of animals dedicated to idols on different grounds). But those who disbelieve coin a lie against Allah, and most of them do not understand.
5|104| When it is said to them, .Come to what Allah has sent down, and to the Messenger;. they say, .Sufficient for us is that on which we have found our forefathers. Is it so, even though their forefathers knew nothing, and had no guidance either?
5|105| O you who believe, take care of your own selves. The one who has gone astray cannot harm you, if you are on the right path. To Allah all of you have to return. Then He will tell you what you have been doing.
5|106| O you who believe, when death draws near one of you, that is, at the time of making a will, the evidence (recognized) between you shall be of two witnesses from among you, or of two others not from you, if you are travelling on the earth and the trauma of death visits you. (Then) you shall detain them after the prayer, if you have some doubt, and they shall swear by Allah, .We shall not take a price for it, even if there be a relative; and we shall not conceal the evidence (as due) of Allah, otherwise we should certainly be among the sinners.
5|107| Then, if it is discovered that the two had rendered themselves liable to a sin, then, in their place shall stand two others, closest of those whose right has been taken away, and they shall swear by Allah, .Our evidence is more truthful than their evidence, and we have not transgressed; otherwise we should be among the unjust.
5|108| Thus, it is more likely that the former people (i.e. the executors of the bequest) will bear witness in its proper way, or they will fear that oaths will be taken in rebuttal of their oaths. Fear Allah and listen. Allah does not lead sinning people to the right path.
5|109| (Be mindful of) the day when Allah will assemble the messengers and will say to them, .How were you responded to?. They will say, .We have no knowledge. Surely You alone have the full knowledge of all that is unseen.
5|110| (Call to mind the time) when Allah will say, .O ‘Isa, son of Maryam, remember My blessing upon you and upon your mother; when I supported you with the Holy Spirit. You spoke to people while you were still in the cradle and when you grew to middle age. I taught you the Book and the Wisdom, the Torah and the Injil. You created from clay something in the shape of a bird, then you blew on it, and it became a bird by My leave. You cured those born blind and lepers by My leave. You raised the dead by My leave. I kept the children of Isra‘il away from you when you came to them with clear signs, and the disbelievers among them said, .This is nothing but a clear magic.
5|111| When I enjoined upon the disciples (of ‘Isa ), .Believe in Me and in My Messenger,. they said, .We believed. Bear witness that we are the submitting ones.
5|112| When the disciples said, .O ‘Isa, son of Maryam, can your Lord send down to us a repast from the heavens?. He said, .Fear Allah if you are believers.
5|113| They said, .We wish that we eat from it, and our hearts be satisfied, and we may know for sure that you have told us the truth, and we may become witnesses to it.
5|114| ‘Isa son of Maryam said, .O Allah, our Lord, send down to us a repast from heaven which may be a happy occasion for us, for all our generations present and future, and a sign from You, and give us provisions. You are the best Giver of Provisions.
5|115| Allah said, .I am going to send it down to you; but whoever among you disbelieves after that, I shall give him such a punishment as I shall not give to anyone else in all the worlds.
5|116| And when Allah said, .O ‘Isa, son of Maryam, did you say to the people: ‘Take me and my mother as gods beside Allah?. He said, .Pure are You, it does not behoove me to say what is not right for me. Had I said it, You would have known it. You know what is in my heart, and I do not know what is in Your‘s. You alone have full knowledge of all that is unseen.
5|117| I have not said to them anything but what You have ordered me to say, that is, ‘Worship Allah, my Lord and your Lord‘ and I was a witness over them as long as I was with them. But when You recalled me, You were the One watching over them. You are a witness over everything.
5|118| If You punish them, they are Your slaves after all, but if You forgive them, You are the Mighty, the Wise.
5|119| Allah will say, .This is a day on which the truth of the truthful shall benefit them. For them there are gardens beneath which rivers flow, where they will live forever. Allah is well-pleased with them and they are well-pleased with Him. That is the great achievement.
5|120| To Allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and of whatever lies therein, and He is powerful over everything.
6|1| All praise belongs to Allah who created the heavens and the earth, and made darkness and light; yet those who disbelieve equate (others) with their Lord.
6|2| He is the One who created you from clay, then destined a term. The fixed term lies with Him, yet you are in doubt.
6|3| He is the true God in the heavens and the earth. He knows what you conceal and what you reveal, and He knows what you earn.
6|4| Yet whenever a sign from the signs of their Lord comes to them, they do nothing but turn away from it.
6|5| So they rejected the truth when it came to them. Now there shall come to them a full account of what they used to ridicule.
6|6| Have they not seen how many generations We have destroyed prior to them__those whom We had given such a strong position in the land as We did not give to you, and We poured on them abundant rains from the sky, and made rivers flow beneath them? Then We destroyed them because of their sins, and raised up another generation after them.
6|7| If We had sent down to you something written on paper, and they had even touched it with their hands, still the disbelievers would have said, .This is nothing but obvious magic.
6|8| They say, .Why is it that an angel has not been sent down to him?. Had We sent down an angel, the whole matter would have been closed, and thereafter no further time would have been allowed to them.
6|9| If We had made him an angel, We would have obviously made him a man, and would have caused them the same confusion they are causing now.
6|10| Even before you (O Prophet,) many messengers were ridiculed. Those who laughed at them were, then, besieged by what they used to ridicule.
6|11| Say, .Go about the earth, and see what was the fate of those who rejected (the prophets).
6|12| Say, .To whom belongs all that is in the heavens and on the earth?. Say, .To Allah. He has prescribed Mercy for Himself. He will surely gather you on the Day of Resurrection in which there is no doubt. Those who have brought loss to themselves are not going to believe.
6|13| To Him belongs all that dwells in the night and the day. He is All-Hearing, All-Knowing.
6|14| Say, .Would I take as guardian someone other than Allah Who is the Creator of the heavens and the earth, and Who feeds others, and is not fed by anyone?. Say, .I have been asked to be the first to submit (to Him) and never to be one of those who ascribe partners to Allah.
6|15| Say, .If I disobey my Lord, I fear the punishment of a momentous day.
6|16| Whoever is spared from it (the punishment of that day) is, indeed, blessed with His mercy. That is the manifest achievement.
6|17| If Allah causes you harm, there is no one to remove it except He Himself; and if He causes you good, then He is powerful over everything.
6|18| He is Dominant over His servants, and He is the All-Wise, the All-Aware.
6|19| Say, .Whose testimony is the greatest?. Say, .Allah is the witness between me and you, and this Qur‘an has been revealed to me so that I should thereby warn you, and whomsoever it may reach. Do you really bear witness that there are other gods along with Allah?. Say, .I bear no such witness. Say, .In fact, He is one God. I disown what you associate (with Him).
6|20| Those to whom We have given the Book recognize him (the Messenger) as (certainly as) they would recognize their sons. Those who have brought loss to themselves, they are not going to believe.
6|21| Who is more unjust than one who invents a lie against Allah or rejects His signs? Beware, the unjust shall not prosper.
6|22| (Be mindful of) the Day We shall gather them together, then We will say to those who associated partners with Allah, .Where are those you claimed to be partners of Allah?.
6|23| Then, they will have no other mischievous move but that they will say, .By Allah, our Lord, we ascribed no partners to Allah.
6|24| See how they will lie about themselves, and all that they used to forge will vanish from them.
6|25| There are those among them who (apparently) listen to you, but We have put coverings on their hearts, so that they do not understand, and heaviness in their ears. If they were to see all the signs, they would still not believe in them, so much so that, when they come to quarrel with you, the disbelievers say (of the Qur‘an), .It is nothing but tales of the ancients.
6|26| From it (the Qur‘an) they prevent others, and from it they keep themselves away. They ruin none but their own selves, while they do not realize it.
6|27| If only you could (be there to) see when they will be made to stand by the Fire, and they will say, .Would that we were sent back, then we would not reject the signs of our Lord, and would join the believers.
6|28| In fact, what they were concealing earlier will become clear to them. If they were sent back, they would again go for what they were forbidden from, as they are sheer liars.
6|29| They say, .There is nothing but this worldly life of ours, and we are not going to be raised again.
6|30| If only you could see when they will be made to stand before their Lord! He will say, .Is this not true?. They will say, .Of course, by our Lord, it is. He will say, .Then, taste the punishment, for you used to disbelieve.
6|31| Losers indeed are those who deny that they will ever face Allah, until when the Hour will come upon them suddenly, they will say, .Alas! We have been negligent about it. They shall carry their burdens on their backs. Beware! Evil is the burden they carry.
6|32| The worldly life is nothing but a game and fun, and the last abode is surely much better for those who fear Allah. Would you still not understand?
6|33| Indeed We know that what they say makes you sad, because it is not you whom they reject, but the transgressors actually deny the signs of Allah.
6|34| Indeed, many messengers have been rejected before you, but they stood patient against their rejection, and they were persecuted until Our help came to them. No one can change the words of Allah, and of course, some accounts of the messengers have already come to you.
6|35| If their aversion is too hard on you, then seek, if you can, a tunnel into the earth or a ladder unto the sky in order to bring them a sign. Had Allah so willed, He would have brought all of them to the right path. So, never be one of the ignorant.
6|36| Only those respond who listen (to seek the truth). As for the dead, Allah shall raise them, after which they shall be returned to Him.
6|37| They say, .Why is it that no sign (of our choice) has been sent down to him from his Lord?. Say, .Allah is surely powerful enough to send down a sign. But most of them do not know.
6|38| There is no creature moving on the earth, nor a bird flying on its two wings, but they are all communities like you. We have not missed anything in the Book. Then, to their Lord all of them shall be gathered.
6|39| Those who gave the lie to Our signs are deaf and dumb, in layers of darkness. He lets whomsoever He wills go astray, and brings whomsoever He wills on the straight path.
6|40| Say, .Tell me if the punishment of Allah comes to you or the Hour befalls you, would you call someone other than Allah, if you are truthful?.
6|41| Rather, Him alone you will call and He, if He wills, shall remove what you call Him for, and you will forget those you associate with Him.
6|42| We did send messengers to communities before you and put them to hardships and sufferings, so that they may supplicate in humility.
6|43| Why then, did they not supplicate in humility when a calamity from Us came upon them? Instead, their hearts were hardened and Satan adorned for them what they were doing.
6|44| Thereafter, when they forgot the advice they were given, We opened for them doors of everything, so that when they became proud of what they were given, We seized them suddenly and they were left in despair.
6|45| Thus, the people who did wrong were uprooted to the last man; Praise be to Allah, the Lord of the worlds.
6|46| Say, .Tell me, if Allah takes away your hearing and your sights and sets a seal on your hearts, which god other than Allah can bring these back to you?. See how We put forth Our verses in various forms? Yet, still they turn away.
6|47| Say, .Tell me if the punishment of Allah comes upon you whether suddenly or openly, shall any people be destroyed except the unjust?‘
6|48| We do not send the messengers but as bearers of good tidings and as warners. So, those who believe and correct themselves, there will be no fear for them, nor shall they grieve,
6|49| whereas those who have rejected Our signs, torment shall afflict them, because they used to commit sins.
6|50| Say, .I do not say to you that I have the treasures of Allah, nor do I have the knowledge of the Unseen, nor do I say to you that I am an angel. I only follow what is revealed to me. Say, .Are the blind and the seeing alike? Do you, then, not reflect?.
6|51| Warn, with it, those who have the fear of being gathered before their Lord, with no one other than Him to support or to intercede. Maybe they become God-fearing.
6|52| Do not expel those who call out to their Lord morning and evening seeking His pleasure. You are not responsible for anything in their account, and they are not responsible for anything in your account, that you should expel them, and thus become one of the unjust.
6|53| Thus We have tested some of them through others, so that they should say, .Are these the ones among all of us whom Allah has chosen for His favour?. Yes, does Allah not know well who are the grateful?
6|54| When those who believe in Our verses come to you, say to them, .Peace on you. Your Lord has prescribed for Himself mercy, so that if any one of you does an evil deed out of ignorance and thereafter repents and mends his ways, then (you will see that) He is Most-Forgiving, Very- Merciful.
6|55| This is how We explain the verses in detail, so that the way of the guilty may become exposed.
6|56| Say, .I have been forbidden from worshiping those whom you invoke beside Allah. Say, .I do not follow your desires, because if I were to do that, I would be going astray and would no more be of those on the right path.
6|57| Say, .I am on clear guidance from my Lord, and you have cried lies to it. That which you demand to be hastened is not up to me. The Decision belongs to none but Allah. He relates the Truth and He is the best of all judges.
6|58| Say, .If what you demand to be hastened were up to me, the matter between me and you would have been over. Allah well knows who the wrongdoers are.
6|59| With Him are the keys of the Unseen. No one knows them but He. He knows what is in the land and the sea. No leaf ever falls but that He knows about it, and there is no grain in the dark layers of the earth, or anything fresh or dry that is not recorded in a manifest book.
6|60| He is the One who recalls your souls by night, and knows what you do by day; then He makes you rise up therein, so that a fixed term may be fulfilled. Thereafter, to Him are you to return; then He will tell you what you have been doing.
6|61| He is Dominant over His slaves, and He sends guardians over you until when death comes upon one of you, Our deputies take his soul in full, and they neglect nothing (from their duties).
6|62| Then all of them will be returned to Allah, their real Master. Behold, His is the judgement, and He is the swiftest of those who take account.
6|63| Say, .Who is the One who delivers you from the darkness of the land and the sea when you supplicate Him in humility and in low tones (promising): ‘If He delivers us from this, We shall truly become grateful?‘.
6|64| Say, .Allah delivers you from it and from every pain; Yet still, you associate partners with Him.
6|65| Say, .He is fully capable that He should send a punishment from above you or from beneath your feet, or to put you in confusion through divisions, and make some of you taste troubles through some others. See how We bring forth explaining verses from different angles, so that they may understand.
6|66| Your people have rejected it (the Qur‘an) while it is the whole truth. Say, .I am not appointed as a taskmaster over you.
6|67| For every event there is a point (of time and place) to occur, and you will soon know (it).
6|68| When you see those who indulge in (blaspheming) Our verses, turn away from them until they become occupied with some other discourse. If Satan should cause you to forget (this instruction), then do not sit with the unjust people after recollection.
6|69| Those who fear Allah are not responsible for any (evil) act in the account of these (infidels), except for advising them, so that they may be careful.
6|70| Avoid those who have taken their faith as fun and games. The worldly life has deceived them. Preach with it (the Qur‘an), lest one should be seized for what he did, in a way that he should have neither a helper besides Allah, nor an intercessor. Should he offer every (sort of) ransom, it will not be accepted from him. Those are the ones who are seized for what they themselves earned. For them there is a drink of boiling water, and a painful punishment, because they used to disbelieve.
6|71| Say, .Should we invoke, besides Allah, something that can neither benefit us nor harm us? Should we turn back on our heels after Allah has guided us? (If we do so, we will be) like the one whom the devils have abducted to a far off land, leaving him bewildered, even though he has friends who call him to the right path (saying), .Come to us. Say, .Allah‘s guidance is the guidance, and we have been ordered to submit to the Lord of the worlds,
6|72| and establish Salah, and heed Him. He is the One before whom you are to be gathered.
6|73| He is the One who created the heavens and the earth with purpose. On the day He says .Be., it (the Resurrection) will come to be. His word is the truth, and His is the kingdom on the day the Horn shall be blown. He is the Knower of the Unseen and the Seen. He is the Wise, the All- Aware.
6|74| (Remember) when Ibrahim said to his father, ‘Azar: .Do you take idols for gods? I see you and your people in manifest error.
6|75| Thus We showed Ibrahim the kingdom of the heavens and the earth, so that he might be firm in belief.
6|76| So, when the night enveloped him, he saw a star. He said, .This is my Lord. But, when it vanished, he said, .I do not like those who vanish.
6|77| Later, when he saw the moon rising, he said, .This is my Lord. But, when it vanished, he said, .Had my Lord not guided me, I would have been among those gone astray.
6|78| Thereafter, when he saw the sun rising, he said, .This is my Lord. This is greater. Again, when it vanished, he said, .O my people, I disown whatever you associate with Allah
6|79| I have, indeed, turned my face straight towards the One who created the heavens and the earth, and I am not one of those who associate partners with Allah.
6|80| His people argued with him. He said, .Do you argue with me about Allah while He has already led me to the right path? I do not fear that which you associate with Him, (because it cannot harm me), unless, of course, something is willed by my Lord. My Lord encompasses everything with His knowledge. Would you, then, take no lesson?
6|81| How can I fear that which you associate with Him, while you do not fear (the evil fate of) your having associated with Allah something for which He did not send down to you any authority? Now, which of the two parties has more right to be in peace? (Tell me) if you know.
6|82| Those who have believed and have not mixed their faith with injustice are the ones who deserve peace, and it is they who are on the right path.
6|83| That is the decisive argument from Us that We gave to Ibrahim against his people. We raise in ranks whomsoever We will. Surely, your Lord is Wise, Knowing.
6|84| We bestowed upon him IsHaq and Ya‘qub . Each one of them We guided to the right path. Earlier, We guided NuH and, of his progeny, (We guided) Dawud and Sulaiman and Ayyub and Yusuf (Joseph) and Musa and Harun.__Thus We reward those who are good in deeds__
6|85| and (We guided) Zakariyya and YaHya and ‘Isa and Ilyas __each one of them was of the righteous__
6|86| __and Isma‘il and Yasa‘ and Yunus and LuT, and all of them We made to excel over all the people of the world (in their respective times).
6|87| We guided many among their fathers and their children and their brothers, and We chose them and led them on to the straight path.
6|88| That is Allah‘s guidance. He guides with it whomsoever He wills from among His servants. Had they associated partners with Him, all they did would have been nullified for them.
6|89| They are those whom We have given the Book and wisdom and prophethood. So, if these people disbelieve this (concept of Prophet-hood), then (be not grieved, because) We have deputed for (believing in) it a people who do not reject it.
6|90| Those are the people whom Allah has guided. So, it is their guidance that you should follow. Say, .I ask you no reward for it. It is nothing but an advice for all the worlds.
6|91| They did not hold Allah in due esteem when they said, .Allah has not sent down anything to a human being. Say, .Who has sent down the Book brought by Musa as a light and a guidance for people, which you keep in various sheets (some of which) you disclose, and a lot of which you conceal, and (by which) you were taught what you did not know, neither you nor your fathers?. Say, .Allah. Then leave them to play with whatever they indulge in.
6|92| This is indeed a Blessed Book We have sent down, confirming what was (revealed) before it, so that you may warn the town which is the Mother of All Towns, (i.e. Makkah) and those around it. Those who believe in the Hereafter believe in it, and they take due care of their prayers.
6|93| Who is more unjust than the one who fabricates a lie against Allah or says, .Revelation has been sent to me., whereas no revelation has been sent to him, and the one who says, .I would produce the like of what Allah has revealed. If only you could witness when the unjust are in the throes of death, and the angels stretch their hands (and say), .Out with your souls. Today, you shall have your punishment, a punishment of humiliation, because you have been saying about Allah what is not true, and have been showing arrogance against His verses.
6|94| You have come to Us all alone, just as We had first created you, and you have left behind you what We had bestowed on you, and We do not see your intercessors with you - those whom you claimed to be (Our) partners in (managing) your matters. In fact, all ties between you are now severed, and all that you presumed has totally failed you.
6|95| Surely, Allah is the one who splits the grain and the date-stone (for sprouting). He brings forth the living from the dead, and He is the One who brings forth the dead from the living. That is Allah! To where, then, are you being turned away (by your desires)?
6|96| (He is) the One who causes the dawn to break. He has made the night for rest, and the sun and the moon for reckoning. This is a measure set by the All-Mighty, the All-Knowing.
6|97| He is the One who made for you the stars, so that you may be guided by them in darkness of the land and the sea. We have elaborated the signs for the people who know.
6|98| He is the One who created you from one person, then, you have a place to dwell and a place to sojourn. We have elaborated the signs for the people who understand.
6|99| He is the One who sent down water from the heavens. Then We brought forth with it vegetation of all kinds. Then from it We brought grains set upon one another. From the palm-trees, from their spathes, come forth the low hanging bunches. (We produce) vineyards and the olive and the pomegranate, either similar or not similar to each other. Look at its fruit when it bears fruit, and at its ripening. Surely, in all this there are signs for the people who believe.
6|100| They have invented the Jinns as partners with Allah, while He has created them; and they have fabricated for Him sons and daughters without any knowledge. Pure is He, and far more higher than what they describe.
6|101| (He is) the Originator of the heavens and the earth. How can He have a son when He never had a wife? He created everything, and He knows everything.
6|102| This is Allah: your Lord, there is no God but He, the Creator of everything; so, worship Him. He is Guardian over everything.
6|103| No vision can comprehend Him, and He comprehends all visions, and He is Absolutely Subtle, All-Aware.
6|104| (Say, O Prophet :) There have come to you insights from your Lord. Now, whoever uses his sight, does so for his own self, and whoever remains blind does so against his own self. I do not stand guard over you.
6|105| This is how We bring the verses in diverse ways, so that they say, .you have been tutored., and so that We may explain it to people who have knowledge.
6|106| Follow what has been revealed to you from your Lord. There is no god but He; and turn away from those who associate partners with Allah.
6|107| If Allah willed, they would not have associated. We have not appointed you as a guard over them, nor are you a taskmaster for them.
6|108| Do not revile those whom they invoke other than Allah, lest they should revile Allah in transgression without having knowledge. This is how We have made the deeds of every community attractive in their sight. Then, to their Lord is their return, after which He shall tell them what they have been doing.
6|109| They have sworn forceful oaths by Allah that if a sign comes to them, they will surely believe in it. Say, .Signs are in Allah‘s power alone. What will make you realize that even when they (the signs) come, they will not believe?
6|110| We will upset their hearts and sights, as they did not believe in them at the first instance, and We will leave them wandering blindly in their rebellion.
6|111| If We had sent down to them the angels, and the dead had spoken to them, and (even if) We had gathered everything before them face to face, still, they were not to believe, unless Allah would have so willed. But, most of them adopt the way of ignorance.
6|112| So it is that, for every prophet, We have set up enemies,__the devils of mankind and jinn__who seduce one another with alluring rhetoric in order to deceive__Had Allah willed, they would have not done it. So, leave them alone with what they forge__
6|113| __and (they seduce one another) in order that the hearts of those who do not believe in the Hereafter may incline to it, and that they may be well pleased with it, and so that they commit what those (seducers) are used to commit.
6|114| So, should I seek someone other than Allah as judge, while it is He who has sent down to you the Book in details? Those We have given the Book know that it is revealed from your Lord with the truth. So, never be one of those who are in suspicion.
6|115| The Word of your Lord is perfect in truth and justice. None is there to change His words, and He is All-Hearing, All-Knowing.
6|116| If you obey the majority of those on earth, they will make you lose the way of Allah. They follow nothing but whims, and they do nothing but make conjectures.
6|117| Surely, your Lord is best aware of those who go astray from His way, and He is best aware of those who are on the right path.
6|118| So, eat (the flesh) of that (animal) upon which the name of Allah has been invoked (when slaughtering), if you do believe in His verses.
6|119| What should cause you to avoid eating of that upon which the name of Allah has been invoked, while He has spelled out to you all that He has made unlawful for you, except that to which you are compelled by extreme necessity? Surely, there are many who misguide people on the basis of their desires without having knowledge. Surely, your Lord is the best knower of those who cross the limits.
6|120| Leave outward sin and inward sin. Surely, those who commit sin shall be punished for what they used to commit.
6|121| Do not eat that (meat) over which the name of Allah has not been pronounced. This is surely a sin. The satans inspire their friends to dispute with you. If you were to obey them, you would be Mushriks.
6|122| Is it (conceivable) that the one who was dead and to whom We gave life, and set for him a light with which he walks among men, (is held to) be like the one whose condition is such that he is in total darkness, never coming out of it? This is how their deeds appear beautified to the disbelievers.
6|123| In a similar way, in every town We caused its chief sinners to commit mischief in it. And they do not commit mischief but against themselves, while they do not realize it.
6|124| When a sign comes to them, they say, .We shall never come to believe unless we are given the like of what was given to the messengers of Allah. Allah knows best where to place His message. Those who committed sin shall soon suffer from disgrace before Allah and face severe punishment for the mischief they have been making.
6|125| So, whomsoever Allah wills to guide, He makes his heart wide open for Islam, and whomsoever He wills to let go astray, He makes his heart strait and constricted, (and he feels embracing Islam as difficult) as if he were climbing to the sky. In this way, Allah lays abomination on those who do not believe.
6|126| This is the path of your Lord, a straight path. We have made the verses elaborate for people who accept the advice.
6|127| For them there is the Abode of Peace with their Lord, and He is their Guardian by virtue of what they used to do.
6|128| The day He will assemble all of them together, (Allah will say to Jinn) .O species of Jinns, you have done too much against mankind. Their friends from among the human beings will say, .Our Lord, some of us have benefited from others, and we have reached our term that You had appointed for us. He will say, .The Fire is your Abode wherein you will remain for ever, unless Allah wills (otherwise). Surely, your Lord is All-Wise, All-Knowing.
6|129| Thus We will make some wrongdoers companions of others (in the Hereafter) because of what they used to commit.
6|130| .O species of Jinn and mankind, had the messengers not come to you, from among yourselves, who used to relate My verses to you, and used to warn you of the encounter of this your day?. They will say, .We testify against ourselves. The worldly life had deceived them, and they will testify against themselves that they were disbelievers.
6|131| That (Allah sends messengers) is because your Lord is not to destroy any towns on account of any wrongdoing, while their people are unaware.
6|132| For all people, there are ranks according to what they did, and your Lord is not unaware of what they do.
6|133| Your Lord is the All-Independent, the Lord of Mercy. If He so wills, He can take you away and cause whomsoever He wills to succeed you, just as He has raised you from the progeny of other people.
6|134| Surely what you are promised is bound to come, and you cannot frustrate (it).
6|135| Say, .O my people, do at your place (whatever you do.) I have to do (in my way). So, you will know for whom is the ultimate abode. Surely, the wrongdoers will not be successful.
6|136| They have assigned a portion for Allah from the tillage and the cattle created by Him, and then said, .This is for Allah., so they claim, .And this is for our associate-gods. Then, that which is allocated for their associate-gods never reaches Allah, while that which is allocated for Allah does reach their associate-gods. Evil is what they judge.
6|137| Similarly, their associate-gods have made the killing of their children seem fair to many mushriks (idolators), so that they may ruin them and may confuse their faith for them. Had Allah so willed, they would not have done that. So, leave them alone with what they fabricate.
6|138| They say, .These are prohibited cattle and produce; none can eat them except those whom we wish. - so they claimed - .and there are cattle whose backs are prohibited (for riding or loading)., and there are cattle over which they do not pronounce the name of Allah,__all being fabrications against Him. He will soon punish them for what they have been fabricating.
6|139| They say, .Whatever is in the wombs of these cattle is purely for our males, and forbidden to our wives. If it be born dead, then all of them share in it. Soon, He will punish them for what they attribute. Surely, He is All-Wise, All-Knowing.
6|140| Losers are those who kill their children foolishly, without knowledge, and hold as prohibited what Allah has provided them, falsely ascribing it to Allah. They have gone astray, and they are not on the right path.
6|141| He is the One who has created gardens, trellised and untrellised, and date-palms and crops with a variety of edibles, and the olive and the pomegranate, (some) similar to one another, and (some) dissimilar. Eat of its fruit when it bears fruits, and pay its due on the day of harvest, and do not be extravagant. Surely, Allah does not like the extravagant
6|142| Among cattle (He has created) those fit for loading and those fit for laying on the floor. Eat of what Allah has provided you, and do not follow the footsteps of Satan. Surely, he is an open enemy to you.
6|143| (Allah has created) eight pairs: two of sheep and two of goats. Say, .Is it the two males that He has prohibited or the two females, or whatever the wombs of the two females contain? Tell me on the basis of knowledge if you are true.
6|144| And (He has created) two of camels and two of oxen. Say, .Is it the two males that He has prohibited or the two females or whatever the wombs of the two females contain? Or were you present when Allah has advised you of this?. So, who is more unjust than the one who fabricates a lie against Allah in order to misguide people without knowledge? Surely, Allah gives no guidance to an unjust people.
6|145| Say, .I do not find, in what has been revealed to me, anything (out of the cattle under discussion) prohibited for anyone who eats it, unless it be carrion or blood that pours forth, or flesh of swine - because it is impure - or there be an animal slaughtered sinfully by invoking on it the name of someone other than Allah. However, if anyone is compelled by necessity, neither seeking pleasure nor crossing the limit, then your Lord is Most-Forgiving, Very-Merciful.
6|146| For those who are Jews We prohibited all that has claws. Of cows and goats, We prohibited for them their fats, except that which is borne by their backs or the entrails, or what is attached to a bone. Thus We recompensed them for their transgression. We are definitely truthful.
6|147| Then, if they give the lie to you, say, .Your Lord is the Lord of all-embracing mercy, and His punishment cannot be averted from the sinning people.
6|148| Those who associate partners with Allah will say, .Had Allah willed, we would have not associated (partners with Him), nor our fathers, nor would we have made anything prohibited. In the same way those who went before them gave the lie to (the truth) until they tasted Our punishment. Say, .Do you have any sure knowledge that you may produce to us? You follow nothing but whims, and do nothing but make conjectures.
6|149| Say, .Then, Allah‘s is the conclusive proof. So, had He willed, He would have brought all of you on the right path.
6|150| Say, .Bring your witnesses who testify that Allah has prohibited this. Then, if they testify, (O prophet), do not be a witness to them, and do not follow the desires of those who have given the lie to Our signs and those who do not believe in the Hereafter, and who equate others with their Lord.
6|151| Say (O Prophet to the infidels), .Come, and I shall recite what your Lord has prohibited for you: Do not associate anything with Him (as His partner); and be good to parents, and do not kill your children because of poverty – We will give provision to you, and to them as well – and do not go near shameful acts, whether they are open or secret; and do not kill a person whom Allah has given sanctity, except rightfully. This He has enjoined upon you, so that you may understand.
6|152| Do not approach the property of the orphan, except with the best possible conduct, until he reaches maturity. Give full measure and full weight in all fairness – We do not obligate anyone beyond his capacity – and be just when you speak, even though the one (against whom you are speaking) is a relative; and fulfill the covenant of Allah. This is what He has enjoined upon you, so that you may observe the advice.
6|153| And: This is My path that is straightforward. So, follow it, and do not follow the (other) ways, lest they should make you deviate from His way. This is what He has enjoined upon you, so that you may be God-fearing.
6|154| Then We gave Musa the Book, perfect for the one who does good, and explaining everything in detail, and a guidance and mercy, so that they may believe in meeting their Lord.
6|155| And this (Qur‘an) is a blessed Book We have sent down. So follow it and fear Allah, so that you may be favored with mercy.
6|156| (Had We not sent this book,) you would (have an excuse to) say, .The Book was sent down only upon two groups before us, (i.e. the Jews and the Christians) and we were unaware of what they read.
6|157| Or you would say, .If the Book had been sent down to us, we would have been more adhering to the right path than they are. Now there has come to you a clear sign from your Lord, and a guidance and mercy. So, who is more unjust than the one who gives the lie to the verses of Allah and turns away from them? We will recompense those who turn away from Our verses with an evil punishment, because of their turning away.
6|158| They are waiting for nothing less than that the angels should come to them, or your Lord or some signs of your Lord should come. The day some signs of your Lord will come, the believing of a person shall be of no use to him who had never believed before, or had not earned some good through his faith. Say, .Wait. Of course, we are waiting.
6|159| Surely, those who have made divisions in their religion and turned into factions, you have nothing to do with them. Their case rests with Allah alone; then He will tell them what they have been doing.
6|160| Whoever comes with a good deed will receive ten times as much, and whoever comes with an evil deed will be requited with no more than the like of it, and they shall not be wronged.
6|161| Say, .As for me, my Lord has guided me to a straight path, the straight religion, the faith of Ibrahim who was upright and was not of those who associate partners with Allah.
6|162| Say, .My prayer, my offering, my life and my death are for Allah, the Lord of all the worlds.
6|163| For Him there is no partner. And thus I have been commanded, and I am the first one to submit.
6|164| Say, .Should I seek a lord other than Allah while He is the Lord of everything? And nobody does anything but to his own account, and no bearer of burden shall bear the burden of another. Then to your Lord is your return. Then He will let you know what you were disputing about.
6|165| It is He who made you the vicegerents of the earth and raised some of you in ranks over others, so that He may test you in what He has given you. Surely, your Lord is swift in punishing, and surely He is Most-Forgiving, Very-Merciful.
7|1| Alif, Lam, Mim, Sad.
7|2| (This is) a book sent down to you. Therefore, your heart must not be straitened because of it. (It is revealed to you) so that you may warn through it, and it may be an advice for the believers.
7|3| (O humankind,) follow what has been sent down to you from your Lord, and do not follow any masters other than Him. Little you heed to advice!
7|4| How many a town We have destroyed! Our punishment came upon them at night or when they were having a nap at midday.
7|5| So, when Our punishment came upon them, they could say nothing but cry, .We were wrongdoers indeed.
7|6| So, We shall ask those to whom the messengers were sent, and We shall ask the messengers (how they conveyed the message).
7|7| Then, having full knowledge, We shall tell them the whole story, as We were never far from them.
7|8| The Weighing (of deeds) on that day is definite. As for those whose scales are heavy, they will be the successful ones.
7|9| But those whose scales are light, they are the ones who have brought loss to themselves, because they did not do justice to Our verses.
7|10| We established you on earth, and created in it means of living for you. Little you appreciate.
7|11| We created you, then gave you a shape, then We said to the angels, .Prostrate yourselves before ‘Adam. So, they all prostrated themselves, except Iblis (Satan). He did not join those who fell prostrate.
7|12| Allah said, .What has prevented you from prostrating when I ordered you?. He said, .I am better than him. You have created me of fire, and created him of clay.
7|13| He said, .Then, get you down from here, it is not for you to show arrogance here. So, get out. You are one of the degraded.
7|14| He said, .Then give me respite until a day when all will be resurrected.
7|15| He (Allah) said, .You are granted respite‘‘.
7|16| He said, .Now that You have led me astray, I will certainly sit for them (in ambush) on Your straight path.
7|17| Then I will come upon them from their front side and from their behind, and from their right and from their left. You will not find most of them grateful.
7|18| He (Allah) said, .Get out of here, condemned, rejected. Indeed, whosoever will follow you from among them, I will fill Hell with all of you together.
7|19| O ‘Adam, dwell, you and your wife, in Paradise, and eat from wherever you like, but do not go near this tree, otherwise you shall join the transgressors.
7|20| Then Satan whispered to them, so that he might expose to them their shame that was hidden from them; and said, .Your Lord has not prohibited this tree for you, but to avoid your becoming angels or your becoming eternal.
7|21| He swore an oath, .I am one of your well-wishers.
7|22| Thus, he cast both of them down by deception. When they tasted (the fruit of) the tree, their shame was exposed to them, and they began to patch together some leaves of Paradise upon themselves, and their Lord called them, .Did I not forbid you from that tree? Did I not tell you that Satan is your declared enemy?.
7|23| They said, .Our Lord, we have wronged ourselves, and if You do not forgive us and do not bless us with mercy, we shall, indeed, be among the losers.
7|24| He said, .Go down, some of you enemies of some; and for you on the earth there will be a dwelling place and enjoyment for a time.
7|25| (Further) He said, .There you shall live and there you shall die, and from there you shall be raised again.
7|26| O children of ‘Adam, We have sent down to you the dress that covers your shame and provides adornment. As for the dress of Taqwa (piety), that is the best. That is one of the signs of Allah, so that they may learn a lesson.
7|27| O children of ‘Adam, .Do not let Satan put you in trouble the way he had your parents expelled from Paradise, having their dress removed from them, so that he could show them their shame. Indeed, he sees you _ he and his company _ from where you do not see them. Surely, We have made the devils friends to those who do not believe.
7|28| When they do a shameful act, they say, .We have found our fathers doing it, and Allah has ordered us to do so. Say, .Allah never orders anything shameful. Do you say about Allah what you do not know?.
7|29| Say, .My Lord has ordered me to do justice.Set your faces aright on each occasion of prostration, and pray to Him with pure faith in Him. Just as He has originated you, so you will be raised again.
7|30| He has led a group to guidance; and established for another group is misguidance. Indeed, they have taken the devils for their friends, instead of Allah, and they think that they are on the right path.
7|31| O children of ‘Adam, take on your adornment at every mosque. Eat and drink and do not be extravagant. Surely, He does not like the extravagant.
7|32| Say, .Who has prohibited the adornment Allah has brought forth for His servants, and the wholesome things of sustenance?. Say, .They are for the believers during this worldly life (though shared by others), while they are purely for them on the day of Resurrection. This is how We elaborate the verses for people who understand.
7|33| Say, .My Lord has prohibited only the shameful acts, whether open or secret, and (every) sinful act, and unjust aggression, and that you associate with Allah anything for which He has not sent any authority, and that you attribute to Allah any thing about which you do not have sure knowledge.
7|34| For every people there is an appointed time. So, when their appointed time will come, they cannot be late for a moment, nor will they get ahead.
7|35| O children of ‘Adam, if messengers from among you come to you conveying My verses to you, then, those who fear Allah and correct themselves will have no fear, nor shall they grieve.
7|36| Those who reject Our verses and stand arrogant against them, – they are the inmates of the Fire. There they shall live forever.
7|37| So, who is more unjust than the one who coins a lie against Allah or rejects His signs? They shall receive their share from that (sustenance) which is written (for them in their destiny) until, when Our envoys (angels) shall come to them to take their souls away, they (the angels) will say, .Where are those (so-called gods) whom you used to invoke besides Allah?. They (the unbelievers) will say, .They all have vanished from us., and they shall testify against themselves that they were unbelievers.
7|38| He (Allah) will say, .Enter the Fire along with the peoples who passed before you from the Jinn and the human beings. Whenever a group will enter it, they will curse their fellows, until when all of them will have joined each other in it, the latter ones will say about the former ones .Our Lord, they misguided us; so, give them a double punishment of the Fire. He will say, .For each there is a double, but you do not know.
7|39| The former ones will say to the latter ones, .So, you have no privilege against us. Now, taste the punishment for what you have been earning.
7|40| Surely, those who have rejected Our signs and stood arrogant against them, the gates of the heavens shall not be opened for them, and they shall not enter Paradise unless a camel passes through the eye of a needle. This is how We recompense the sinners.
7|41| For them there is a bed from the Jahannam, and over them there are coverings. This is how We recompense the transgressors.
7|42| Those who believe and do good deeds,__We do not obligate anyone beyond his capacity___they are the people of Paradise; they shall remain there for ever.
7|43| We will remove whatever amount of malice they had in their hearts. Rivers will flow beneath them, and they will say, .All praise is to Allah who has guided us to this. We would not have been able to find the way, had Allah not guided us. Surely, the messengers of our Lord came with the truth. Then they will receive a call, .Here is the Paradise which you have been made to inherit because of the deeds you have been doing.
7|44| The inmates of Paradise will call out to the inmates of the Fire: .We have found true what our Lord had promised to us. Have you, too, found true what your Lord had promised?. They will say, .Yes. Then, an announcer between them will call out, .The curse of Allah is on the wrongdoers
7|45| who used to turn themselves away from the way of Allah, seeking to make it crooked, while they were the deniers of the Hereafter.
7|46| Between the two groups there will be a barrier. And on A‘raf (the Heights) there shall be people who will recognize each group through their signs, and they will call out to the people of Paradise, .Peace on you. They will not have entered it, yet they will hope to.
7|47| When their eyes will be turned to the people of the Fire, they will say, .Our Lord, do not join us with the unjust people.
7|48| The people of A‘raf will call out to the people (of Fire) whom they will recognize through their signs: .Your masses were not of any help to you, nor was the arrogance you used to show.
7|49| Is it these (people of Paradise) about whom you swore that Allah would not allow His mercy to reach them?. (It will be said to such people,) .Enter Paradise; there will be no fear for you, nor shall you grieve.
7|50| The people of the Fire will call out to the people of Paradise, .Pour on us some water, or some of what Allah has provided you. They will say, .Allah has prohibited these for disbelievers,
7|51| who had taken their faith as play and a game, and the worldly life had deceived them. So, We shall forget them today, as they had forgotten to face this day of theirs, and as they used to deny Our signs.
7|52| Surely We have brought them a book that We have elaborated with knowledge, as guidance and mercy for a people who believe.
7|53| They are waiting for nothing but its final result (i.e. the punishment promised in the Qur‘an). The day when its final result will come, those who had ignored it earlier will say, .Surely, the messengers of our Lord had come with truth. So, are there any intercessors for us who could intercede in our favor? Or, could we be sent back, so that we might do contrary to what we used to do?. Indeed, they have put their selves to loss, and vanished from them all that they used to fabricate.
7|54| Surely, your Lord is Allah who created the heavens and the earth in six days, then He positioned himself on the Throne. He covers the day with the night that pursues it swiftly. (He created) the sun and the moon and the stars, subjugated to His command. Lo! To Him alone belong the creation and the command. Glorious is Allah, the Lord of all the worlds.
7|55| Supplicate to your Lord humbly and secretly. Surely, He does not like those who cross the limits.
7|56| Do not make mischief on the earth after it has been set in order. Supplicate Him in fear and hope. Surely, the mercy of Allah is close to those who are good in their deeds.
7|57| He is the One who sends the winds carrying good news before His blessings, until when they lift up the heavy clouds, We drive them to a dead land. Then, there We pour down water. Then, We bring forth with it all sorts of fruits. In similar way, We will bring forth all the dead. (All this is being explained to you), so that you may learn a lesson.
7|58| As for a good land, its vegetation comes out with the permission of its Lord. But that which is bad does not grow except what is bad. Thus We alternate the verses in various ways for a people who pay gratitude.
7|59| Surely We sent NuH to his people. So he said, .O my people, worship Allah. You have no god other than Him. I fear for you the punishment of a great Day.
7|60| The chiefs of his people said, .Indeed we see you in an obvious error.
7|61| He said, .O my people, there is no error in me, but I am a messenger from the Lord of all the worlds.
7|62| I convey to you the messages of my Lord and wish your betterment, and I know from Allah what you do not know.
7|63| Do you wonder that an advice from your Lord has come to you through a man from among you, so that he may warn you and that you may fear Allah, and that you may be blessed with mercy?.
7|64| Then, they accused him of falsehood; so We saved him, and those with him in the Ark, and drowned those who rejected Our signs. Certainly, they were a blind people.
7|65| To ‘Ad, We sent their brother Hud. He said, .O my people, worship Allah; you have no god other than Him. So, will you not fear Allah?.
7|66| Said the chiefs of his people who disbelieved, .Indeed, we see you in folly, and we believe you are one of the liars.
7|67| He said, .O my people, there is no folly in me, but I am a messenger from the Lord of all the worlds.
7|68| I convey to you the messages of my Lord; and I am an honest well-wisher for you.
7|69| Do you wonder that an advice from your Lord has come to you through a man from among you, so that he may warn you? And remember when He made you successors after the people of NuH and gave you increased strength in physique. So, be mindful of the bounties of Allah, so that you may be successful.
7|70| They said, .Have you come to us that we should worship Allah alone and give up what our fathers used to worship? Now, bring upon us that (scourge) with which you threaten us if you are one of the truthful.
7|71| He said, .The punishment and the anger from your Lord have fallen upon you. Do you quarrel with me about mere names that you and your fathers have concocted and for which Allah has sent down no authority? So, wait. I am one of those waiting with you.
7|72| So, We saved him and those with him out of mercy from Us, and We eradicated those who rejected Our signs. They were not believers.
7|73| To Thamud, (We sent) their brother, SaliH. He said, .O my people, worship Allah. You have no god other than Him. There has come to you a clear sign from your Lord. This is the she-camel of Allah, a sign for you. So, leave her to eat on the earth of Allah, and do not touch her with mischief, lest a painful punishment should seize you.
7|74| Remember when He made you successors after ‘Ad and lodged you on earth (whereby) you make castles in its plains and hew out the mountains to build houses. So be mindful of the bounties of Allah, and do not go about the earth spreading disorder.
7|75| The haughty chiefs of his people said to those of the oppressed who had believed (in the Messenger), .Do you know for sure that SaliH is a messenger from his Lord?. They said, .Of course, we believe in what he has been sent with.
7|76| The haughty people said, .As for us, we disbelieve in what you believe.
7|77| Then they slaughtered the she-camel and defied the command of their Lord and said, .O SaliH, bring to us what you threaten us with, if you are one of the messengers.
7|78| So, the earthquake seized them, and they were (found dead) in their homes, fallen on their faces.
7|79| So, he turned away from them and said, .O my people, indeed I have delivered to you the message of my Lord, and wished you betterment, but you do not like the well-wishers.
7|80| And (We sent) LuT (Lot) when he said to his people, .Do you commit the shameful act in which nobody in the world has ever preceded you?
7|81| You come to men lustfully instead of women. No, you are a people who cross the limits.
7|82| The answer of his people was no other than to say, .Expel them from your town. They are a people who pretend too much purity.
7|83| So, We saved him and his family, except his wife. She was one of those who remained behind.
7|84| And We rained down upon them a rain. So, look! How was the fate of the sinners!
7|85| And to Madyan (We sent) their brother Shu‘aib. He said, .O my people, worship Allah. You have no god other than Him. There has come to you a clear sign from your Lord. Give the measure and weight in full, and do not make people short of their things, and do not make mischief on the earth after it has been set in order. That is good for you, if you are believers.
7|86| Do not sit in every path threatening and preventing from the way of Allah the people who believe in Him, and seeking a twist in it. Remember the time when you were few, then He increased you in number. Consider the fate of those who used to make mischief.
7|87| If a group from among you has believed in what I have been sent with, and another group has not believed, then keep patience until Allah decides between us. He is the best of all judges.
7|88| The chiefs of his people, who were arrogant, said, .O Shu‘aib, we will expel you and those who believe with you from our town, or you shall have to turn to our faith. He said, .Even if we hate it?
7|89| We will be forging a lie against Allah, if we were to turn to your faith after Allah has saved us from it. It is not for us that we turn to it unless Allah, our Lord, so wills. Our Lord has encompassed everything with His knowledge. In Allah we place our trust. __Our Lord, decide between us and our people, with truth, and You are the best of all judges.
7|90| The chiefs of his people who disbelieved said, .If you are to follow Shu‘aib, then you will be utter losers.
7|91| So, the earthquake seized them, and they were (found dead) in their homes, fallen on their faces.
7|92| Those who rejected Shu‘aib became as if they never dwelt there. Those who rejected Shu‘aib were themselves the losers.
7|93| So, he turned away from them and said, .O my people, I have surely delivered to you the message of my Lord, and wished your betterment. How, then, should I grieve over a disbelieving people?.
7|94| We did not send any prophet to a town, but We seized its people with hardship and suffering, so that they may turn humble.
7|95| Thereafter, We substituted good in place of evil until they increased, and said, .Hardship and prosperity came to our fathers (too). Then We seized them suddenly while they were not aware.
7|96| If the people of the towns believed and feared Allah, We would have opened for them blessings from the heavens and the earth, but they disbelieved. So, We seized them because of what they used to earn for themselves.
7|97| So, do the people of the towns feel themselves immune from Our punishment that may befall them at night while they are asleep?
7|98| Or do the people of the towns feel themselves immune from Our punishment that may befall them in broad daylight while they are at play?
7|99| Do they feel secure from Allah‘s plan? None can feel secure from Allah‘s plan except the people who are losers.
7|100| Have all these events still not taught a lesson to those who inherit the land after its (former) inhabitants, that if We so willed, We could afflict them for their sins? But We seal their hearts, so that they do not listen.
7|101| Those are the towns We narrate to you their important events. Surely their messengers came to them with clear signs, but they were not able to believe in what they had rejected earlier. This is how Allah seals the hearts of the disbelievers.
7|102| We did not find with most of them any covenant (unbroken), and surely We have found most of them sinners.
7|103| After them, We sent Musa with Our signs to Pharaoh and his chiefs. But they did injustice to them. So, consider the fate of the mischief-makers.
7|104| Musa said, .O Pharaoh, I am a messenger from the Lord of all the worlds;
7|105| it befits me not to say anything about Allah except the truth. I have come to you with a clear sign from your Lord. So, let the children of Isra‘il go with me.
7|106| He said, .If you have come with a sign, then bring it forth, if you are really truthful.
7|107| So he threw down his staff, and in no time it was a vivid serpent;
7|108| and he drew out his hand, and it was luminous for the onlookers.
7|109| The chiefs of the people of Pharaoh said, .This man is certainly a sorcerer of great knowledge.
7|110| He wants to expel you from your land. So, what do you suggest?.
7|111| They said, .leave him and his brother alone for a while, and send (your) men to the cities to collect
7|112| and bring to you every expert sorcerer (who could defeat him).
7|113| The sorcerers came to Pharaoh. They said, .There must be a reward for us, if we are the victors.
7|114| He said, .Yes, and of course, you will be among the closer ones (to me).
7|115| They said, .O Musa, would you throw (first) or are we to throw?.
7|116| He said, .You throw. So when they threw, they bewitched the eyes of the people, and made them frightened, and produced great sorcery.
7|117| We revealed to Musa, .Throw your staff. Then of a sudden, it began to swallow all that they had concocted.
7|118| Thus the truth prevailed, and what they were doing became a nullity.
7|119| So, they were overcome then and there and turned humiliated.
7|120| The sorcerers could not but fall in prostration.
7|121| They said, .We believe in the Lord of the worlds,
7|122| the Lord of Musa and Harun.
7|123| Pharaoh said, .You have believed in him before my permission. Undoubtedly, this is a plot you have designed in the city, so that you may expel its people from it. Now you shall know (its end).
7|124| I will cut off your hands and your legs from opposite sides. Then I will crucify you all together.
7|125| They said, .We have surely to return to our Lord.
7|126| For what fault would you punish us except that we have believed in the signs of our Lord when they appeared to us? O our Lord, pour out patience upon us, and cause us to die as Muslims (those who submit to you.).
7|127| The chiefs of the people of Pharaoh said, .Shall you leave Musa and his people free to spread disorder in the land and to abandon you and your gods?. He said, .We shall slaughter their sons and let their women remain alive. We have full power over them.
7|128| Musa said to his people, .Seek help from Allah and be patient. Surely, the land belongs to Allah. He lets whomsoever He wills inherit it from among His servants; and the end-result is in favor of the God-fearing.
7|129| They said, .We were persecuted before you came to us and after you have come to us. He said, .Hopefully your Lord will destroy your enemy and make you successors in the land, then He will see how you act.
7|130| And We seized the people of Pharaoh with years of famine and poor production of fruits, so that they may learn a lesson.
7|131| When good times came to them, they said, .This is our right. And if an evil touched them, they took it as an ill omen of Musa and those with him. Listen, their ill omen lies with Allah only, but most of them do not know.
7|132| They said, .Whatever sign you bring to us to enchant us with, we are not going to believe in you.
7|133| So We sent upon them the storm and locusts and lice and frogs and blood, as signs distinct from each other. Yet they showed arrogance, and they were a guilty people.
7|134| Whenever a scourge befell them, they said, .O Musa, pray for us to your Lord by the covenant He has made with you. If you remove the scourge from us, we will truly believe in you, and will send the children of Isra‘il with you.
7|135| But when We removed the scourge from them for a term they had to reach, in no time they started to break their promise.
7|136| Then We subjected them to retribution, and drowned them in the sea, because they rejected Our signs, and were neglectful of them.
7|137| We caused those people who were deemed to be weak (the Israelites) to inherit the East and West of the land that We had blessed. And the sublime word of your Lord was fulfilled for the children of Isra‘il, because they stood patient; and We destroyed what Pharaoh and his people used to build and what they used to raise high.
7|138| We made the children of Isra‘il cross the sea, then they came across a people sitting in devotion before their idols. They (the Israelites) said, .O Musa, make a god for us like they have gods. He said, .You are really an ignorant people.
7|139| What these people are engaged in is sure to be destroyed; and false is what they are doing.
7|140| He said, .Shall I seek any one other than Allah as God for you, while He has given you excellence over the (people of all the) worlds.
7|141| (Remember) when We delivered you from the people of Pharaoh who inflicted grievous torment upon you, slaughtered your sons and left your women alive. In all that there was a great trial from your Lord.
7|142| And We made an appointment with Musa for thirty nights, then We supplemented them with another ten. So, the total period fixed by his Lord was forty nights. Musa said to his brother Harun, .Take my place among my people and keep things right, and do not follow the way of mischief makers.
7|143| When Musa came at Our appointed time and his Lord spoke to him, he said, .My Lord, show (Yourself) to me that I may look at You. He said: .You shall never see Me. But look at the mount. If it stays at its place, you will see Me. So when his Lord appeared to the Mount, He made it smashed, and Musa fell down unconscious. When he recovered, he said: .Pure are You. I repent to You, and I am the first to believe (that no one can see You in this world.).
7|144| He said, .Musa, I have chosen you above all men for my messages and for My speaking (to you). So, take what I have given to you, and be among the grateful.
7|145| We wrote for him on the Tablets advice of every kind, and explanations of all (needful) things. .So hold it firm, and ask your people to hold on to the best things in it. I shall show you the house of the sinners.
7|146| I shall keep away from My verses those who show arrogance on the earth with no right to do so. Even if they were to see every sign, they would not believe in it; and if they see the Path of guidance, they do not take it as their way; and if they see the path of misguidance, they would take it as their way. That is because they have rejected Our signs, and have been neglectful of them.
7|147| Gone to waste are the deeds of those who have rejected Our signs and the meeting of the Hereafter. They will be recompensed only for what they have been doing.
7|148| And in the absence of Musa, his people made a calf from their ornaments, which was merely a sculpture with a moaning sound. Did they not see that it neither talked to them nor could it guide them to any way? They adopted it (as god), and were so unjust.
7|149| When they became remorseful and saw that they had gone astray, they said, .If Allah shows no mercy to us, and does not forgive us, we shall certainly be among the losers.
7|150| When Musa returned to his people, angry and sad, he said, .How bad is the thing you have done in my absence! How did you act in haste against the command of your Lord?. He dropped down the Tablets, and grabbed the head of his brother, pulling him towards himself. He (Harun) said, .My mother‘s son, the people took me as weak and were about to kill me. So do not let the enemies laugh at me, and do not count me with the wrong-doers.
7|151| He said, .My Lord! Forgive me and my brother, and admit us into Your mercy. You are the most Merciful of all the merciful.
7|152| Surely, those who have taken the calf (as god) shall be seized by Allah‘s wrath and by humiliation in the worldly life. That is how we recompense the fabricators.
7|153| As for those who do evil, and repent thereafter, and embrace faith, your Lord is then most forgiving, very merciful (for them).
7|154| When the fury of Musa calmed down, he picked up the Tablets, and in its contents there was guidance, and mercy for those who are fearful before their Lord.
7|155| And Musa selected seventy men from his people for Our appointment. Later when the earthquake seized them, he said, .My Lord, had it been Your will, You could have destroyed them earlier, and me too. Would You destroy us for what the foolish among them have done? It is nothing but a trial from You, wherewith you let go astray whom You will, and give guidance to whom You will. You are our protector, so forgive us, and have mercy on us, and You are the best among those who forgive.
7|156| And write for us good in this world and in the Hereafter. We turn to You in repentance. He (Allah) said, .As for My punishment, I afflict with it whom I will. And My mercy extends to everything. So, I shall write it for those who guard themselves against evil, and pay Zakah, and those who do believe in Our verses,
7|157| those who follow the Messenger, the Ummiyy (unlettered) prophet whom they find written with them in the Torah and the Injil , and who bids them what is fair and forbids what is unfair, and makes lawful for them good things, and makes unlawful for them impure things, and relieves them of their burden, and of the shackles that were upon them. So, those who believe in him and support him, and help him and follow the light sent down with him, __ those are the ones who are successful.
7|158| (O Prophet Muhammad) Say, .O people, I am a messenger of Allah (sent) to you from the One to whom belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. There is no god but He. He gives life and brings death. So, believe in Allah and His Messenger, the Ummiyy (unlettered) prophet, who believes in Allah and in His words, and follow him, so that you may find the right path.
7|159| Among the community of Musa there are people who guide with truth and do justice thereby.
7|160| And We divided them into twelve tribes, as separate communities, and We revealed to Musa when his people asked him for water, .Strike the rock with your staff. Then twelve springs gushed forth from it. Each tribe came to know their drinking place. We shaded them with the shadow of the clouds. And We sent down to them Mann and Salwa (saying), .Eat of the good things we have provided you. And they did us no harm, rather they have been harming their own selves.
7|161| (Recall) when it was said to them, .Live in this town and eat therefrom anywhere you like, and say, HiTTah (we seek forgiveness) and enter the gate prostrating yourselves, so that We forgive your errors. We shall give much more to those who are good in their deeds.
7|162| But those of them who were unjust substituted another word for the one that was said to them. So, We sent down upon them a scourge from the heavens, because they had been transgressing.
7|163| Ask them about the town situated by the sea, when they used to transgress in the matter of Sabbath, when their fish came to them openly on the Sabbath, and did not come when they did not have Sabbath. In this way, We put them to a test, because they used to act sinfully.
7|164| When a group of them said, .Why do you exhort a people whom Allah is going to destroy or chastise with a severe punishment?. They said, .To absolve ourselves before your Lord, and in order that they may fear Allah.
7|165| So, when they forgot the advice they were given, We saved those who used to forbid evil and seized those who transgressed with a bitter punishment, because they had been disobeying.
7|166| When they persisted in doing what they were forbidden from, We said to them, .Become apes debased.
7|167| Recall) when your Lord declared that He would surely keep sending, till the Day of Judgment, those who inflict on them evil chastisement. Certainly, your Lord is swift in punishing, and certainly He is the Most-forgiving, Very Merciful.
7|168| We divided them on the earth as separate communities. Some of them were righteous, while some others were otherwise. We tested them with good and bad times, so that they might return.
7|169| Then, after them, came a generation that inherited the Book, opting for the mundane stuff of this world and saying, .We shall be forgiven. But if there comes to them similar stuff, they would opt for it (again). Was not the covenant of the Book taken from them that they should not say anything but the truth about Allah? They learnt what it contained. Certainly, the Last Abode is better for those who fear Allah. Have you then, no sense?
7|170| Those who hold fast to the Book and establish Salah, We shall never let the reward of (such) righteous people to go to waste.
7|171| When We raised the mountain over them as though it were a canopy, and they thought it was falling upon them, (We said,) .Adhere firmly to what We have given you and remember what is therein, so that you may become God-fearing.
7|172| (Recall) when your Lord brought forth their progeny from the loins of the children of ‘Adam, and made them testify about themselves (by asking them,) .Am I not your Lord?. They said, .Of course, You are. We testify. (We did so) lest you should say on the Day of Judgment, .We were unaware of this,.
7|173| or you should say, .It was our forefathers who associated partners with Allah, and we were their progeny after them; would you then destroy us on account of what the erroneous did?.
7|174| This is how We elaborate the verses, so that they may return.
7|175| Recite to them the story of the one whom We gave Our verses, then he wriggled out from them, so Satan pursued him and he became one of the perverted.
7|176| If We so willed, We would have elevated him thereby; but he clung to the earth and followed his desires. So, his example is like the example of a dog, if you attack him, he pants with his tongue protruding, and if you leave him alone he still pants with his tongue protruding. That is the example of those who rejected Our signs. So, relate the chronicles, so that they may ponder.
7|177| Evil is the example of those who have rejected Our signs and have been doing wrong to themselves.
7|178| The one whom Allah gives guidance is the one on the right path. As for those whom Allah lets go astray, those are the losers.
7|179| Surely We have created for Hell a lot of people from among Jinn and mankind. They have hearts wherewith they do not understand, eyes wherewith they do not see, and ears wherewith they do not hear. They are like cattle. Rather, they are much more astray. They are the heedless.
7|180| For Allah there are the most beautiful names. So, call Him by them, and leave those who deviate in (the matter of) His names. They shall be recompensed for what they have been doing.
7|181| Among those whom We have created there are people who guide with truth and do justice thereby.
7|182| As for those who reject Our signs, We will lead them gradually (towards their punishment) in a way that they do not know.
7|183| I give them respite. Surely My plan is firm.
7|184| Have they not reflected that their fellow (i.e. the Holy Prophet) does not suffer from any madness? He is but a plain warner.
7|185| Have they not looked into the kingdom of the heavens and the earth, and into the things Allah has created, and into the fact that their time might have possibly drawn near? In which other discourse, then, shall they believe after this?
7|186| For those whom Allah lets go astray, there is no one to guide, and He leaves them wandering blindly in their rebellion.
7|187| They ask you about the Hour (i.e. the Doomsday), .When is it due to happen?. Say, .Its knowledge is only with my Lord. No one can unfold it except He at its time. It shall weigh heavy in the heavens and the earth. It shall not come upon you but suddenly. They ask you as if you were aware of it. Say, .Its knowledge is only with Allah, but most of the people do not know.
7|188| Say, .I have no power to bring a benefit or a harm to myself, except that which Allah wills. If I had the knowledge of the Unseen, I would have accumulated a lot of good things, and no evil would have ever touched me. I am but a warner, and a herald of good news for a people who believe.
7|189| He is the One who has created you from a single soul, and out of him created his wife, so that he may find comfort in her. So when he covers her with himself, she carries a light burden and moves about with it. Thereafter, when she grows heavy, they both pray to Allah, their Lord, .If You bless us with a perfect child, we shall be grateful.
7|190| But when We bless them with a perfect child, they ascribe partners to Him in what He blessed them with. Indeed Allah is much higher than what they associate with Him.
7|191| Do they associate those with Allah who do not create any thing, rather, they are created (themselves)?
7|192| And they (the alleged partners) cannot extend to them any help, nor can they help themselves.
7|193| If you call them to the right path, they will not follow you. It is all the same for them whether you call them or remain silent.
7|194| Surely, those whom you invoke beside Allah are slaves (of Allah) like you. So, call them, and they should respond to you if you are true.
7|195| Do they have legs to walk with? Or do they have hands to grasp with? Or do they have eyes to see with or do they have ears to hear with? Say, .Call to your associate-gods, then, plot against me and allow me no respite.
7|196| Surely, my protector is Allah who has revealed the Book and who does protect the righteous.
7|197| Those whom you call beside Him cannot help you, nor can they help themselves.
7|198| If you call them for guidance, they shall not hear. You see them as if they are looking at you, while they cannot see.
7|199| (O Prophet,) take forgiveness (as your habit), enjoin virtue, and ignore the ignorant.
7|200| Should a stroke from the Satan strike you, seek refuge with Allah. Surely, He is All-Hearing, All-Knowing.
7|201| Surely when the God-fearing are touched by any instigation from Satan, they become conscious (of Allah), and at once they discern (the reality).
7|202| As for the brethren of satans, they are dragged by them on into the error, and they do not desist.
7|203| When you do not bring them a sign, they say, .Could you not make up one?.Say, .I only follow what is revealed to me from my Lord. This is (a Book of) insights from your Lord and a guidance and mercy for a people who believe.
7|204| When the Qur‘an is recited, listen to it and be silent, so that you may be blessed.
7|205| Remember your Lord in your heart with humility and awe, and without speaking loudly, in mornings and evenings, and do not be among the heedless.
7|206| Surely, those who are with your Lord (i.e. the angels) are not arrogant against His worship, and they proclaim His purity, and before Him they prostrate themselves.
8|1| They ask you about the spoils. Say, .The spoils are for Allah and the Messenger. So, fear Allah, and set your relations right, and obey Allah and His Messenger, if you are believers.
8|2| Certainly, the believers are those whose hearts are filled with awe when (the name of) Allah is mentioned; and when His verses are recited to them, it makes them more developed in faith; and in their Lord they place their trust.
8|3| (They are) those who establish Salah, and give away from what We have given to them.
8|4| Those are the believers in reality. For them there are high ranks with their Lord, and forgiveness, and dignified provision.
8|5| It is like when your Lord made you leave your home for the sake of truth, while a group from the believers were averse to it;
8|6| they were disputing with you about the truth after it became clear, as if they were being driven to death being seen by them.
8|7| And recall when Allah was promising you that one of the two groups would become yours, and you were wishing that the one without strength should fall to you. And Allah wanted to establish the truth through His words and to cut off the very root of the disbelievers,
8|8| so that He proves the truth to be true and the falsehood to be false, even though the sinners might dislike it.
8|9| When you were calling your Lord for help, so He responded to you (saying): .I am going to support you with one thousand of the angels, one following the other.
8|10| And Allah has made it (the promise) merely to give you a good news, and so that your hearts might be at rest thereby. And the help is from none but Allah. Surely, Allah is Mighty, Wise.
8|11| When He covered you with drowsiness, as tranquility (descending) from Him and sent down upon you water from the heavens, so that He might purify you with it, and remove from you the impurity of Satan, and so that He might strengthen your hearts and make (your) feet firm therewith.
8|12| When your Lord revealed to the angels: .I am with you. So, make firm the feet of those who believe. I shall cast awe into the hearts of those who disbelieve. So, strike at the necks, and strike at every finger-joint of theirs.
8|13| That is because they were hostile to Allah and His Messenger; and whoever becomes hostile to Allah and His Messenger, then, Allah is severe at punishment.
8|14| That is what you have to taste, and for the disbelievers is the (further) punishment of the Fire.
8|15| O you who believe, when you face the disbelievers in a battle, do not turn your backs to them.
8|16| Whoever turns his back to them on such a day,__ unless it is for a tactic in the battle, or to join a company,__turns with wrath from Allah, and his abode is Jahannam (Hell), and it is an evil place to return.
8|17| So, it is not you who killed them, but in fact Allah killed them. And you did not throw when you threw but Allah did throw, so that He might bless the believers with a good favour. Surely, Allah is All-Hearing, All-Knowing.
8|18| Apart from that, Allah is the One who frustrates the device of the disbelievers.
8|19| (O unbelievers,) if you were looking for a decision, the ‘decision‘ has come upon you. And if you give up, it is better for you. And if you repeat, We shall repeat. And your people shall not suffice you at all, even though they are many in number; and Allah is with the believers.
8|20| O you who believe, obey Allah and His Messenger, and do not turn away from Him when you listen (to him).
8|21| And do not be like those who say, .We have listened. while they do not listen.
8|22| Surely, the worst of all animals in the sight of Allah are the deaf and the dumb who do not understand.
8|23| Had Allah seen in them some good, He would have made them listen (as due). But if He makes them listen (now), they will turn away paying no heed.
8|24| O you who believe, respond to Allah and the Messenger when He calls you to what gives you life, and be sure that Allah intervenes between man and his heart, and that to Him you shall be gathered.
8|25| And beware of a scourge that shall not fall only on the wrongdoers from among you, and know well that Allah is severe at punishment
8|26| Recall when you were few in number, oppressed on the earth, fearing that the people would snatch you away. Then, He gave you shelter and fortified you with His support and provided you with good things, so that you may be grateful.
8|27| O you who believe, do not betray the trust of Allah and the Messenger__, and do not betray your mutual trusts, while you know.
8|28| Be aware that your wealth and your children are but a trial and that with Allah there is a great reward.
8|29| O you who believe, if you fear Allah, He will provide you with a criterion (to distinguish between right and wrong) and will write off your evil deeds and will forgive you. Allah is the Lord of great bounty.
8|30| And (recall) when the disbelievers were conspiring against you to hold you as a captive, or to kill you, or to expel you. They were planning, and Allah was planning, and Allah is the best planner.
8|31| When Our verses are recited to them, they say, .We have heard; if we wish, we can compose a discourse like this. It is nothing but the tales of the ancient people.
8|32| And (recall) when they said, .O Allah, if this is indeed the truth (revealed) from You, then, rain down stones upon us from the heavens, or bring upon us a painful punishment.
8|33| And Allah was not to send scourge upon them while you (O Prophet), were in their midst, nor would Allah send scourge upon them while they are seeking forgiveness.
8|34| And what privilege do they have that Allah should not punish them, while they prevent (people) from Al-Masjid-ul-Haram (the Sacred Mosque), even though they are not (competent to be) its custodians? Its (competent) custodians are none but the God-fearing, but most of them do not know.
8|35| And their prayer near the House was not more than whistling and clapping. So, taste the punishment, because you used to disbelieve.
8|36| Surely, those who disbelieve spend their wealth to prevent (people) from the way of Allah. So, they shall spend it, then it will become remorse for them, then they shall be overpowered, and those who disbelieve shall be gathered into Jahannam ,
8|37| so that Allah may separate the wicked from the good people, and join the wicked with each other, and heaps them all together, and puts them into Jahannam . Those are the losers.
8|38| Say to those who disbelieve that if they desist (from infidelity), they shall be forgiven for what has passed (of their sins), and if they repeat, then, the precedent of the earlier people is already established (that the infidels are punished).
8|39| And fight them until there is no Fitnah (mischief), and total obedience becomes for Allah. So, if they desist, then, Allah is indeed watchful over what they do.
8|40| And if they turn away, then, rest assured that Allah is your protector. So excellent a protector is He, and so excellent a supporter.
8|41| And know that whatever spoils you receive, its one fifth is for Allah and for His Messenger, and for kinsmen and orphans and the needy and the wayfarer, if you do believe in Allah and in what We have sent down upon Our Servant on the decisive day, the day when the two forces encountered each other. And Allah is powerful over everything.
8|42| (Remember) when you were on the nearest end of the valley, and they were on the farthest one, and the caravan was downwards from you. Had you made an appointment with each other, you would have disagreed about the appointment. But (it happened like this) so that Allah might accomplish what was destined to be done, so that whoever is going to perish may perish knowingly, and whoever is going to live may live knowingly. Allah is indeed All-Hearing, All-Knowing.
8|43| (Recall) when in your dream, Allah showed them to you few in number. And if He had shown them to you many in number, you would have been demoralized and would have disputed in the matter, but Allah saved (you). Surely, Allah is fully aware of what lies in the hearts.
8|44| And when, at the time you met each other, He showed them to you few in number in your eyes, and reduced your number in their eyes, so that Allah might accomplish what was destined to be done. And to Allah all matters are returned.
8|45| O you who believe, when you face a group (in battle), stand firm and remember Allah abundantly, so that you may be successful.
8|46| Obey Allah and His Messenger, and do not quarrel with each other, lest you should lose courage, and your prowess should evaporate; and be patient. Surely, Allah is with the patient.
8|47| And do not be like those who set forth from their homes waxing proud and showing off to people, preventing (people) from the way of Allah. Allah is All-Encompassing of what they do.
8|48| When the Satan made their deeds look beautiful to their eyes, and said, .None of the people can overpower you today, and I am a protector for you. But, when the two groups faced each other, he turned back on his heels and said, .I am quit of you. I am seeing what you do not see. I am scared of Allah, and Allah is severe in punishment.
8|49| When the hypocrites and those who have a malady in their hearts said, .The belief of these people has deluded them. And whoever places his trust in Allah (becomes victorious, because) Allah is Mighty, Wise.
8|50| Only if you were to see (them) when the angels take out the souls of those who disbelieve, beating their faces and their backs, and (saying) .Taste the punishment of the flaming Fire.
8|51| That is due to what your hands sent ahead, and that Allah is not cruel to (His) servants.
8|52| (Their way is) like the way of the people of Pharaoh and of those before them. They rejected the signs of Allah; so Allah seized them for their sins. Surely, Allah is strong, severe in punishment.
8|53| All this is because Allah is not the one who may change a favour He has conferred on a people unless they change their own condition, and that Allah is All-Hearing, All-Knowing.
8|54| Their practice is like that of the people of Pharaoh and those before them. They rejected the signs of their Lord. So, We destroyed them for their sins and drowned the people of Pharaoh; and all of them were wrongdoers.
8|55| Surely, the worst of all the moving creatures, in the sight of Allah, are those who reject Faith and do not believe
8|56| __those with whom you have entered into a treaty, then they break their treaty each time, and they do not fear Allah.
8|57| So, if you find them in war, deal with them in a way that those behind them have to disperse fearfully, so that they take a lesson.
8|58| And if you apprehend a breach from a people, then, throw (the treaty) towards them in straight-forward terms. Surely, Allah does not like those who breach the trust.
8|59| The disbelievers should never think that they have surpassed (the divine punishment). Surely, they cannot frustrate (the Divine will).
8|60| Prepare against them whatever force you can, and the trained horses whereby you frighten Allah‘s enemy and your own enemy and others besides them whom you do not know. Allah knows them. Whatever thing you spend in the way of Allah, it will be paid to you in full, and you shall not be wronged.
8|61| And if they tilt towards peace, you too should tilt towards it, and place your trust in Allah. Surely, He is the All-Hearing, the All-Knowing.
8|62| If they intend to deceive you, then, Allah is all-sufficient for you. He is the One who supported you with His help and with the believers,
8|63| and united their hearts. Had you spent all that is on earth, you could not have united their hearts. But Allah did unite their hearts. Surely, He is All-Mighty, All-Wise.
8|64| O Prophet, Allah is sufficient for you, and the believers who followed you.
8|65| O Prophet, rouse the believers to fighting. If there are twenty among you, who are patient, they will overcome two hundred; and if there are one hundred among you, they will overcome one thousand of those who disbelieve, because they are a people who do not understand.
8|66| Now Allah has lightened your burden, and He knew that there is weakness in you. So, if there are one hundred among you, who are patient, they will overcome two hundred; and if there are one thousand among you, they will overcome two thousand by the will of Allah. Allah is with the patient.
8|67| It is not befitting a prophet that he has captives with him unless he has subdued the enemy by shedding blood in the land. You intend to have the stuff of this world, while Allah intends the Hereafter (for you). And Allah is All-Mighty, All-Wise.
8|68| Had there not been a decree from Allah that came earlier, a great punishment would have overtaken you because of what you have taken.
8|69| So, eat of the spoils you have got, lawful and pure, and fear Allah. Surely, Allah is Most-Forgiving, Very-Merciful.
8|70| O Prophet, say to the prisoners in your hands, .If Allah knows any goodness in your hearts, He will give you something better than what has been taken from you, and will forgive you. Allah is Most-Forgiving, Very-Merciful.
8|71| And if they intend to commit treachery against you, then, they have already committed treachery against Allah, and in turn Allah has given you full control over them. And Allah is All-Knowing, Wise.
8|72| Surely those who believed and emigrated and carried out Jihad in the way of Allah with their wealth and lives, and those who gave refuge and help (to the emigrants), both are close friends to each other. And those who believed and did not emigrate, you have no friendship with them at all, unless they emigrate. However, if they seek your help in the matter of faith, then, you are bound to help, except against a people with whom you have a treaty. Allah is watchful over what you do.
8|73| And those who disbelieve are friends to each other. If you do not do so, there shall be disorder on the earth, and a great corruption.
8|74| Those who have believed and emigrated and carried out Jihad in the way of Allah, and those who gave refuge and help, both are the believers in truth. For them there is forgiveness and a respectful provision.
8|75| Those who believed later on and emigrated and carried out Jihad alongwith you, then, they are joined with you. As for the womb-relatives, they are closer to one another according to the Book of Allah. Surely, Allah is aware of every thing.
9|1| Here is a disavowal (proclaimed) by Allah and His Messenger against the Mushriks (polytheists) with whom you have a treaty.
9|2| So, move in the land freely for four months, and be aware that you can never frustrate Allah, and that Allah is going to disgrace the disbelievers.
9|3| And here is an announcement, from Allah and His Messenger, to the people on the day of the greater Hajj, that Allah is free from (any commitment to) the Mushriks, and so is His Messenger. Now, if you repent, it is good for you. And if you turn away, then be aware that you can never frustrate Allah. And give those who disbelieve the ‘good‘ news of a painful punishment.
9|4| Except those of the Mushriks with whom you have a treaty, and they were not deficient (in fulfilling the treaty) with you, and did not back up any one against you. So fulfill the treaty with them up to their term. Surely, Allah loves the God-fearing.
9|5| So, when the sacred months expire, kill the Mushriks wherever you find them, and catch them and besiege them and sit in ambush for them everywhere. Then, if they repent and establish Salah and pay Zakah, leave their way. Surely, Allah is most Forgiving, Very-Merciful.
9|6| And if any one of the Mushriks seeks your protection, give him protection until he listens to the Word of Allah, then let him reach his place of safety. That is because they are a people who do not know.
9|7| How can the Mushriks have a treaty with Allah and His Messenger? Except those with whom you made a treaty near Al-Masjid-ul-Haram . Then, as long as they remain straight with you, you too remain straight with them. Surely, Allah loves the God-fearing.
9|8| How (can they have a treaty) while if they overcome you, they will not observe any bond or treaty with you. They want to please you with (words of) their mouths, but their hearts refuse. Most of them are sinners.
9|9| They have taken a paltry price for the verses of Allah, so they have prevented (people) from His path. Indeed, evil is what they have been doing.
9|10| They do not observe any bond or treaty with a believer; and they are the transgressors.
9|11| Then, if they repent and establish Salah and pay Zakah, they are your brothers in faith. We elaborate the verses for a people who understand.
9|12| And if they break their oaths after they have made a covenant, and speak evil of your Faith, then fight the leaders of infidelity,__since their oaths are nothing,___so that they may desist,
9|13| Would you not fight a people who broke their oaths and conspired to expel the Messenger, and it was they who started (fighting) against you for the first time? Do you fear them? But Allah has greater right that you fear Him, if you are believers.
9|14| Fight them, so that Allah should punish them at your hands and disgrace them, and help you win against them and bring relief to bosoms of the believing people,
9|15| and remove the rage of their hearts. And Allah relents to whomsoever He wills. Allah is (All-) Knowing, (All-) Wise.
9|16| Do you think that you will be left alone (without being tested), while Allah has not yet seen those of you who struggle in Jihad and never take anyone as their confidant other than Allah and His Messenger and the believers? Allah is fully aware of what you do.
9|17| It is not for the Mushriks to build up the mosques of Allah while they are witnesses of their own infidelity. Those are the ones whose deeds have gone to waste; and in the Fire they shall remain forever.
9|18| In fact, the mosques of Allah are built-up only by those who believe in Allah and the Last Day and those who establish Salah and pay Zakah and who fear none but Allah. So, it is hoped that they are to be among those on the right path.
9|19| Have you taken the serving of water to the pilgrims and the maintenance of Al-Masjid-ul-Haram as equal to (the acts) of one who believes in Allah and in the Last Day, and carries out Jihad in the way of Allah? They are not equal in the sight of Allah. Allah does not lead the wrongdoing people to the right path.
9|20| Those who believed and emigrated and carried out Jihad in the way of Allah with their wealth and lives are greater in rank in the sight of Allah, and it is they who are the successful.
9|21| Their Lord gives them the happy news of Mercy from Him, and of (His) Pleasure, and of Gardens having an everlasting bliss for them,
9|22| where they shall dwell forever. Surely, it is Allah with whom lies a great reward.
9|23| O you who believe, do not take your fathers and your brothers as your friends, if they prefer infidelity to Faith. Those of you who have friendship with them are the wrongdoers.
9|24| Say, .If your fathers and your sons and your brothers and your spouses and your clan and the wealth you have earned and the trade you apprehend will recede and the homes you like are dearer to you than Allah and His Messenger and Jihad in His way, then, wait until Allah comes with His command. Allah does not lead the sinning people to the right path.
9|25| Allah has surely blessed you with His help on many battlefields, and on the day of Hunain, when you were proud of your great number, then it did not help you at all, and the earth was straitened for you despite all its vastness, then you turned back on your heels.
9|26| Then Allah sent down His tranquility upon His Messenger and upon the believers, and sent down troops that you did not see, and punished those who disbelieved. That is the recompense of the disbelievers.
9|27| Yet Allah relents, after that, to whomsoever He wills. Allah is Most-Forgiving, Very-Merciful.
9|28| O you who believe, the Mushriks are impure indeed, so let them not approach Al-Masjid-ul-Haram after this year. And if you apprehend poverty, then, Allah shall, if He wills, make you self-sufficient with His grace. Surely, Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise.
9|29| Fight those People of the Book who do not believe in Allah, nor in the Last Day, and do not take as unlawful what Allah and His Messenger have declared as unlawful, and do not profess the Faith of Truth; (fight them) until they pay jizyah with their own hands while they are subdued.
9|30| The Jews say, . ‘Uzair (Ezra) is the Son of Allah. and the Christians say, .MasiH (the Christ) is the Son of Allah. That is their oral statement. They imitate the saying of the earlier disbelievers. May Allah ruin them, how far they are turned back from the truth!
9|31| They have taken their rabbis and their monks as gods beside Allah, and also (they have taken) MasiH the son of Maryam (as god). And they were not commanded but to worship only One God. There is no god but He. Pure is He from what they associate with Him.
9|32| They wish to blow out the Light of Allah with their mouths, and Allah rejects everything short of making His light perfect, no matter how the disbelievers may hate it.
9|33| He is the One who has sent down His Messenger with guidance and the Faith of Truth, so that He makes it prevail over every faith, no matter how the Mushriks may hate it.
9|34| O you who believe, many of the rabbis and the monks do eat up the wealth of the people by false means and prevent (them) from the way of Allah. As for those who accumulate gold and silver and do not spend it in the way of Allah, give them the ‘good‘ news of a painful punishment,
9|35| on the day it (the wealth) will be heated up in the fire of Jahannam, then their foreheads and their sides and their backs shall be branded with it: .This is what you had accumulated for yourselves. So, taste what you have been accumulating.
9|36| Surely, the number of months according to Allah is twelve (as written) in the Book of Allah on the day He created the heavens and the Earth, of which there are Four Sacred Months. That is the right faith. So, do not wrong yourself therein. And fight the Mushriks all together, as they fight you all together, and be sure that Allah is with the God-fearing.
9|37| Nasi‘ (i.e. postponement of months) is nothing but a further excess in infidelity, whereby the disbelievers are misguided. They allow it one year and disallow it another year, so that they may conform (only) to the number of what Allah has sanctified, and allow what Allah has disallowed. The evil of their deeds has been beautified for them (by Satan). And Allah does not lead the disbelieving people to the right path.
9|38| O you who believe, what is wrong with you that when it is said to you, .Come out in the way of Allah,. you turn heavy (and cling) to the ground. Have you become happy with the worldly life instead of the Hereafter? So, (remember that) the enjoyment of the worldly life is but trivial in (comparison with) the Hereafter.
9|39| If you do not march forth (in the way of Allah), He will chastise you with a painful punishment and will replace you with another nation, and you can do Him no harm at all. Allah is powerful to do anything.
9|40| If you do not help him, (it makes no difference to the Prophet, because) Allah has already helped him when the disbelievers expelled him, and he was the second of the two, when they were in the cave, and he was saying to his companion, .Do not grieve. Allah is surely with us.So, Allah caused His tranquility to descend on him, and supported him with troops that you did not see, and rendered the word of the disbelievers humiliated. And the word of Allah is the uppermost. Allah is Mighty, Wise.
9|41| March forth (in the way of Allah), no matter whether you are light or heavy, and carry out Jihad (struggle) in the way of Allah with your wealth and lives. That is good for you, if you were to realize.
9|42| Had it been a gain at hand or an average journey, they would have certainly followed you, but the distance seemed too far to them. They will swear by Allah: .We would have certainly set out with you, if we were able to. They are putting themselves to ruin. Allah knows that they are liars.
9|43| (O Prophet,) Allah has forgiven you; why did you permit them (to stay in Madinah) before the truthful ones could become distinct to you, and you could be sure of the liars.
9|44| Those who believe in Allah and in the Last Day do not ask you to excuse them from Jihad with their wealth and lives. Allah is aware of the God- fearing.
9|45| Only those people ask you to be excused who do not believe in Allah and in the Last Day and whose hearts are in doubt; so they are wavering in their doubt.
9|46| Had they wished to set out, they would have made some preparation for it, but Allah disliked their going forth, so He made them lag behind, and it was said to them, .Stay back with those who are staying back.
9|47| And had they set out with you, they would have added nothing for you but trouble, and would have run around in your midst seeking mischief against you. Still, among you there are those who spy for them. Allah is aware of the wrongdoers.
9|48| They sought mischief even earlier and tried to upset matters for you, until the Truth arrived and the will of Allah prevailed, though they disliked it.
9|49| And among them there is one who says, .Allow me (to stay behind) and do not expose me to an ordeal.Look! They have already fallen into an ordeal, and certainly Jahannam (the Hell) has the disbelievers encircled.
9|50| If some good comes to you, it annoys them, and if hardship befalls you, they say, .We had already taken care of our problem., and they go their way delighted.
9|51| Say, .Nothing can ever reach us except what Allah has destined for us. He is our Master. And in Allah alone the believers must place their trust.
9|52| Say, .What you are expecting for us is nothing but one of the two good things (martyrdom or victory). And we are expecting for you that Allah sends to you a punishment from Himself or at our hands. So, wait. Of course, we are waiting with you.
9|53| Say, .Spend, willingly or unwillingly, it will never be accepted from you. You have been a sinning people.
9|54| Nothing has prevented their spending from being accepted from them but that they have disbelieved in Allah and in His Messenger, and they do not come to the Salah but lazily, and do not spend but without volition.
9|55| So, their wealth and their children should not attract you. In fact, Allah intends to punish them with these in this lowly life and that their souls should depart while they are disbelievers.
9|56| They swear by Allah that they are from among you, whereas they are not from among you, but they are a people in fear.
9|57| If they find a place of refuge or caves or any place to enter, they will turn towards it running (as) unbridled (horses).
9|58| And among them there are those who find fault with you in (the distribution of) Sadaqat (alms). So, if they are given something out of it, they are quite happy, and if they are given nothing from it, they at once get annoyed.
9|59| Would that they were content with what Allah and His Messenger had given to them, and were to say, .Allah is sufficient for us; Allah and His Messenger will give us (more) out of His grace (when they so will). Indeed, we crave for (the pleasure of) Allah alone.
9|60| The Sadaqat (prescribed alms) are (meant) only to be given to the poor, the needy, to those employed to collect them, to those whose hearts are to be won, in the cause of the slaves and those encumbered with debt, in the way of Allah and to a wayfarer. This is an obligation prescribed by Allah. Allah is All-Knowing, Wise.
9|61| And among them (the hypocrites) there are those who hurt the Prophet and say, .He is just an ear. (that is, he hears and believes everything). Say, .He gives ear to that which is good for you; he believes in Allah and trusts the believers and is a mercy for those of you who (pretend to) believe. And those who hurt the Messenger of Allah, for them there is a painful punishment.
9|62| (O believers,) they swear by Allah before you, so that they may please you, whereas Allah, as well as His Messenger, has greater right that they should please Him, if they are (true) believers.
9|63| Have they not come to know that whoever opposes Allah and His Messenger, definite for him is the fire of Jahannam (Hell) wherein he will remain forever. That is the extreme disgrace.
9|64| The hypocrites are afraid that a Surah (a chapter of the Holy Qur‘an) may be sent down about them, which tells them what lies in their hearts. Say, .Go on mocking. Allah is surely to bring out what you are afraid of.
9|65| And if you ask them, they will say, .We were just chatting and having fun. Say, .Is it of Allah and His verses and His Messenger that you were making fun?.
9|66| Make no excuses. You became disbelievers (by mocking at Allah and His Messenger) after you had professed Faith. If We forgive some of you (who repent and believe), We shall punish others (who carry on their hypocrisy), because they were guilty.
9|67| The hypocrites, males and females, are all alike. They bid vice and forbid virtue and withhold their hands (from spending in Allah‘s way). They forgot Allah, so He forgot them. Surely, the hypocrites are the sinners.
9|68| Allah has promised the fire of Jahannam to the hypocrites, men and women, and to the disbelievers who shall live there forever. It is adequate for them. Allah has put His curse on them, and for them there is a lasting punishment.
9|69| (You are) like those who were before you. They were stronger than you in power, and richer in wealth and children. So, they enjoyed their share (from the pleasures of this world), then you enjoyed your share as those before you enjoyed their share, and you indulged (in evils) as they indulged. They are the ones whose deeds have gone to waste in this world and in the Hereafter, and they are the losers.
9|70| Has there not reached them the news of those before them, the people of NuH and ‘Ad and Thamud and the people of Ibrahim and the people of Madyan, and (the news) of the towns overturned? Their messengers came to them with clear signs; so, Allah was not such as would wrong them, but they have been doing wrong to their own selves.
9|71| The believers, male and female, are friends to each other. They bid virtue and forbid vice and establish Salah and pay Zakah and obey Allah and His Messenger. Those are the ones whom Allah will bless with mercy. Surely, Allah is Powerful, Wise.
9|72| Allah has promised to the believers, male and female, gardens beneath which rivers flow, where they shall live forever, and good homes in gardens of eternity. And Allah‘s pleasure is above all. That is the supreme success.
9|73| O Prophet, carry out Jihad (struggle) against the disbelievers and hypocrites, and be strict with them. And their abode is Jahannam (Hell), and it is an evil terminus.
9|74| They swear by Allah that they said nothing, while indeed, they had said the word of infidelity and had disbelieved after having accepted Islam, and had intended what they could not achieve. And they have reacted for nothing but that Allah and His Messenger have enriched them with His grace. So, if they repent, it will be good for them, and if they turn away, Allah will chastise them with a painful punishment in this world and the Hereafter, and for them there is neither a friend on the Earth, nor a helper.
9|75| And among them there are those who made a pledge with Allah: .If He gives us (wealth) out of His grace, then, surely we shall give alms and shall be among the righteous.
9|76| But when He gave them (wealth) out of His grace, they became stingy about it, and went back turning their faces away.
9|77| So Allah, in turn, put hypocrisy in their hearts till the day they shall meet Him, because they broke their promise with Allah, and because they have been telling lies.
9|78| Do they not know that Allah knows what they conceal and what they whisper, and that Allah is well aware of all the Unseen?
9|79| (Among the hypocrites, there are) those who taunt the believers who voluntarily give alms and have nothing but their hard earnings; still they mock at such people. Allah mocks at them, and for them there is a painful punishment.
9|80| (It is all equal whether you) ask pardon for them or do not ask pardon for them. Even if you ask pardon for them seventy times, Allah will never pardon them. That is because they disbelieved in Allah and His Messenger. Allah does not lead the sinning people to the right path.
9|81| Those who were left behind were happy with their sitting back to the displeasure of the Messenger of Allah, and they disliked carrying out Jihad in the way of Allah with their wealth and lives, and they said, .Do not march in this hot weather. Say, .The fire of Jahannam is much more intense in heat,. only if they could understand.
9|82| So, let them laugh a little, and weep a lot, this being a reward of what they used to earn.
9|83| Then, if Allah brings you back to a group of them and they seek your permission to march, say to them, .You shall never march with me ever after, and shall never fight an enemy in my company. You were happy with sitting back the first time; now, sit with those remaining behind.
9|84| And never offer a prayer on any one of them who dies, and do not stand by his grave. They disbelieved in Allah and His Messenger and died while they were sinners.
9|85| Their wealth and children should not attract you. Allah only wills to punish them with these in this world and that their souls depart while they are disbelievers.
9|86| When a Surah is revealed (saying), .Believe in Allah and carry out Jihad in the company of His Messenger. the capable ones from them seek your permission and say, .Let us remain with those sitting back.
9|87| They are happy to be with women who sit back, and their hearts are sealed; so they do not understand.
9|88| But the Messenger and the believers in his company have carried out Jihad with their wealth and lives, and for them there are the good things, and they are the successful.
9|89| Allah has prepared for them gardens beneath which rivers flow where they will live forever. That is the supreme achievement.
9|90| And the excuse-makers from the Bedouins came, so that they might be allowed (to stay behind), while those who were false to Allah and His Messengers (just) stayed behind (without seeking permission). A painful punishment is about to fall upon those of them who disbelieve.
9|91| There is no blame on the weak, or on the sick, or on those who have nothing to spend, if they are sincere to Allah and His Messenger. There is no way against those who are good in deeds. Allah is most Forgiving, Very Merciful.
9|92| Nor (is there any blame) on those who, when they came to you so that you might provide them with a carrier (that they could ride for Jihad ) and you said (to them), .I find no carrier to give to you., went back with their eyes flowing with tears in grief, because they had nothing to spend.
9|93| Blame lies, in fact, on those who ask you permission despite being rich. They are happy being with women who sit back. Allah has sealed their hearts; so they do not know.
9|94| They will make excuses to you when you return to them. Say, .Do not make excuses. We shall never believe you. Allah has told us the facts about you. Allah will see what you do, and His Messenger as well. Then you shall be returned to the Knower of the Seen and the Unseen, and He will tell you what you have been doing.
9|95| They will swear by Allah before you when you will go back to them, so that you may ignore their misdeeds. So, just ignore them. They are filth, and their abode is Jahannam, a recompense for what they used to do.
9|96| They swear before you, so that you may be pleased with them. So, even if you are pleased with them, Allah will not be pleased with the sinning people.
9|97| The Bedouins are often more strict in disbelief and hypocrisy, and are most likely to be ignorant of the limits of what Allah has sent down to His Messenger. Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise.
9|98| And among the Bedouins there are those who take what they spend as a fine, and they look forward to the cycles of time to turn against you. Upon those is the evil cycle. And Allah is All-Hearing, All-Knowing.
9|99| And among the Bedouins there are others who believe in Allah and in the Last Day and take what they spend as a source of nearness to Allah and of prayers from the Messenger. It is indeed a source of nearness for them. Allah will admit them to His mercy. Surely, Allah is Most Forgiving, Very Merciful.
9|100| As for the first and foremost of the Emigrants (Muhajirin) and the Supporters (AnSar) and those who followed them in goodness, Allah is pleased with them and they are pleased with Allah, and He has prepared for them gardens beneath which rivers flow, where they will live for ever. That is the supreme achievement.
9|101| And among those Bedouins who are around you there are hypocrites, and among the people of Madinah as well. They are adamant on hypocrisy. You do not know them. We know them. We will chastise them twice, then they shall be driven to a terrible punishment (in the Hereafter).
9|102| And there are others who admitted their sins while they had mixed a good deed with an evil one. It is likely that Allah will relent towards them. Surely, Allah is Most-Forgiving, Very-Merciful.
9|103| Take Sadaqah (obligatory alms) out of their wealth through which you may cleanse and purify them, and pray for them. Indeed, your prayer is a source of peace for them. And Allah is (All-) Hearing, (All-) Knowing.
9|104| Have they not come to know that Allah is He who accepts repentance from His slaves and accepts Sadaqat, and that Allah is Most-Relenting, Very-Merciful.
9|105| Say, .Do (what you do); Allah will see your deed, as will the Messenger and the believers. And you shall be returned to the Knower of the Seen and the Unseen, then He will tell you what you have been doing.
9|106| And there are others whose matter is deferred till the command of Allah (comes): either He would punish them or relent towards them. Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise.
9|107| And (there are) those who have built a mosque to cause harm (to Islam) and to promote infidelity and to create dissention among the believers and to provide a station for one who has been at war with Allah and His Messenger even before. They will certainly swear (and say), .We intended to do nothing but good. Allah testifies that they are liars
9|108| Do not ever stand there (in prayer). In fact, the mosque that was founded on Taqwa (piety) from the very first day has greater right that you stand in it. In it there are people who like to observe purity; and Allah loves those observing purity.
9|109| Then tell me, which one is better, whether the one who has founded his building on fear of Allah and on search of His pleasure, or the one who has founded his building on the edge of an abyss that is about to collapse, then it did collapse with him into the fire of Jahannam ? Allah does not give guidance to the unjust people.
9|110| The building they had built shall always remain a source of unrest in their hearts, unless their hearts are cut into pieces. Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise.
9|111| Surely, Allah has bought their lives and their wealth from the believers, in exchange of (a promise) that Paradise shall be theirs. They fight in the way of Allah, and kill and are killed, on which there is a true promise (as made) in the Torah and the Injil and the Qur‘an. And who can be more faithful to his covenant than Allah? So, rejoice in the deal you have made, and that is the great achievement.
9|112| (They are) those who repent, those who worship, those who praise (Allah), those who journey (in Allah‘s way), those who bow in Ruku‘, those who prostrate in sajdah, those who bid the Fair and forbid the Unfair and those who preserve the limits prescribed by Allah. And give the good news to the believers.
9|113| It is not (permissible) for the Prophet and the believers to seek forgiveness for the Mushriks, even if they are kinsmen, after it became clear to them that they are the people of hell.
9|114| As for the prayer of Ibrahim for the forgiveness of his father, it was only due to a promise he had made to him. Later, when it became clear to him that he was an enemy of Allah, he withdrew himself from him. Indeed, Ibrahim was very tender-hearted, very forbearing.
9|115| Allah is not such as He makes a people go astray after He has given them guidance, unless He explains to them what they should avoid. Indeed, Allah is fully aware of every thing.
9|116| Surely, to Allah alone belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. He gives life and brings death. And, other than Allah, you have neither a supporter, nor a helper.
9|117| Surely, Allah has relented towards the Prophet and the Emigrants (Muhajirin) and the Supporters (the AnSar) who followed him in the hour of hardship after the hearts of a group of them were about to turn crooked, then He relented towards them. Surely, to them He is Very-Kind, Very- Merciful.
9|118| And (He relented) towards the three whose matter was deferred until when the earth was straitened for them despite all its vastness, and even their own souls were straitened for them, and they realized that there is no refuge from Allah, except in Him, then He turned towards them, so that they may repent. Surely, Allah is the Most-Relenting, the Very Merciful.
9|119| O you who believe, fear Allah, and be in the company of the truthful.
9|120| It was not (permissible) for the people of Madinah and for those around them of the Bedouins to stay behind abandoning the Messenger of Allah, nor to prefer their own lives to his life. That is because whatever thirst or fatigue or hunger strikes them in the way of Allah, and whenever they step into a place which infuriates the infidels, and whenever they make a gain from an enemy, a virtuous deed is credited to their account. Surely, Allah does not nullify the reward of the virtuous.
9|121| Whatever they spend, be it less or more, and whenever they cross a valley, is all written down for them, so that Allah may give them the best reward for what they used to do.
9|122| It is not (necessary) for all the believers to go forth.‘; So, why should it not be that a group from every section of them goes forth, so that they may acquire perfect understanding of the Faith, and so that they may warn their people when they return to them, so that they may take due care (of the rules of Shari‘ah ).
9|123| O you who believe, fight those disbelievers who are near you, and let them find severity in you. Know well that Allah is with the God-fearing.
9|124| When a Surah is sent down, some of them (the hypocrites) say, .Whose faith from among you has been increased by this?. So far as the believers are concerned, it has certainly increased their faith, and they are quite happy.
9|125| As for those who have malady in their hearts, it adds further impurity to their (initial) impurity, and they die infidels.
9|126| Do they not see that they are put to trial every year once or twice; still they neither repent, nor do they take lesson?
9|127| And when a Surah is sent down, they look at each other (as if saying): .Is there someone watching you?. Then they turn away. Allah has turned their hearts, because they are a people who do not understand.
9|128| Surely, there has come to you, from your midst, a Messenger who feels it very hard on him if you face a hardship, who is very anxious for your welfare, and for the believers he is very kind, very merciful.
9|129| So, if they turn away, say (O Messenger,) .Enough for me is Allah. There is no god but He. In Him I have placed my trust, and He is the Lord of the Great Throne.
10|1| Alif, Lam, Ra . These are verses of the Wise Book.
10|2| Is it surprising for the people that We have sent the divine revelation to a man from among them to direct him that he should warn the people (who are heedless), and give happy news to those who believe that they will have a truly excellent footing at a place near their Lord? The disbelievers said, .Surely, he is an open sorcerer.
10|3| Surely, your Lord is Allah, the One who created the heavens and the earth in six days, and then He positioned Himself on the Throne. He governs all affairs (of His creation). There is no one who could intercede before Him, except after His permission. That is Allah, your Lord. So, worship Him. Would you still pay no heed?
10|4| Towards Him all of you have to return, this being a true promise from Allah. Surely, He originates the creation; then He will bring it again, so that He may justly reward those who believe and do good deeds. As for those who disbelieve, for them there is a drink of boiling water and a painful punishment, because they used to be infidels.
10|5| He is the One who has made the sun a glow, and the moon a light, and determined for it stages, so that you may learn the number of the years, and the calculation (of time). Allah has not created all this but for a rightful purpose. He elaborates the signs for a people who understand.
10|6| Surely, in the alternation of night and day and in what Allah has created in the heavens and the earth, there are signs for a people who are God- fearing.
10|7| As for those who do not believe in meeting Us and are quite happy with the life of this world and are content with it, and those who are heedless to Our signs,
10|8| they are the ones whose abode is the Fire, because of what they used to earn for themselves.
10|9| As for those who believe and do good deeds, their Lord will guide them by virtue of their belief; rivers will be flowing beneath them in the Gardens of Bliss.
10|10| Their call therein will be, .Pure are You, O Allah. and their greeting therein will be Salam . And the end of their call will be, .Praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds.
10|11| And if Allah were to hasten in sending evil to the people, as they hasten in seeking good, their time would have been all over. So, We leave alone those who do not believe in meeting Us to wander blindly in their rebellion.
10|12| When man is afflicted by a hardship, he prays to Us (at all times), when reclining or sitting or standing. But when We remove his hardship, he just takes his way as though he had never prayed to Us in any hardship that afflicted him. This is how their deeds appear beautified to the transgressors.
10|13| Indeed We have destroyed generations before you when they transgressed, and their Messengers had come to them with clear signs, but they were not the ones who would believe. This is how We punish the guilty people.
10|14| Then We made you (their) successors in the land, so that We see how you would act.
10|15| When Our verses are recited to them in all their clarity, say those who do not believe in meeting Us, .Bring a Qur‘an other than this, or make changes in it (to suit our fancies). Say, .It is not possible for me to make changes in it on my own. I follow nothing but what is revealed to me. If I disobey my Lord, I fear the punishment of a terrible day.
10|16| Say, .Had Allah so willed, I would have not recited it to you, nor would He have let you know it. Then, I have lived among you for years before it. Have you, then, no sense?.
10|17| So, who is more unjust than the one who forges a lie against Allah or gives the lie to His signs? Indeed (such) guilty people shall not achieve success.
10|18| Beside Allah, they worship those who can neither harm nor benefit them, and they say, .These are our intercessors with Allah. Say, .Are you informing Allah of what He does not know as existing in the heavens or on the earth?. Pure is He, and far higher than what they associate with Him.
10|19| All the people were no more than a single community; later, they differed. But for a word from your Lord that had already come to pass, a decisive judgment would have been made about their mutual differences.
10|20| And they say, .Why is it that no sign has been sent down to him from his Lord?. Say, .The Unseen is only for Allah. So, wait. I am waiting with you.
10|21| Once We cause people to taste a blessing after a hardship having afflicted them, they at once start devising plans against Our verses. Say, Allah is swifter in implementing His plan. Indeed, Our messengers (angels) record whatever you intrigue.
10|22| He is the One who enables you to travel on land and at sea, until when you are aboard the boats, and they sail with those on board, under a favorable wind, and they are pleased with it, there comes upon them a violent wind, and the wave comes upon them from every direction, and they think that they are surrounded from all sides, they pray to Allah, having faith in Him alone, (and say,) .If You deliver us from this, we shall be grateful indeed.
10|23| But when He delivers them, they at once start rebelling on the earth wrongfully. O people, your rebellion is, in fact, against your own selves. It is only worldly life that you are enjoying. Thereafter, it is to Us that you have to return; then We will tell you what you have been doing.
10|24| The example of worldly life is just like the water We sent down from the sky, then the vegetation of the earth grew with it, which is (meant to be) eaten by men and cattle, until when the earth took on its ornament and was fully adorned, and its people thought that they had control over it, Our command came to it at night or by day, and We turned it into a stubble, as if it had not been there a day earlier. This is how We elaborate the verses for a people who reflect.
10|25| Allah invites (people) to the Abode of Peace and brings whom He wills to a straight path.
10|26| For those who do good there is the best, and something more. Neither gloom shall cover their faces, nor disgrace. Those are the people of Paradise. Therein they shall live forever.
10|27| As for those who commit evils, the recompense of each evil shall be similar to that evil, and disgrace shall cover them. For them, there is none to save from Allah. Their faces will seem to be covered with layers of a dark night. Those are the people of the Fire. Therein they shall live forever.
10|28| And (be mindful of) the Day when We shall gather them together, then We shall say to those who associated partners with Allah, .Wait in your place, you and your associate-gods. Then We will cause a split between them, and their associate-gods will say, .It was not us that you worshipped.
10|29| So, Allah is enough as witness between us and between you. We were totally unaware of your worship.
10|30| Thereupon, everyone shall assess what one had sent ahead, and they will be sent back to Allah, their true Lord, and whatever they used to fabricate will vanish from them.
10|31| Say, .Who gives you sustenance from the heavens and the earth? Or, who controls the (powers of) hearing and seeing? And who brings forth the living from the dead, and brings forth the dead from the living? And who manages everything?. They will say, .Allah. Then, (you) say, .Would you not, then, fear Allah (by desisting from holding others as gods)?.
10|32| So, that is Allah, your Lord in truth. And what is there after truth but error? To where, then, are you being diverted (by your whims)?
10|33| This is how the Word of your Lord has come true about the sinners that they will not believe.
10|34| Say, .Is there any one from your ‘associate-gods‘ who originates the creation, then brings it again? To where then, are you being turned away (by your desires)?.
10|35| Say, .Is there any one from your associate-gods who guides to the truth?. Say, .Allah guides to the truth. Is, then, He who guides to the truth more worthy of being obeyed, or he who has no guidance at all unless he is guided (by someone else)? So, what has happened to you? How do you judge things?
10|36| Most of them follow nothing but conjectures. Surely, conjectures are of no avail in the matter of truth at all. Certainly, Allah is fully aware of what they do.
10|37| And this Qur‘an is not such as could have been made up by someone without (having been revealed by) Allah, but it is a confirmation of that (discourse) which had been (revealed) before it, and an elaboration of what is prescribed. There is no doubt in it. It is from the Lord of all the worlds.
10|38| Or, do they say that he has made it up? Say, .Then, bring a Surah like this, and call whomsoever you can beside Allah, if you are true.
10|39| But they have rejected a thing they could not comprehend with knowledge, while its ultimate end has not appeared to them as yet. Similarly those who passed before them had rejected the truth. So, look how was the fate of the unjust.
10|40| And among them there are those who believe in it, and among them there are others who do not believe in it. And your Lord has the best knowledge about the mischief-makers.
10|41| And if they give the lie to you, say, .For me, my deed, and for you, your deed. You are not accountable for what I do, and I am not accountable for what you do.
10|42| And among them there are those who listen to you. Would you, then, make the deaf hear, even though they lack understanding?
10|43| And among them there are those who look at you. Would you, then, guide the blind even when they have no insight?
10|44| Surely, Allah does not wrong people at all, but the people do wrong their own selves.
10|45| The Day when He will gather them (in the next life,) they will feel as if they had not stayed (in the world) any longer than a fraction of a day. They will recognize each other. Losers, indeed, are those who deny that they will ever face Allah; they are not on the right path.
10|46| No matter whether We show you (during your life) some of what We warn them of, or We take you back to Us (before it), in any case, they have to return to Us. Then, Allah is witness to what they do.
10|47| For every people there is a messenger. So, when their messenger comes, the matter is decided between them with justice, and they are not wronged.
10|48| They say, .When will this promise (of punishment to the disbelievers) be fulfilled if you are true?.
10|49| Say, .I have no power to bring a harm or a benefit to myself, except what Allah wills. For every people there is an appointed time. When their time comes, they are not able to put it off for a moment, nor are they able to go ahead of it.
10|50| Say, .Just tell me, if His punishment befalls you at night or by day, what (desirable thing) will it have that the sinners are asking it so hurriedly?
10|51| Is it only when it befalls you that you will believe in it? (It will be said to you at that time, .Have you believed) now, while you used to demand (in mockery) that it should come sooner?.
10|52| Then it will be said to the unjust, .Taste the punishment lasting for ever. You shall not be punished except for what you have been earning.
10|53| They ask you to tell them whether it is true. Say, .Yes, by my Lord, it is true. And you cannot frustrate (Allah‘s plan).
10|54| If anyone who did wrong possesses all that is on the earth, he would (agree to) ransom himself with it. And they will conceal their remorse when they will see the punishment. And the matter will be decided between them with justice and they will not be wronged.
10|55| Look! To Allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth. Look! Allah‘s promise is certainly true, but most of them do not know.
10|56| He gives life and brings death, and to Him you shall be returned.
10|57| O men, there has come to you an advice from your Lord, and a cure for the ailments of your hearts, and guidance and mercy for the believers.
10|58| Say, .With the grace of Allah and with His mercy (this book has been revealed). So they should rejoice in it. It is much better than that (wealth) which they accumulate.
10|59| Say, .Have you ever considered, whatever provision Allah has sent down for your benefit, you have made up lawful and unlawful from it?. Say, .Has Allah permitted you or are you fabricating a lie against Allah?.
10|60| What is the assumption of those who fabricate a lie against Allah (about) the Day of Judgment? Indeed Allah is gracious to people, but most of them are not grateful.
10|61| In whatever condition you are, and whatever portion of the Qur‘an you recite therein, and whatever work you all do, We are present before you when you are engaged in it. Hidden from your Lord is nothing even to the measure of a particle on the earth or in the heavens. And there is nothing smaller or greater that is not in the clear Book.
10|62| Listen, the friends of Allah shall have no fear, nor shall they grieve.
10|63| __those who have believed and have been fearful of Allah.
10|64| For them there is the good news in the worldly life and in the Hereafter: there is no change in the words of Allah.That is the great achievement.
10|65| (O Prophet,) what they say should not make you grieve. Surely, all power belongs to Allah. He is All-Hearing, All Knowing.
10|66| Listen, to Allah belong all those in the heavens and all those on the earth. And those who invoke associate-gods besides Allah do not follow a reality. They follow nothing but whims and do nothing but make conjectures.
10|67| He is the One who made for you the night, so that you may have rest in it, and (made) the day to see. Indeed, there are signs therein for a people who listen.
10|68| They say, .Allah has got a son. Pure is He. He is Self-Sufficient. To Him belongs what is in the heavens and what is in the earth. You have no proof for it. Do you allege about Allah what you do not know?
10|69| Say: Those who fabricate lies against Allah shall not prosper.
10|70| It will be a little enjoyment in this world; thereafter to Us they are bound to return; then We shall make them taste the severe punishment, because they used to disbelieve.
10|71| Recite to them the story of (the Prophet) NuH (Noah), when he said to his people, .O my people, if it is hard on you that I stay (with you) and give (you) advice through the signs of Allah, then, in Allah I place my trust. So, be firm in your plan (against me) with (the help of) all your partners, and your plan should not be a cause of concern for you; then carry it out against me and give me no respite.
10|72| Still, if you turn away, then, I did not demand any reward from you. My reward is with none except Allah, and I have been commanded to be among those who submit.
10|73| Then they rejected him, and We saved him and those with him in the Ark and made them the successors, and drowned those who gave the lie to Our signs. So look how was the fate of those who were warned.
10|74| Then, after him, We sent messengers to their peoples, and they came to them with clear signs, but they were not to believe in what they had rejected earlier. This is how We seal the hearts of the transgressors.
10|75| Then, after them, We sent Musa and Harun with Our signs to Pharaoh and his group, but they showed arrogance. And they were surely a guilty people.
10|76| So, when Truth came to them from Us, they said, .It is certainly a clear magic.
10|77| Musa said, .Do you say (this) about the Truth when it came to you? Is this magic, while the magicians do not achieve success?.
10|78| They said, .Have you come to us to turn us away from the way on which we have found our fathers, and so that you both have supremacy on earth? We are not going to believe in you.
10|79| And Pharaoh said, .Bring to me every knowledgeable magician.
10|80| So, when the magicians came, Musa said to them, .Cast what you have to cast.
10|81| So, when they had cast, Musa said, .All that you have brought is magic. Allah will certainly bring it to naught. Be assured that Allah does not set right the work of the mischief-makers.
10|82| And Allah establishes the truth through His words, even though the guilty ones may dislike it.
10|83| Then, except some youths of his people, no one believed in Musa for the fear of Pharaoh and his group, lest he should persecute them. Pharaoh was high-handed in the land and he was of those who crossed all limits.
10|84| And Musa said, .My people, if you have believed in Allah, then, in Him place your trust if you are obedient.
10|85| So, they said, .In Allah we have placed our trust: Our Lord, do not make us a victim of the unjust people,
10|86| and save us, through Your mercy, from the disbelieving people.
10|87| And We revealed to Musa and his brother: .Have houses for your people in Egypt, and make your houses worship oriented, and establish Salah, and give good tidings to the believers.
10|88| Musa said, .Our Lord, You have given Pharaoh and his group glamour and riches in the worldly life, so that, our Lord, they mislead (people) from Your path. Our Lord, obliterate their riches and harden their hearts, so that they may not come to believe until they witness the painful punishment.
10|89| Allah said, .The prayer of the two of you has been granted; so stand firm, and never follow the way of the ignorant.
10|90| And We let the children of Isra‘il cross the sea. So, Pharaoh and his troops chased them in transgression and hostility, until when he was about to drown, he said, .I believe that there is no god but the One in whom the children of Isra‘il believe, and I am among those who submit to Allah.
10|91| (Allah said,) .Is it now (that you have come to believe) while you were rebellious all along, and you were among the mischief-makers?
10|92| So, today, We shall save your body, so that you may become a sign for those after you. And many of the people are heedless of Our signs.
10|93| And surely We gave the children of Isra‘il a proper place to live, and provided them with good things. Then they did not disagree between themselves but after knowledge had come to them. Surely, Allah will decide between them on the Day of Judgment about the matters in which they used to dispute each other.
10|94| So, (O prophet,) even if you are in doubt about what We have sent down to you, ask those who read the Book (revealed) before you. Surely, truth has come to you from your Lord, so never be among those who are suspicious.
10|95| And never be among those who have rejected Our signs, lest you should be among the losers.
10|96| Surely, those against whom the Word of your Lord stands settled will not believe,
10|97| even though every sign comes to them, unless they witness the painful punishment.
10|98| So, how is it that there never was a town, which could have believed and its belief would have been of benefit to it, except the people of Yunus? When they came to believe, We removed from them the punishment of humiliation in the worldly life and let them enjoy themselves for some time.
10|99| Had your Lord willed, all those on earth would have believed altogether. Would you, then, compel people, so that they become believers?
10|100| It is not (possible) for any one that he believes except with the will of Allah. And He makes filth settle on those who do not understand.
10|101| Say, .Look at what is there in the heavens and the earth. But, signs and warnings do not suffice a people who do not believe.
10|102| So, are they waiting for nothing short of something like the days of those who have passed before them? Say, .So wait. I am with you, among those who are waiting.
10|103| Then We (used to) save Our messengers and those who believed. Similarly, it being undertaken by Us, We shall save the believers.
10|104| Say, .O people, if you are in doubt about my Faith, then, I do not worship those whom you worship beside Allah. Rather, I worship Allah who brings death to you. And I have been ordained to be among the believers,
10|105| and that I should make myself firm on Faith, being upright, and never should be among the Mushriks (who ascribe partners to Allah).
10|106| And do not invoke, other than Allah, what neither benefits you nor harms you, for, if you do so, then you will surely be one of the unjust.
10|107| If Allah brings some harm to you, there is none to remove it except He. And if He intends to bring some good to you, there is none to turn His grace back. He brings it to whomever He wills from among His servants. He is the Most-Forgiving, the Very Merciful.
10|108| Say, .O people, the truth has come to you from your Lord. So, whoever accepts guidance accepts it to his own benefit, and whoever goes astray does so to his own detriment. And I am not responsible for you.
10|109| Follow what is being revealed to you, and be patient until Allah gives His judgment, and He is the best of all judges.
11|1| Alif , Lam , Ra . (This is) a book the verses of which have been made firm, and elaborated by the One who is All Wise, All Aware,
11|2| (directing the Prophet to say to the people,) .You must not worship anyone other than Allah; I am for you a warner from Him, and a bearer of glad tidings;
11|3| and you must seek forgiveness from your Lord, then, turn to Him in repentance, and He will provide you with good things to enjoy for a given time, and bestow His extra favor on everyone who has extra good deeds (in his account). And if you turn away, then, I fear for you the punishment of a terrible day.
11|4| To Allah is your return, and He is powerful over everything.
11|5| Beware, they bend their chests to hide from Him. Beware, when they cover up themselves with their clothes, He knows what they hide and what they expose. Surely, He is All Aware of what lies in the hearts.
11|6| There is no creature on earth whose sustenance is not undertaken by Allah. He knows its permanent and its temporary place. Everything is in a clear book.
11|7| He is the One who created the heavens and the earth in six days, while His throne was on water, so that He might test you as to who among you is better in deed. And if you say, .You shall be raised after death,. the disbelievers will surely say, .This is nothing but sheer magic.
11|8| And if We defer the punishment for them for a certain time, they will say, .What is holding it back?. Beware, the day it will visit them, it shall not be turned back from them, and they shall be besieged by what they used to ridicule.
11|9| If We give man a taste of Our mercy and then take it away from him, he becomes highly desperate, utterly ungrateful.
11|10| And if We give him a taste of comfort after a hardship has touched him, he will say, .Evils have gone away from me., (and thus) He will become over-exulting, boastful,
11|11| except those who are patient and do good deeds. Such people will have Allah‘s forgiveness and a great reward.
11|12| Is it then possible from you (O Prophet,) that you will abandon some of what is being revealed to you, and that your heart will be straitened thereby, because they say, .Why has a treasure not been sent down to him or an angel not come with him?. You are but a warner. And Allah takes care of everything.
11|13| Do they say that he has fabricated it? Say (to them), .Then bring ten Surahs like this, fabricated. And call whomsoever you can, other than Allah, if you are true.
11|14| So, if they do not respond to your call, then be assured that it has been sent down with the knowledge of Allah and that there is no god but He. So, do you submit?
11|15| Those who seek (merely) the worldly life and its beauty, We will fully recompense them herein for their acts, and their right will not be curtailed in this world.
11|16| Those are the people for whom there is nothing in the Hereafter except fire. Nullified will be whatever they worked herein, and void will be what they have been doing.
11|17| Then, can such people be equal to the one who has a clear proof from his Lord, followed by an evidence from within, and before which there was the Book of Musa, a guide and a mercy? Such people believe in it; and whoever of the groups denies its veracity, his promised place is the Fire. So, do not be in doubt about it. Surely, it is the truth from your Lord, but most of people do not believe.
11|18| Who is more unjust than the one who forges a lie against Allah? Such people will be presented before their Lord, and the witnesses will say, .These are the ones who lied against their Lord. Lo! the curse of Allah lies on the unjust,
11|19| the ones who prevent (people) from the way of Allah and seek crookedness in it, and who are deniers of the Hereafter.
11|20| They were unable to frustrate (Allah‘s plan) on the earth, and they had no supporters besides Allah. Punishment will be doubled for them. They were not able to hear, nor would they see.
11|21| Those are the ones who brought loss to their own selves, and all that they used to fabricate vanished from them.
11|22| Essentially, they are the worst losers in the Hereafter.
11|23| Surely, those who believe and do good deeds and humble themselves before their Lord, those are the people of Paradise. There they shall live forever.
11|24| The example of the two groups is that of a blind and deaf person on the one hand, and a seeing and hearing one on the other. Are the two equal when compared? Would you still pay no heed?
11|25| We sent NuH to his people (saying to them): .I am here to warn you
11|26| that you should worship none but Allah, (otherwise) I fear for you the punishment of a painful day.
11|27| So the chiefs of his people who disbelieved replied, .We are not seeing that you are anything more than a man like us, and we are not seeing that any people have followed you except those who are the meanest among us, and we have not seen in you people any superiority over us; rather, we believe that you are liars.
11|28| He said, .O my people, tell me, if I am on a clear path from my Lord, and He has bestowed mercy upon me from Himself which is hidden from your sight, shall we, then, impose it upon you by force, while you are averse to it?
11|29| And, O my people, I do not demand from you any wealth for it. My reward is with none but Allah. And I am not the one who could drive the believers away. Surely, they will be meeting their Lord (gracefully), but I do see your behavior is that of ignorance.
11|30| O my people, who would help me against (the punishment of) Allah, if I were to drive them away? Would you still take no lesson?
11|31| And I do not say to you that I have the treasures of Allah, nor that I have the knowledge of the unseen, nor do I say that I am an angel. Nor do I say (as you do) about those who are contemptible in your eyes that Allah will never award them any good; Allah knows best what lies in their hearts. (If I were to say so,) then, I would indeed be one of the unjust.
11|32| They said, .O NuH, you have debated with us, and debated too much. Now bring upon us what you threaten us with, if you are one of the truthful.
11|33| He said, .Only Allah will bring it to you, if He so wills, and you cannot frustrate (His will).
11|34| My good counsel will not profit you, even though I wish you the best, if Allah wills to let you go astray. He is your Lord, and to Him you shall be made to return.
11|35| Do they (the pagans of Makkah) still say that he (Muhammad) has forged it? Say, .If I have forged it, then, I am responsible for my sin, and I am free of the sins you commit.
11|36| And it was revealed to NuH: None of your people would come to believe any more, except those who have already believed. So, be not distressed by what they have been doing.
11|37| And make an ark under Our eyes and according to Our revelation; and do not speak to Me about those who have crossed the limits, as they are destined to be drowned.
11|38| He started making the Ark. Whenever the leaders of his people passed by him, they mocked at him. He said, .If you mock at us, we mock at you like you mock at us:
11|39| So, you shall soon know who will be visited by a scourge that will humiliate him, and upon whom a lasting punishment will settle forever.
11|40| At last, when Our command came and the oven overflowed, We said, .Take into the Ark a pair of two from every species, along with your family,__except those against whom the Word has already been pronounced__and (also take into it) those who have believed. And there were only a few who had believed with him.
11|41| He (NuH) said, .Embark it. With the name of Allah it sails and anchors. Surely, my Lord is Most-Forgiving, Very-Merciful.
11|42| And it was sailing with them amidst the waves like mountains. And NuH called out to his son, who was at an isolated place, .O my child, come on board with us, and do not be in the company of the disbelievers.
11|43| He said, .I shall take shelter on a mountain which will save me from the water. He said, .There is no saver today from the command of Allah, except the one to whom He shows mercy. And the waves rose high between the two, and he was among those who were drowned.
11|44| It was said (by Allah), .O earth, suck in your water, and O heaven, stop. And water subsided, and the matter was over. It (the Ark) came to rest on the Judi, and it was said, .Away with the wrongdoers.
11|45| NuH called unto his Lord and said, .My Lord, my son is a part of my family, and surely Your promise is true, and You are the greatest of all judges.
11|46| He said, .O NuH, in fact, he is not a part of your family. Indeed, he is (a man of) bad deeds. So do not ask Me something of which you have no knowledge. I exhort you not to be among the ignorant.
11|47| He said, .My Lord, I seek refuge with You that I should ask You something of which I have no knowledge. If You do not forgive me and do not show mercy to me, I shall be among the losers.
11|48| It was said, .O NuH, disembark in peace from Us and with blessings upon you and upon the peoples (springing) from those with you. And there are peoples whom We shall give some enjoyment, then a painful punishment from Us will visit them.
11|49| These are some reports from the unseen (events), which We reveal to you. You did not know them before this, neither you nor your people. So, be patient. Surely, the end is in favor of the God-fearing.
11|50| And to ‘Ad, (We sent) their brother Hud. He said, .O my people, worship Allah. You have no god other than Him. You are nothing but fabricators.
11|51| O my people, I ask you no reward for it. My reward is only on the One who created me. Do you, then, not understand?
11|52| O my people, seek forgiveness from your Lord, then turn to Him in repentance, and He will release the heavens pouring upon you, and will add strength to your strength, and do not turn away like sinners.
11|53| They said, .O Hud, you did not bring to us any proof, and we are not to leave our gods on your statement, and we are not to believe in you.
11|54| We do not say except that some of our gods have subjected you to some evil. He said, .I make Allah my witness, and you bear witness that I have nothing to do with what you take as gods
11|55| besides Him. So, try your plans against me, all of you together, then give me no respite.
11|56| I place my trust in Allah who is my Lord and your Lord. There is no creature but He holds it by the forelock. Surely, my Lord is on a straight path.
11|57| Now, if you turn away, I have already conveyed to you the message with which I was sent to you. My Lord will replace you with some other people, and you cannot do Him any harm. Surely, my Lord is guardian over every thing.
11|58| So, when came Our command, We saved Hud and those who believed along with him, out of mercy from Us, and We did save them from a heavy punishment.
11|59| Such was the tribe of ‘Ad who rejected the signs of their Lord, disobeyed their Messengers and followed the dictates of every obstinate tyrant!
11|60| A curse was made to pursue them in this world and on the Day of Judgment. Lo! The people of ‘Ad disbelieved their Lord. Lo! Ruined were ‘Ad, the people of Hud.
11|61| And to (the people of) Thamud (We sent) their brother, SaliH. He said, .O my people, worship Allah. You have no god other than Him. He has created you from earth and made you settle therein. So, seek His forgiveness, then turn to Him in repentance. Surely, my Lord is near, responsive to the prayers.
11|62| They said, .O SaliH, we had hopes in you before this. Do you ask us not to worship what our fathers used to worship? We have serious doubts that have disturbed us about the faith to which you are calling us.
11|63| He said, .O my people, tell me: If I have a clear proof from my Lord, and He has bestowed mercy upon me from Himself, who will come to my help against Allah, if I still disobey Him? So, you extend nothing to me but loss.
11|64| And O my people, this is the she-camel of Allah, a sign for you. So, leave her free to eat on the earth of Allah, and do not even touch her with evil (intention), lest an approaching punishment should seize you.
11|65| Then they slaughtered her. So, he said, .Enjoy yourselves in your homes for three days (only). That is a promise, not to be backed out.
11|66| So, when came Our command, We saved SaliH and those who believed along with Him, out of mercy from Us, and (We saved them) from the disgrace of that day. Surely, your Lord is the Powerful, the All Mighty.
11|67| And those who transgressed were caught by the Cry, and they were found dead in their homes, fallen on their knees,
11|68| as though they had never lived there. Lo! The people of Thamud disbelieved their Lord. Lo! Ruined were the people of Thamud.
11|69| And Our emissaries came to Ibrahim with the good news. They greeted him with .Salam (peace). He said, .Salam. Then he took not much time in bringing a roasted calf.
11|70| So, when he noticed their hands not acceding to it, he found them strange and felt scared of them. They said, .Be not scared. We have been sent to the people of LuT.
11|71| His wife was standing (nearby), and she laughed. Thus We gave her the good news about IsHaq, and about Ya‘qub after IsHaq.
11|72| She said, .Woe to me! Shall I give birth to a child while I am an old woman and this is my husband, an old man? This is something amazing indeed.
11|73| They said, .Do you marvel at Allah‘s command? Allah‘s mercy and His blessings have always been upon you, O people of the house. Surely, He is Praiseworthy, Glorious.
11|74| So, when fear left Ibrahim and the happy news came to him, he started disputing with Us for the people of LuT.
11|75| Surely, Ibrahim is forbearing, very penitent, ever-turning to Allah.
11|76| .O Ibrahim! Leave it. In fact, the command of your Lord has come to pass, and there has to come upon them a punishment that cannot be averted.
11|77| When Our emissaries (angels) came to LuT, he was saddened because of them, and his heart felt uneasy for their sake, and He said, .This is a very hard day.
11|78| And his people came to him, rushing upon him. They were already habitual to commit evil deeds. He said, .These are my daughters. They are purer for you. So, have fear of Allah and do not disgrace me in respect of my guests. Is there no reasonable man among you?.
11|79| They said, .You know that we have no claim on your daughters, and you know well what we want.
11|80| He said, .Would that I had some power over you, or could seek refuge in a strong support!.
11|81| They (the angels) said, .O LuT, we are emissaries of your Lord. They shall never reach you. So, move with your family in a part of night, and none of you shall turn to look back; except your woman. There has to befall her whatever will befall them. Their deadline is the morning. Is it not that the morning is near?.
11|82| So, when Our command came to pass, We turned their habitations upside down, and rained on it stones of hard clay, one over another
11|83| marked from your Lord. And it is not far from the transgressors.
11|84| And to Madyan (We sent) their brother, Shu‘aib. He said, .O my people, worship Allah. You have no god other than Him. And do not curtail the measure and the weight. I see you quite well off, and I fear for you the punishment of an encircling day.
11|85| And O my people, perfect the measure and the balance with justice and do not make the people short of their things, and do not go about the earth spreading disorder.
11|86| Whatever is allowed by Allah to retain (lawfully) is better for you, if you are believers. And I am not a watchman over you.
11|87| They said, .O Shu‘aib, does your Salah (prayer) command you that we should forsake what our fathers used to worship or that we should not deal with our wealth as we please? You pretend to be the only man of wisdom and guidance.
11|88| He said, .O my people, tell me, if I am on a clear path from my Lord and He has provided me with a good provision from Himself, (should I still leave you unguided?) I do not want to do in your absence what I forbid you from. I want nothing but to set things right as far as I can. My ability to do any thing comes from none but Allah. In Him alone I have placed my trust and to Him alone I turn in humbleness.
11|89| O my people, let not your hostility towards me cause you to suffer what was suffered by the people of NuH, or the people of Hud, or the people of SaliH. And the people of LuT are not far from you.
11|90| Seek forgiveness from your Lord, then turn towards Him in repentance. Surely, my Lord is very merciful, most loving.
11|91| They said, .O Shu‘aib, we do not understand much of what you say, and, in fact, we see you are weak among us. But for your clan, we would have stoned you. And to us, you are not a man of respect.
11|92| He said, .O my people, is my clan more respectable to you than Allah, as you have taken Him as something thrown behind your backs? Surely, my Lord encompasses all that you do.
11|93| O my people, do what you can, I am to do (what I can). Soon you will know the one whom the punishment will visit, putting him to disgrace, and the one who is false. And wait. I am, with you, waiting.
11|94| And when Our command came, We saved Shu‘aib and those who believed along with him, out of mercy from Us; and those who transgressed were caught by the Cry, and they were found (dead) in their homes, fallen on their knees
11|95| as though they never lived there. Lo! Ruined were Madyan, like Thamud were ruined.
11|96| And We sent Musa, with Our signs and with clear proof,
11|97| to Pharaoh and his group. So, they followed the command of Pharaoh, while the command of Pharaoh was not right.
11|98| He will lead his people on the Day of Judgement, and make them descend into the Fire. And it is the evil descending place.
11|99| The curse was made to pursue them here and on the Day of Judgement. It is the evil reward to be offered.
11|100| That is a part of stories of the towns that We narrate to you. Some of them are still standing, and (some are) eradicated like a harvested field.
11|101| We did no wrong to them; rather, they have wronged themselves. So, their gods whom they used to invoke beside Allah did not come to their help in any way, when came the command of your Lord, and they added nothing to them except destruction.
11|102| Such is the seizing of your Lord when He seizes the (people of) towns when they are transgressing. Indeed, His seizing is painful, severe.
11|103| In this there is a sign for the one who fears the punishment of the Hereafter. That is a day when all the people shall be gathered together, and that is a day which will be witnessed by all.
11|104| We do not defer it but for a limited term.
11|105| The day it comes no one shall speak except by His leave. So, some of them will be wretched and (some) blessed.
11|106| As for those who are wretched, they shall be in the Fire. For them there is (nothing but) crying and howling.
11|107| They shall remain there forever, as long as the heavens and the earth remain intact, unless your Lord wills (otherwise). Surely, your Lord does what He intends.
11|108| As for those who are blessed, they shall be in Paradise living there forever, as long as the heavens and the earth remain intact, unless your Lord wills (otherwise), It will be an award never to be ceased.
11|109| So, be not in doubt about what they worship. They worship only in the way their fathers used to worship earlier. Surely, We are going to pay them their full share, not curtailed in the least.
11|110| And We gave Musa the Book, then it was disputed about. But for a word from your Lord that had already come to pass, the matter would have been decided between them. Surely, they are in confounding doubt about it.
11|111| And to all of them, your Lord shall pay for their deeds in full. Surely, He is aware of all that they do.
11|112| So, stand firm (on faith) as you have been commanded, as well as those who having repented (from disbelief) have joined you, and do not cross the limits. Surely, He is watchful of what you do.
11|113| And do not incline towards the wrongdoers, lest the Fire should catch you, and you have no supporters other than Allah, then you should not be helped.
11|114| Establish Salah at both ends of the day, and in the early hours of the night. Surely, good deeds erase bad deeds. That is a reminder for the mindful.
11|115| And be patient, for Allah does not let the reward of the righteous go to waste.
11|116| Then, why is it that there were no people, among the generations before you, who would have enough remnants of wisdom to stop others from creating disorder in the land, except a few among them whom We saved (from Our punishment)? And the wrongdoers pursued the luxuries they were involved in, and they became sinners.
11|117| Your Lord is not such that He would destroy the towns unjustly while their people are good in their ways.
11|118| Had your Lord willed, He would have made all the people a single community. But, they will continue in their differences,
11|119| except those whom Allah has blessed with mercy, and for that He has created them. And perfect is the word of your Lord: .I will surely fill the Hell with Jinns and the human beings, all together.
11|120| We narrate to you all such stories from the events of the messengers as We strengthen your heart therewith. And in these (stories) there has come to you the truth, a good counsel and a reminder to those who believe.
11|121| Say to those who do not believe, .Do whatever you can. We are doing (what we can).
11|122| And wait. We too are waiting.
11|123| To Allah belong the secrets of the heavens and the earth, and to Him the entire matter shall be returned. So worship Him and have trust in Him. Your Lord is not unaware of what you do.
12|1| Alif Lam Ra. These are verses of the enlightening Book.
12|2| We have sent it down, as an Arabic Qur‘an, so that you may understand.
12|3| By revealing this Qur‘an to you, we hereby narrate to you the best narrative, while before this you were among those unaware (of it).
12|4| (It happened) when Yusuf said to his father, .My father, I saw (in dream) eleven stars and the Sun and the Moon; I saw them all fallen prostrate before me.‘‘
12|5| He said, .My son, do not relate your dream to your brothers, lest they should devise a plan against you. Surely, Satan is an open enemy for mankind.
12|6| And it will be in this way that your Lord will choose you and teach you the correct interpretation of events, and will perfect His bounty upon you and upon the House of Ya‘qub, as He has perfected it earlier upon your fore-fathers, Ibrahim and IsHaq. Surely, your Lord is All-Wise, All- Knowing.
12|7| Surely, in (the story of) Yusuf and his brothers, there are signs for those who ask.
12|8| (It happened) when they said, .Yusuf and his brother are dearer to our father than we are, while we are a whole group. Surely, our father is in clear error.
12|9| Let us kill Yusuf, or throw him at some place on earth, and thus your father‘s full attention will be devoted for you alone, and after doing that, you may become a righteous people.‘‘
12|10| One of them said, .Do not kill Yusuf; rather, cast him into the bottom of a pit, so that some wayfarers may pick him up, if you are going to do something anyway.‘‘
12|11| They said (to Ya‘qub), .Our father, why is it that you do not trust us about Yusuf, while we are his well-wishers indeed.
12|12| Send him with us tomorrow, that he may eat and play, and of course, we will remain as guards for him.
12|13| He said, .It makes me sad that you should take him with you, and I fear that some wolf may eat him up when you are heedless of him.
12|14| They said, .If a wolf eats him up, while we are a whole group, we are then losers indeed.
12|15| So, when they went away with him and were determined to put him in the bottom of a pit, (they did accordingly). And We revealed to him (Yusuf), .You will (one day) remind them of this deed of theirs, and they will not recognize (you).
12|16| And at nightfall, they came to their father weeping.
12|17| They said, .Father, we went racing with one another, and left Yusuf with our belongings, and the wolf ate him up. You will never believe us, howsoever truthful we may be.
12|18| And they came with fake blood on his shirt. He said, .Rather, your inner desires have tempted you to do something. So, patience is best. It is Allah whose help is sought against what you describe.‘‘
12|19| And some wayfarers came (near the pit in which Yusuf was thrown), and sent their water-drawer (to bring water for them). So, he let down his bucket. He said, .What a good news! Here is a boy. And they kept him hidden as merchandise, while Allah was aware of what they were doing.
12|20| And they sold him for a paltry price, for a few silver-coins, and they had not much interest in him.
12|21| And the one who bought him from Egypt said to his wife, .Make his stay graceful. He may be useful for us. Or, we may adopt him as a son. And thus We established Yusuf in the land, so that We should teach him the interpretation of events. Allah is powerful in (enforcing) His command, but most of the people do not know.
12|22| And when he reached the prime of his age, We gave him wisdom and knowledge, and this is how We reward those who are good in their deeds.
12|23| And she, in whose house he was, seduced him towards herself, and bolted the doors, and said, .come on!. He said, .I seek refuge with Allah. Surely, he (your husband) is my master. He has given me a good lodging. Indeed, the wrongdoers do not prosper.
12|24| She certainly desired him, and he might have desired her, had he not seen the proof from his Lord. Thus We did, to turn evil and lewdness away from him. Surely, he was one of Our chosen servants.
12|25| They raced towards the door, and she ripped his shirt from behind, and they found her master by the door. She said, .What could be the punishment of him who intended evil with your wife, except that he be imprisoned or (given) a painful chastisement?.
12|26| He (Yusuf) said, .It was she who tried to seduce me. And a witness from her family observed that if his shirt was ripped from the front side, then she is true and he is a liar;
12|27| and if his shirt was ripped from behind, then she is telling a lie and he is truthful.
12|28| So, when he (her husband) saw his shirt ripped from behind, he said, .This is certainly your trickery, O women. Great is the trickery of you women indeed.
12|29| O Yusuf, ignore this matter, and you (O woman,) seek forgiveness for your sin, for you were guilty infact.
12|30| And women in the city said, .The wife of the minister is seducing her youthful slave. His love has entered the depth of her heart. Surely, we see her in open error.
12|31| So, when she heard of their taunting comments, she extended an invitation to them and arranged for them a comfortable place (to sit and dine) and gave everyone a knife, and said (to Yusuf): .come out to them. So when they saw him, they found him great, and (were so stunned that they) cut their hands and said, .Oh God! He is no human being. He is but a noble angel.
12|32| She said, .This is the one about whom you reproached me. Yes, I seduced him, but he abstained. And should he not follow my command, he shall be imprisoned and will be disgraced.
12|33| He (Yusuf) said, .My Lord, the prison is dearer to me than what these women invite me to do. If You do not turn their guile away from me, I shall get inclined towards them and shall be among the ignorant.
12|34| So, his Lord accepted his prayer and turned their guile away from him. Surely, He is the All-Hearing, the All-Knowing.
12|35| Later on, even after having seen the clear signs (of his innocence), they deemed it proper to imprison him for some time.
12|36| And two men entered the prison with him. One of them said, .I have seen myself (in dream) pressing wine. And the other said, .I saw myself carrying bread on my head of which the birds were eating. Let us know its interpretation. We see you are a man of good deeds.
12|37| He said, .No food provided for you shall come to you, but I can give you its description before it comes to you. This is the knowledge my Lord has given to me. I have abandoned the way of those who do not believe in Allah, and who are deniers of the Hereafter,
12|38| and I have followed the way of my fathers, Ibrahim, IsHaq and Ya‘qub. It is not for us that we associate any partners with Allah. All this is a part of the favor Allah has bestowed upon us and upon the people, but most of the people are not grateful.
12|39| O my fellow prisoners, are different gods better or Allah, the One, the All-Dominant?
12|40| Whatever you worship, other than Him, are nothing but names you have coined, you and your fathers. Allah has sent down no authority for them. Sovereignty belongs to none but Allah. He has ordained that you shall not worship anyone but Him. This is the only right path. But most of the people do not know.
12|41| .O my fellow prisoners, one of you will serve wine to his master, while the other will be crucified and birds will eat from his head. Destined is the matter you are asking about.
12|42| And he (Yusuf) said to the one whom he believed likely to be released out of the two, .Tell your master about me. Then, the Satan made him forget to tell his master. So, he (Yusuf) remained in prison for a few years.
12|43| And (one day) the king said (to his courtiers), .I have seen (in a dream) seven fat cows being eaten by seven lean ones, and seven ears of grain which are green and (seven) others which are dry. O people, tell me about my dream, if you can interpret dreams.
12|44| They said, .(It seems to be) a mishmash of dreams, and we do not know the interpretation of dreams.
12|45| And said the one who was released (from the prison) out of the two, and recalled (Yusuf) after a long time, .I shall tell you its interpretation. Just send me (to Yusuf).
12|46| (Thus he came to the prison and said to Yusuf .Yusuf, O the truthful one, tell us about seven fat cows eaten by seven lean ones, and seven ears of grain which are green and (seven) others which are dry, so that I may go back to the people and they may know (the interpretation of the dream.).
12|47| He said, .You will grow crops for seven years consecutively. So, what you have harvested, leave it in its ear, except a little which you eat.
12|48| Then seven hard years shall come after that, which shall eat up what you have stored for them, except a little which you preserve (to sow).
12|49| Then there shall come after that a year in which people will have rains and in which they will extract juices.
12|50| And (when this person went back and told the king about the interpretation of the dream), the king said, .Bring him to me. So, when the messenger came to Yusuf, he said, .Go back to your lord and ask him, ‘What is the case of the women who cut their hands?‘ Surely, my Lord knows well their guile.
12|51| He (the king) said, .What was your case, O women, when you seduced Yusuf?. They said, .God forbid, we know of no evil in him. The governor‘s wife said, .Now the truth has come to light. I did seduce him, and he is surely truthful.
12|52| (Then Yusuf said), .That was because he (the governor) may know that I did not betray him in his absence, and that Allah does not lead the guile of betrayers to success.
12|53| And I do not absolve my inner self of blame. Surely, man‘s inner self often incites to evil, unless my Lord shows mercy. Certainly, my Lord is the Most-Forgiving, Very-Merciful.
12|54| The king said, .Bring him to me, and I shall employ him purely for myself. So, when he (the king) talked to him, he said (to Yusuf), .Today you are with us well-placed, fully trusted.
12|55| He said, .Appoint me to (supervise) the treasures of the land. I am indeed a knowledgeable keeper.
12|56| And thus We gave Yusuf power in the land. He could settle in it wherever he wished. We extend Our mercy to whomsoever We will, and We do not let the reward of the righteous people to go to waste.
12|57| And the reward of the Hereafter is surely better for those who believe and constantly observe taqwa.
12|58| And came the brothers of Yusuf and appeared before him. He recognized them, while they did not recognize him.
12|59| When he equipped them with their provisions, he said, .Bring to me your other brother from your father‘s side. Do you not see that I give full measure, and I extend the best hospitality?
12|60| Still, if you do not bring him to me, then you deserve no (further) measure from me, nor shall you approach me any more.
12|61| They said, .We shall persuade his father about him and we will certainly do it.
12|62| And he (Yusuf) said to his boys, .Put their goods in their camel-packs. Perhaps they will recognize it when they go back to their family; perhaps they will come again.
12|63| So, when they returned to their father, they said, .Father, the (required) measure (of grain) has been withheld from us, therefore, send our brother with us, so that we may receive our full measure. And, of course, we are his guards.
12|64| He said, .Shall I trust you about him as I trusted you earlier about his brother? Well, Allah is the best guardian, and He is the Most-Merciful of all the merciful.
12|65| When they opened their baggage, they found their goods given back to them. They said, .Our father, what else should we want? Here is our goods given back to us, and we shall bring food to our family, protect our brother and add the measure of one camel more. That is an easy measure.
12|66| He said, .I shall never send him with you until you give me a pledge in the name of Allah that you will definitely bring him back to me, unless you are overpowered (by circumstances). So, when they gave him their pledge, he said, .Allah is watchful over what we say.
12|67| And he said, .O my sons, do not enter (the city) all of you from the same gate, rather, enter from different gates. And I cannot help you in any way against (the will of) Allah. Sovereignty belongs to none but Allah. In Him I place my trust, and all those who trust should trust in Him alone.
12|68| And (recall) when they entered (the city) in the manner their father had advised them. He could not help them in any way against (the will of) Allah, but it was just an urge in the heart of Ya‘qub which he satisfied; he was a man of knowledge, because We had taught him, but most of the people do not know.
12|69| And when they came to Yusuf, he lodged his brother (Binyamin) with himself. He said, .Look, I am your brother! So do not grieve for what they have been doing.
12|70| Later, when he equipped them with their provisions, he placed the bowl in the camel-pack of his brother. Then, an announcer shouted out, .O people of the caravan, you are thieves.
12|71| Turning towards them, they said, .What are you missing?.
12|72| They said, .We are missing the measuring-bowl of the king, and whoever brings it back shall deserve a camel-load, and I stand surety for it.
12|73| They said, .We swear by Allah, you know, we did not come to make mischief in the land, nor have we ever been thieves.
12|74| They said, .What is the punishment, if you are liars?.
12|75| They said, .Its punishment? The one in whose saddlebag it is found shall himself be the punishment. This is how we punish the wrongdoers.
12|76| So, he started with their bags before (searching) the bag of his brother, then, recovered it from the bag of his brother. This is how We planned for Yusuf. He had no right to take his brother according to the law of the king, unless Allah so willed. We elevate in ranks whomsoever We will. Above every man of knowledge, there is someone more knowledgeable.
12|77| They said, .If he commits theft, (there is nothing surprising, because) his other brother had committed theft earlier. Yusuf kept it (his reaction) to himself and did not reveal it to them. He said (in his heart), .You are even worse in position. Allah knows best of what you allege.
12|78| They said, .O ‘Aziz, he has a father, a very old man. So, take one of us in his place. We see you are a generous man.
12|79| He said, .We seek Allah‘s refuge from keeping anyone other than him with whom we have found our thing, otherwise we shall be unjust.
12|80| So when they lost hope in him, they went aside for consultation. The oldest of them said, .Do you not know that your father has taken pledge from you in the name of Allah, while you had defaulted earlier in the case of Yusuf. So, I shall never leave this land unless my father permits me or Allah decides about me. He is the best of all judges.
12|81| Go back to your father and say, ‘Our father, your son has committed theft, and we do not testify except what we know, and we could not guard against the unseen.
12|82| Ask (the people of) the town in which we have been, and the caravan with which we have come, and undoubtedly we are truthful.
12|83| He (Ya‘qub) said, .Rather, your inner desires have seduced you to something. So, patience is best. Hopefully, Allah may bring them all together. Surely, He is the All-Knowing, All-Wise.
12|84| He turned away from them and said, .How sad I am about Yusuf!. and his eyes turned white with sorrow and he was suppressing (his anger and grief).
12|85| They said, .By God, you will not stop remembering Yusuf until you collapse or perish.
12|86| He said, .I do not complain of my anguish and sorrow to anyone but Allah, and I know from Allah what you do not know.
12|87| O my sons, go and search for Yusuf and his brother, and do not lose hope in the mercy of Allah. In fact, only the infidels lose hope in Allah‘s mercy.
12|88| So, when they came to him (Yusuf), they said, .‘Aziz, we and our family are struck by distress, and we have brought some goods of very little worth. So, give us the full measure (of grain) and be charitable to us. Surely, Allah rewards the charitable.
12|89| He said, .Do you know what you did to Yusuf and his brother when you were ignorant?.
12|90| They said, .Is it that you are, in fact, Yusuf?. He said, .I am Yusuf, and this is my brother. Allah has been very kind to us. Surely, whoever fears Allah and observes patience, Allah does not let the reward of such good people to go to waste.
12|91| They said, .We swear by Allah, indeed Allah has given to you preference over us, and we were guilty in fact.
12|92| He said, .No reproach upon you today! May Allah forgive you, and He is the Most- Merciful of all the merciful.
12|93| Go with this shirt of mine, and put it over the face of my father, and he will turn into a sighted man. And bring to me all your family.
12|94| And when the caravan set out (from Egypt), their father (Ya‘qub) said (in Canaan), .I sense the fragrance of Yusuf, if you do not take me to be senile.
12|95| They said, .By God, you are still in your old fallacy!.
12|96| So, when came the man with good news, he put it (the shirt) on his face, and he turned into a sighted man. He (Ya‘qub) said, .Did I not tell you that I know from Allah what you do not know?.
12|97| They said, .Our father, pray to Allah to forgive us our sins. Surely, we have been guilty.
12|98| He said, .I shall pray to my Lord to forgive you. Surely, He is the Most-Forgiving, Very-Merciful.
12|99| Later, when they came to Yusuf, he placed his parents near himself and said, .Enter Egypt, God willing, in peace.
12|100| And he raised his parents up on the throne, and they all fell before him in prostration. He said, .My father, here is the fulfillment of my early dream. My Lord has made it come true. He favored me when he released me from the prison, and brought you from the countryside after Satan had caused a rift between me and my brothers. Surely, my Lord does what He wills in a subtle way. Surely, He is the All-Knowing, the All- Wise.
12|101| .My Lord, You have given me power to rule and the knowledge of interpreting events. O Creator of the heavens and the Earth, You are my guardian in this world and the Hereafter. Make me die a Muslim and make me join the righteous.
12|102| That is a part of the reports of the unseen We reveal to you (O Prophet). You were not with them when they determined their object, and when they were planning devices.
12|103| Most of the people are not going to believe despite your strong desire for it.
12|104| And you do not demand from them any reward against it. It is nothing but a reminder for all the (people of the) worlds.
12|105| How many a sign there are in the heavens and the Earth, which they pass by and they are heedless to them;
12|106| and most of them do not believe in Allah without associating partners with Him in His divinity.
12|107| Do they feel themselves secure from the visit of Allah‘s encircling punishment or from the sudden arrival of the Hour, while they are not conscious of it?
12|108| Say, .This is my way. I call (people) to Allah with full perception, both I and my followers. Pure is Allah; and I am not among those who associate partners with Allah.
12|109| We did not send before you (messengers) other than men from the people of the towns whom We inspired with revelation. Have they not traveled in the land where they could have seen how was the fate of those before them? And surely the abode of the Hereafter is much better for those who fear Allah. Would you, then, still not understand?
12|110| (Punishment was often delayed) until when the messengers were in despair and thought that they were wrong in their estimation, Our help came to them, then saved were those whom We willed. And Our punishment is not averted from the guilty.
12|111| Surely, in the narratives of these, there is a lesson for the people of understanding. It is not an invented story, rather, a confirmation of what has been before it, and an elaboration of everything, and guidance and mercy for a people who believe.
13|1| Alif , Lam , Mim , Ra. These are the verses of the Book. What has been sent down to you from your Lord is true, but most of the people do not believe.
13|2| Allah is the One who raised the heavens without pillars that you can see them. Then He positioned Himself on the Throne and subjugated the sun and the moon, each one of them running to an appointed time. He manages all matters, elaborating the signs, so that you may be sure of meeting your Lord.
13|3| He is the One who spread out the earth and made mountains and rivers on it, and created in it the pairs of two from all the fruits. He makes the night cover the day. Surely, in that there are signs for a people who think.
13|4| And in the earth there are tracts of land neighboring each other, and gardens of grapes, and farms and date palms, some having twin trunks and some having a single one. (Although) all of them are irrigated with the same water, We make some of them better than others in taste. Surely, in that there are signs for a people who understand.
13|5| If you wonder, then wondrous indeed is their saying, .Is it that, once we are dust, we are to be created anew?. They are those who have disbelieved in their Lord, and they are those who (shall) have shackles around their necks, and they are the people of the Fire. They shall remain there forever.
13|6| They ask for evil to come sooner than good, while punishments have really come to pass (against people) earlier to them. And surely, your Lord is the lord of forgiveness for the people against their wrongdoing, and surely, your Lord is severe in punishing.
13|7| The disbelievers say, .Why is it that no sign has been sent down to him from his Lord?. You are but a warner; and for every people there is a guide.
13|8| Allah knows what every female carries and what the wombs decrease or increase. Everything has measure with Him
13|9| He is the Knower of the hidden and the manifest. He is the Great, the High.
13|10| Alike (for Him) is he, from among you, who speaks quietly and he who speaks aloud, and he who hides in the night and he who walks out in the day.
13|11| For every one (from among you) there are angels replacing one another, in front of him and behind him, who guard him under the command of Allah. Surely, Allah does not change the condition of a people unless they change themselves. When Allah intends evil for a people, there is no way to turn it back, and for them there is no patron other than Him.
13|12| He is the One who makes you see the lightening in fear and hope, and who forms the heavy clouds.
13|13| The thunder proclaims His purity with His praise, and (so do) the angels, out of His awe. And He sends the thunderbolts and strikes with it whom He wills. They are quarrelling about Allah, and He is stern in His plan.
13|14| True prayers are to be directed to Him alone; and those to whom they pray instead of Him do not respond to them at all, but they are like one who stretches his hands towards water so that it may reach his mouth (by itself), while it is not to reach it. And the prayer of the disbelievers (that they make to false gods) is nothing but straying in void.
13|15| To Allah bow in prostration all who are in the heavens and the earth, willingly or unwillingly, and their shadows as well in morns and eves.
13|16| Say, .Who is the Lord of the heavens and the earth?. Say, .Allah. Say, .Have you, then, taken as protectors those besides Him who possess no power to cause benefit or harm even to themselves?. Say, .Is it that a blind person and a sighted one are equal, or that all sorts of the darkness and the light are alike?. Or, have they ascribed such partners with Allah who (according to their belief) have created (some of the creation) as He has created, and thus the creation seemed to them alike? Say, .Allah is the Creator of all things, and He is the One, the All-Dominant.
13|17| He sent down water from the heavens, so the canals flowed according to their capacity, and the flood carried bulging scum. And a similar scum comes up from what they melt in the fire to obtain ornaments or other objects. This is how Allah depicts the truth and the untruth. As for the scum, it goes to be thrown away, while that which benefits people remains on the earth. This is how Allah brings out the parables.
13|18| For those who obey their Lord there is the best of rewards; and those who do not obey Him (shall be in such a plight that) even if they possess all that is on earth, rather twice as much, they would offer it in ransom (to redeem themselves from the punishment). For these there is the worst of reckoning, and their abode is Hell, which is an evil bed to rest.
13|19| Now, can the one who knows that whatever has been revealed to you from your Lord is the truth, be equal to one who is blind? Only the people of understanding respond to the advice —
13|20| those who fulfill (their) pledge with Allah and do not break the covenant,
13|21| and those who maintain the relationships Allah has commanded to be maintained and fear their Lord and are frightful of evil reckoning,
13|22| and those who observe patience in order to seek the pleasure of their Lord and establish Salah and spend secretly and openly from what We have given to them, and repel evil with good. Those are the ones for whom there is the ultimate abode,
13|23| the eternal gardens they enter, and those as well who are righteous from their fathers, spouses, and progeny. The angels will enter onto them from every gate
13|24| (saying) .Peace on you for the patience you observed. So, how excellent is the ultimate abode.
13|25| As for those who break their pledge with Allah after it has been made binding, and cut off the relationships Allah has commanded to be joined, and make mischief in the land, those are the ones for whom there is the curse, and for them there is the evil abode.
13|26| Allah expands the provision for whom He wills and narrows it (for whom He wills). They are happy with the worldly life, while the worldly life, compared to the Hereafter, is nothing but a little enjoyment.
13|27| The disbelievers say, .Why is it that no sign (of their choice) has been sent down to him from his Lord?. Say, .Allah lets go astray whom He wills and gives guidance to those who turn to Him,
13|28| the ones who believe and their hearts are peaceful with the remembrance of Allah. Listen, the hearts find peace only in the remembrance of Allah.
13|29| Those who believe and do good deeds, for them there is the bliss and a good place to return.
13|30| Thus We have sent you, amidst a community before which many communities have passed away, so that you may recite to them what We have revealed to you, while they disbelieve in Ar-RaHman (the All-Merciful Allah). Say, .He is my Lord. There is no god but He. In Him I place my trust, and to Him is my return.
13|31| And even if there were a Qur‘an wherewith the mountains could be moved, or the earth could be split apart, or wherewith the dead are spoken to, (they would not believe). In fact, every decision rests only with Allah. Are the believers not satisfied with the fact that, if Allah willed, He would have brought all the people to the right path? And the disbelievers are continually receiving affliction because of what they did, or it visits somewhere close to their homes, until Allah‘s promise will come to pass. Surely, Allah does not go back upon His promise.
13|32| Messengers have been mocked at before you, so I let the disbelievers go on for a while. Then I seized them. So, how was My punishment?
13|33| Is then He, who is watchful over everyone and over whatever he does, (equal to their false deities?) Still they have made partners with Allah. Say, .Give their names. Is it that you are informing Him of something on earth He does not know, or of just empty words?. But, their ill- designs have been made alluring for the disbelievers, and they have been barred from the Path. And for the one whom Allah deprives of guidance, there is no one to guide.
13|34| For them there is punishment in the worldly life, and indeed the punishment of the Hereafter is even harder, and for them there is none to save them from Allah.
13|35| Here is the description of the Paradise promised to the God-fearing: underneath it the rivers flow; its food is everlasting and (so is) its shade. This is the ultimate abode of the God-fearing while the ultimate abode of the disbelievers is Fire.
13|36| Those to whom We have given the Book are happy with what has been sent down to you. And among their groups there are those who deny some of it. Say, .I am commanded only to worship Allah and not to ascribe partners to Him. To Him I call and to Him is my return.
13|37| Thus We have sent it down, being a command in Arabic. And if you follow their desires, after the knowledge that has come to you, there shall be neither a friend for you against Allah, nor a savior.
13|38| We have sent messengers before you, and gave them wives and children. It is not for a messenger to bring a verse without the will of Allah. For every age there are some rules prescribed.
13|39| Allah wipes off what He wills and affirms (what He wills), and with Him is the Mother Book.
13|40| And if We show you (O prophet) some of what We have promised to them, or We take you back to Us (before that), in both cases you have only to convey the message, and We have to reckon.
13|41| Have they not seen that We are coming to the land narrowing it down from all its sides? Allah judges; there is none to repel His judgement. And He is swift at reckoning.
13|42| Those before them did devise plans, but all the real plans belong only to Allah. He knows what every soul earns, and the disbelievers will soon know for whom is the excellent end.
13|43| The disbelievers say, .You are not a messenger. Say, .Allah is sufficient as a witness between me and you, and those too (are my witnesses) who have the knowledge of the Book.
14|1| Alif, Lam, Ra. This is a book We have sent down to you, so that you may deliver the people, with the will of their Lord, out of all sorts of darkness into the light, leading them to the path of the Almighty, the Praiseworthy
14|2| Allah, the One to whom belongs what is in the heavens and what is in the earth. Woe be to the disbelievers because of a severe punishment,
14|3| to those who prefer the worldly life to the Hereafter and prevent (people) from the way of Allah, and seek to make it crooked. Those have gone too far in straying.
14|4| We did not send any messenger but (speaking) in the language of his people, so that he might clearly convey the message to them. So, Allah lets go astray whom He wills and lets find guidance whom He wills. And He is the Mighty, the Wise.
14|5| Surely, We sent Musa with Our signs saying to him, .Bring your people out of (all sorts of) darkness into the light, and remind them of the Days of Allah. Surely, there are signs therein for every one who observes patience and gratitude.
14|6| And when Musa said to his people, .Remember Allah‘s blessing upon you when He delivered you from Pharaoh‘s people who had been inflicting a grievous torment on you, slaughtering your sons and leaving your women alive. In that there was a great trial from your Lord.
14|7| (Recall the time) when your Lord declared, .If you express gratitude, I shall certainly give you more, and if you are ungrateful, then My punishment is severe.
14|8| And Musa said, .If you and all those on earth become ungrateful, then Allah is free of all needs, worthy of every praise.
14|9| Has there not come to you the news of those before you, the people of NuH, ‘Ad and Thamud and of those after them. No one knows them except Allah. Their prophets came to them with clear signs, but they put their hands into their mouths and said, .We reject what you are sent with, and indeed we are in confounding doubt about what you are calling us to believe.
14|10| Their prophets said, .Is it in Allah that you have some doubt, who is the Creator of the heavens and the earth? He calls you, so that He may forgive you some of your sins and give you respite up to a specified term. They said, .You are no more than a human being like us. You want to prevent us from what our forefathers used to worship. So, bring us some clear authority.
14|11| Their prophets said to them, .We are no more than a human being like you, but Allah bestows His favour upon whom He wills from among His servants. It is not for us to bring you an authority without Allah‘s permission, and in Allah the believers must place their trust.
14|12| What is wrong with us that we should not put our trust in Allah when He has guided us to our paths? We shall, of course, endure with patience all your persecutions; and all those who have to trust should trust only in Allah.
14|13| The disbelievers said to their prophets, .We shall certainly expel you from our land unless you come back to our faith. So, their Lord revealed to them, .We shall destroy the transgressors,
14|14| and shall certainly let you dwell in the land after them. This is for the one who is fearful of standing before Me and is fearful of My warning.
14|15| They sought final decision (by demanding the divine scourge), and (thus) every obstinate tyrant failed.
14|16| The Hell is pursuing him, and he shall be made to drink pus-fluid,
14|17| which he will arduously sip, and will not be able to swallow. Death will come upon him from every side, yet he will not die, and still a heavy chastisement will be ahead of him.
14|18| The deeds of those who refuse to believe in their Lord are like ashes blown away by the wind on a stormy day. They will not be able to gain anything out of what they did. That is the farthest point of straying away from the right path.
14|19| Have you not seen that Allah has created the heavens and the earth with truth? If He wills, He can put you away and bring a new creation;
14|20| and that is not at all difficult for Allah.
14|21| All of them shall appear before Allah. Then, the weak shall say to the arrogant, .We were your followers. So, can you relieve us a little from Allah‘s punishment?. They will say, .Had Allah guided us, we would have guided you. It is all the same for us whether we deplore or endure, we have no way out.
14|22| The Satan will say when the matter will have been decided, .Allah promised you a truthful promise while I gave you a promise and did not fulfill it. I had no authority over you, except that I invited you and you accepted my call. So, do not blame me, but blame yourselves. Neither I can come to your help, nor can you come to my help. I disown your associating me with Allah in the past. Surely, there is a painful punishment for the unjust.
14|23| And those who believed and did good deeds shall be admitted to Gardens beneath which rivers flow, living there forever by the will of Allah. There they shall greet each other with .Salam.
14|24| Have you not seen how Allah has set forth a parable: A good word is like a good tree, having its root firm and its branches in the sky.
14|25| It brings its fruits at all times with the will of its Lord. Allah sets forth the parables for the people, so that they may take lesson.
14|26| And the parable of a bad word is like a bad tree, removed from the top of the soil, having no firm root.
14|27| Allah keeps the believers firm with the stable word in the worldly life and in the Hereafter; and Allah lets the unjust go astray; and Allah does what He wills.
14|28| Have you not seen those who adopted disbelief in exchange of Allah‘s favor and caused their people to disembark at a land of total destruction,
14|29| (which is) the Jahannam. They shall enter it; and it is an evil place to dwell.
14|30| They have set up partners with Allah, so that they may mislead (the people) from His path. Say, .Enjoy (for a while). Then your ultimate journey is to the Fire.
14|31| Say to My believing servants that they should establish Salah and spend, secretly and openly, out of what We have given to them before there comes a day in which there is neither a trade nor friendship.
14|32| Allah is the One who created the heavens and the earth and sent down water from the sky, then brought forth with it sustenance for you from the produce, and subjugated for you the ships, so that they may sail in the sea with His command, and subjugated for you the rivers;
14|33| and He subjugated for you the sun and the moon, moving constantly, and subjugated for you the day and the night,
14|34| and He gave you whatever you asked for. If you (try to) count the bounties of Allah, you cannot count them all. Indeed, man is highly unjust, very ungrateful.
14|35| (Recall) when Ibrahim said, .My Lord, make this city peaceful, and keep me and my children away from worshiping idols.
14|36| My Lord, they have misled many a people. So, the one who follows me does surely belong to me. As for the one who disobeys me, then You are Most-Forgiving, Very-Merciful.
14|37| Our Lord, I have settled some of my children in a valley of no vegetation, close to Your sanctified House, so that, Our Lord, they may establish Salah. So, make hearts of people yearn towards them, and provide them with fruits, so that they may be grateful.
14|38| Our Lord, surely You know what we conceal and what we reveal.__Hidden from Allah is nothing whatsoever, neither in the earth nor in the heavens.
14|39| Praise be to Allah who, despite my old age, blessed me with Isma‘il (Ishmael) and IsHaq (Isaac). Surely, my Lord is the One who listens to the prayer.
14|40| My Lord, make me steadfast in Salah, and my offspring as well. And, Our Lord, grant my prayer.
14|41| Our Lord, forgive me and my parents and all believers on the day when reckoning shall take place.
14|42| Never think that Allah is unaware of what the wrongdoers are doing. He is but giving them respite up to a day when the eyes shall remain upraised (in terror).
14|43| They shall be rushing with their heads raised upward; their eyes shall not return towards them and their hearts shall be hollow.
14|44| Warn the people of a day when punishment will come upon them, and the wrongdoers will say, .Our Lord, give us respite for a short term, and we will respond to Your call and will follow the messengers. (Allah will say), .Is it not that you had sworn oaths earlier that you would not have to leave (the world)?
14|45| And you dwelt in the dwellings of those who wronged themselves, and it became clear to you how We dealt with them, and We put forth for you the examples.
14|46| And they worked out their plot and whatever they plot is before Allah, even though their plot is such as would move the mountains.
14|47| So, never think that Allah will do against His promise to His messengers. Surely, Allah is Mighty, the Lord of Retribution
14|48| the day on which this earth will be turned into some other earth, and the skies as well, and they all shall appear before Allah, the One, the All- Dominant.
14|49| On that day you will see the culprits tied up together in chains,
14|50| their shirts will be of rosin, and their faces will be covered with Fire
14|51| so that Allah repays everyone in full whatever he earned. Indeed, Allah is swift at reckoning.
14|52| This is a message for mankind, so that they (take lesson and) be warned, and so that they may know that He is One God, and so that the people of understanding may observe the advice.
15|1| Alif, Lam, Ra. These are verses of the Book and the enlightening Qur‘an.
15|2| On many occasions, the disbelievers will wish that they were Muslims.
15|3| Let them eat and enjoy, and let (their) fancy make them neglectful, for they shall soon come to know (their ultimate end).
15|4| We did not destroy any town without having a pre-determined time for it.
15|5| No people can precede their appointed time, nor can they exceed it.
15|6| They say, .O you to whom the Dhikr (the Qur‘an) has been revealed, you are surely insane.
15|7| Why do you not bring the angels to us, if you are one of the truthful?.
15|8| We do not send down the angels except with truth, and then they shall be given no respite.
15|9| We, Ourselves, have sent down the Dhikr (the Qur‘an), and We are there to protect it.
15|10| We did send the messengers before you among the groups of earlier peoples.
15|11| No messenger came to them but they used to mock at him.
15|12| Likewise, We make it (i.e. disbelief) enter into the hearts of the sinners,
15|13| (whereby) they do not believe in it (the Qur‘an), and this has been the way of earlier people.
15|14| Even if We open a gate in the sky and they keep ascending through it,
15|15| still they will say, .In fact our eyes have been deluded; rather we are enchanted people.
15|16| We have created stellar formations in the sky and have beautified them for onlookers,
15|17| and have protected them from every outcast devil,
15|18| but the one who tries to eavesdrop is chased by a clearly visible flame.
15|19| As for the earth, We have stretched it out and placed on it firm mountains, and We have caused to grow in it everything well-balanced,
15|20| and created in it sources of sustenance for you and those (creatures) for whom you are not the sustainers.
15|21| We have treasures of every thing, but We send it down only in a determined quantity.
15|22| And We sent forth winds carrying the clouds, then sent down water from the sky and gave it to you to drink, and you are not able to store it.
15|23| It is indeed We, and only We, who give life and bring death, and We are the ultimate inheritor (of everything).
15|24| We know those of you who went ahead, and We know those who remained late.
15|25| Surely, your Lord will gather all of them together. Indeed He is All-Wise, All-Knowing.
15|26| Indeed We created man from a ringing clay made of decayed mud.
15|27| As for the Jann (the first Jinn), We had created him earlier from the fire of the scorching wind.
15|28| Recall when your Lord said to the angels, .I am going to create a human being from a ringing clay made of decayed mud.
15|29| When I form him perfect, and blow in him of My spirit, then you must fall down before him in prostration.
15|30| So the angels prostrated themselves, all together,
15|31| except Iblis (Satan). He refused to join those who prostrated.
15|32| He (Allah) said, .O Iblis, what is the matter with you that you did not join those who prostrated?.
15|33| He said, .I am not such that I should prostrate myself before a mortal whom You have created from a ringing clay made of decayed mud.
15|34| He said, .Then, get out of here, for you are an outcast,
15|35| and upon you is the curse up to the Day of Judgment.
15|36| He said, .My Lord, then give me respite up to the day they (the dead) shall be raised.
15|37| He (Allah) said, .Well, respite is given to you
15|38| till the day of the Appointed Time.
15|39| He said, .My Lord, since You made me go astray, I swear that I shall beautify for them (evils) on the earth, and shall lead all of them astray,
15|40| except those of Your servants from among them who are chosen (by You).
15|41| He (Allah) said, .This is the straight path leading to Me (that a person is chosen by Me through his good deeds).
15|42| My servants are such that you have no power over them except those of the deviators who will follow you.
15|43| And Jahannam (Hell) is the promised place for them all.
15|44| It has seven gates. For each gate there is a group apportioned from them.
15|45| Surely, the God-fearing will be in gardens and streams:
15|46| .Enter here in peace, free of fear.
15|47| We shall have removed whatever grudge they had in their hearts, (thus making them) brothers, sitting on couches, face to face.
15|48| No weariness shall touch them nor will they be expelled from there.
15|49| Tell My servants that I am the Most-Forgiving, the Very-Merciful
15|50| and that My punishment is the painful punishment,
15|51| and tell them about the guests of Ibrahim.
15|52| When they visited him, they greeted him with Salam (peace on you). He said, .We are scared of you.
15|53| They said, .Do not be scared. We give you good news of a boy who will be knowledgeable.
15|54| He said, .Do you give me the good news despite the old age has befallen me? So what good news you are giving to me?.
15|55| They said, .We have given to you the good news of a fact. So do not be one of those who lose hope.
15|56| He said, .Who can lose hope in the mercy of his Lord except those who have lost the straight path?.
15|57| He said, .Then, what is your mission, O messengers?.
15|58| They said, .We have been sent to a sinful people,
15|59| except the family of LuT - all of whom we shall save,
15|60| but his wife. We have ordained that she will be among those who will remain behind.
15|61| So when the messengers came to the family of LuT,
15|62| he said, .You are an unfamiliar people.
15|63| They said, .No, but we have brought to you that (scourge) in which they have been doubting,
15|64| and we have come to you with a definite matter and surely we are truthful.
15|65| So, carry your family after a part of the night (has passed), and follow them at the rear (to make sure that all of your family has joined you), and no one from you should look back; and keep going to where you are commanded.
15|66| We conveyed to him Our decision that they (the unbelievers) were to be totally uprooted when they would see the morning.
15|67| And the people of the city came rejoicing.
15|68| He (LuT) said, .They are my guests; so do not put me to shame,
15|69| and fear Allah and do not disgrace me.
15|70| They said, .Had we not forbidden you from (being the guardian of) the whole world?.
15|71| He said, .These are my daughters, if you are to do something.
15|72| By your life, (O prophet) they were wandering blindly in their intoxication (misguidance).
15|73| So, they were seized by the Cry at sunrise.
15|74| Then, We turned it (the city) upside down and rained down upon them stones of baked clay.
15|75| Surely, in that there are signs for those who read signs.
15|76| Surely, it (their city) is located on the straight road.
15|77| Surely, in it there is a sign for the believers.
15|78| And the people of Aikah were (also) transgressors.
15|79| So, We punished them in retribution, and both of them are (situated) by a highway, clearly visible.
15|80| And the people of Al-Hijr gave the lie to the messengers.
15|81| We provided them with Our signs, yet they kept turning away from them.
15|82| They used to hew out houses from the hills peacefully.
15|83| Then, the Cry seized them by the morning.
15|84| So, whatever they earned did not come to their help.
15|85| We did not create the heavens and the earth and all that is in between them without a truthful purpose. The Hour is sure to come. Therefore, overlook (their evil behavior) in a gracious manner.
15|86| Surely, your Lord is the Creator of all, the All-Knowing.
15|87| We have given you the seven oft-repeated verses and the glorious Qur‘an.
15|88| Never stretch your eyes towards what We have given to groups of them to enjoy, and do not grieve for them, and be kind to believers in humbleness,
15|89| and say, .I am a plain warner indeed.
15|90| (to warn them that We may send down the scourge upon them) as We sent down upon the dividers.
15|91| who had split the divine recitation (Scriptures) into bits.
15|92| So, by your Lord, We shall question all of them.
15|93| about what they have been doing.
15|94| Now, proclaim what you are commanded to, and turn away from those who ascribe partners to Allah.
15|95| Surely, We are sufficient for you against those who deride,
15|96| __ those who believe in any other god along with Allah. So, they shall soon learn (the reality).
15|97| We know that your heart feels distressed for what they say.
15|98| So, proclaim the purity and glory of your Lord, and be among those who prostrate themselves (before Allah);
15|99| and worship your Lord until comes to you that which is certain.
16|1| Allah‘s command has (almost) come. So, do not demand that it should come sooner. Pure is He, and much higher than their ascribing partners to Him.
16|2| He sends down the angels at His behest with the spirit, (that is, the revelation), upon whom He wills from among His servants: .Warn people that there is no god but Me. So, fear Me.
16|3| He created the heavens and the earth in the proper way. He is much higher than their ascribing partners to Him.
16|4| He created man from a drop, and soon he turned into a debating person, expressing himself openly.
16|5| He has created cattle in which there is warmth and other benefits for you; and from them you have food;
16|6| and in them there is a beautiful look for you when you drive them home in the evening and take them out to graze.
16|7| And they carry your loads to a city where you were not able to reach without putting yourselves to arduous labor. Surely, your Lord is Very- Kind, Very-Merciful.
16|8| And (He created) horses, mules and donkeys, so that you may ride on them, and they may give you a good look. And He creates what you do not know (as yet).
16|9| Undertaken by Allah is (to show) the right path, while there are some (paths) that are crooked. Had He so willed, He would have led all of you to the right path.
16|10| He is the One who sent down water from the heavens, of which you have your drink; and with it (you grow) plants on which you pasture your cattle.
16|11| He causes the crops therewith to grow for you, and olives, and date palms, and grape vines, and all the fruits. Surely, in that, there is a sign for a people who ponder.
16|12| He has subjugated for you the day and the night and the sun and the moon, and the stars (too) are subservient by His command. Surely, in that, there are signs for a people who understand.
16|13| And (He subjugated to you) whatever He created for you on the earth having varied colors. Surely, in that, there is a sign for a people who accept advice.
16|14| He is the One who has subjugated the sea, so that you may eat fresh meat from it, and may take out from it ornaments you wear, and you see the boats cleaving through it, and so that you may seek His bounty, and that you may be grateful.
16|15| And He placed mountains on the earth, lest it should shake with you, and rivers and tracks, so that you may find the right way,
16|16| and He has set landmarks. And by the stars they find the right way.
16|17| Is then the One who creates (everything) equal to one who does not create? Would you still pay no heed?
16|18| If you count the bounties of Allah, you cannot count them all. Surely, Allah is Most-Forgiving, Very-Merciful.
16|19| Allah knows what you conceal and what you reveal.
16|20| Those whom they invoke beside Allah do not create any thing; rather they are themselves created;
16|21| they are dead, having no life, and they do not know when they shall be raised again.
16|22| Your God is One God. As for those who do not believe in the Hereafter, their hearts are defiant and they are arrogant.
16|23| Invariably, Allah knows what they conceal and what they reveal. Surely, He does not like the arrogant.
16|24| When it is said to them, .What has your Lord sent down?. They say, .It is nothing but the tales of the ancient people.
16|25| Hence, they shall bear the full weight of their burdens on the Day of Judgment, and also some of the burdens of those whom they mislead without knowledge. Remember, evil is the burden they bear.
16|26| Those (too) who were before them made plots. Then (the command of) Allah came upon their buildings (uprooting them) from the foundations. So roofs fell down upon them from above, and the chastisement came to them from where they could not even imagine.
16|27| Then, on the Day of Judgment, He will put them to disgrace and will say, .Where are My partners for whose sake you used to quarrel (with the believers)?. Those endowed with knowledge will say, .Today, the disgrace and the evil (chastisement) has to befall the unbelievers,
16|28| the ones to whom the angels brought death while they were (still) wronging themselves. Then, they will resort to submission, (yet will say), .We used to do nothing wrong. (They will be answered) Why not? Allah knows well what you used to do.
16|29| Hence, enter the gates of Jahannam to live in it forever. So evil is the abode of the arrogant.
16|30| And (on the other hand,) it is said to the God-fearing, .What has your Lord sent down?. They say, .(He has sent down) excellent (discourse). For those who do good, there is good (end) in this world, and indeed the abode of the Hereafter is much better. Excellent is the abode of the God- fearing -
16|31| the eternal gardens they enter, with rivers flowing beneath them. For them there is what they desire. That is how Allah rewards the God-fearing -
16|32| the ones to whom angels bring death while they are pure (in beliefs and deeds). They (angels) say, .Peace on you! Enter Paradise for the deeds you have been doing.
16|33| They (the unbelievers) are waiting for nothing but that the angels should come to them, or comes the command of your Lord. Similar was the reaction of those who were before them. Allah did not wrong them; rather they were doing wrong to themselves.
16|34| So, the evils of what they did overtook them, and they were encircled by the very thing they used to ridicule.
16|35| The polytheists said, .If Allah had so willed, we would have not worshipped anything other than Him - neither we nor our forefathers - nor would we have made anything unlawful without (a command from) Him. Similar was the reaction of those who were before them. Therefore, the messengers‘ obligation is no more than to convey the message clearly.
16|36| We did raise a messenger among every people, with the message: .Worship Allah and stay away from the Rebel (the Satan). Then, there were some among them whom Allah guided, and there were others against whom deviation (from the right path) was established. So, travel on earth and see how was the fate of those who rejected (the prophets).
16|37| If you are keen for their guidance, then, (remember that) Allah does not lead those to the right path whom He lets go astray, and for them there are no helpers.
16|38| They swore by Allah on solemn oaths: .Allah will not resurrect those who die. Why not? It is a promise on His part, which is due to come true, but most of the people do not know.
16|39| (He will resurrect all of them,) so that He discloses for them what they have been disputing about, and so that those who disbelieve may know that they were liars.
16|40| Whenever We intend to do something, We do no more than say to it, .Be,. and it comes to be.
16|41| Those who have migrated for the sake of Allah after they were oppressed, We shall give them a good place in the world, 6 and of course, the reward of the Hereafter is much greater, if they only knew!
16|42| #NAME?
16|43| We did not send (messengers) before you other than men whom We inspired with revelation. So, ask the people (having the knowledge) of the Reminder (the earlier Scriptures), if you do not know.
16|44| (We sent them) with clear signs and scriptures. And We sent down the Reminder (The Qur‘an) to you, so that you explain to the people what has been revealed for them, and so that they may ponder.
16|45| Do those who contrive evil plots feel immune from that Allah makes them sink into the earth, or from that the punishment comes to them from where they would not perceive,
16|46| or that He seizes them when roaming about - while they are not able to frustrate Him -
16|47| or that He seizes them while they are in apprehension? So, indeed your Lord is Very-Kind, Very-Merciful.
16|48| Have they not observed the things Allah has created, their shadows inclining from the right and the left prostrating themselves before Allah, while they are humble?
16|49| To Allah prostrates itself whatever creature there is in the heavens and in the earth, and the angels, and they show no arrogance.
16|50| They fear their Lord above them and do as they are commanded.
16|51| Allah has said, .Do not take two gods. He is but One God. So, Me alone you fear.
16|52| And to Him belongs what is in the heavens and the earth, and it is only He who deserves obedience as ever due. Would you, then, fear someone other than Allah?
16|53| Whatever blessing you have is from Allah. Then, once you are touched by distress, to Him alone you cry for help.
16|54| Then, as soon as He removes the distress from you, a group from among you starts ascribing partners to their Lord.
16|55| Thus, they deny what We have given to them. Well, enjoy yourself (for some time), and soon you will come to know (the fate of your misdeeds).
16|56| They allocate a share from what We have given to them for those (idols) the reality of whom they do not even know. By Allah, you shall definitely be responsible for the fabrications you have been inventing.
16|57| They ascribe daughters to Allah - Pure is He - and for themselves is what they desire!
16|58| When one of them is given the good news of a female child, his face becomes gloomy and he is choked with grief.
16|59| He hides himself from people because of the (self-presumed) bad news given to him (and wonders): Shall he keep it despite the disgrace (he will face in the society), or put it away into the dust? In fact, evil is what they decide.
16|60| Those who do not believe in the Hereafter have evil attributes, and to Allah belong the most exalted attributes. He is the Mighty, the Wise.
16|61| If Allah were to seize the people for their transgression, He would have spared no creature on earth, but He lets them go on up to an appointed time. So, when their time will come, they will not be able to delay it for a moment, nor to bring it soon.
16|62| They assign to Allah what they themselves dislike, and their tongues make the false statement that for them there is a happy end. No, Fire is imminently theirs, and they are being driven (towards it) speedily.
16|63| By Allah, We sent (messengers) to communities before you, but the Satan made their deeds look good to them. So, he is their patron today, and for them there is a painful punishment.
16|64| We have sent down the Book to you, only because you may explain to them what they differed about, and (so that it may be) guidance and mercy for a people who believe.
16|65| Allah sent down water from the heavens and revived the land with it after it was dead. Surely, in that there is a sign for a people who listen.
16|66| Surely there is a lesson for you in the cattle. We provide you, out of what lies in their bellies between feces and blood, the (drink of) milk, pure and pleasant for those who drink.
16|67| And from the fruits of date palms and grape vines, you obtain intoxicants, and good provision. Surely, in that there is a sign for a people who understand.
16|68| Your Lord revealed to the honeybee: .Make homes in the mountains, in the trees and in the structures they raise.
16|69| Then, eat from all the fruits, and go along the pathways of your Lord made easy for you. From their bellies comes out a drink of various colors in which there is cure for people. Surely, in that there is a sign for a people who ponder.
16|70| Allah has created you, then He takes you back. And among you there is one who is carried to the worst part of the age, so that he knows nothing after having knowledge. Surely, Allah is All-Knowing, All-Powerful.
16|71| Allah has given some of you preference over others in provision. So, those given preference are not willing to pass on their provision to their slaves, so that they become equal in it: Do they, then, reject the blessing of Allah?
16|72| Allah has created spouses from among you and created sons and grandsons for you from your spouses, and gave you provision from good things. Is it, then, the falsehood that they believe in, and the blessing of Allah that they reject?
16|73| They worship, besides Allah, the objects that have no power to give them anything from the heavens and the earth, nor can they ever have such power.
16|74| So, do not coin similarities for Allah. Surely, Allah knows and you do not know.
16|75| Allah gives an example: There is a slave owned (by someone), who has no power over anything, and there is a person whom We have given good provision from Us, and he spends out of it secretly and openly. Are they equal? Praise be to Allah. But, most of them do not know.
16|76| And Allah gives another example: There are two men. One of them is dumb who is unable to do anything, and he is a burden on his master. Wherever he directs him to, he brings no good. Can he be equal to the one who enjoins justice and is on the straight path?
16|77| To Allah belongs the Unseen of the heavens and the earth; and the matter of Hour (of Judgment) is no more than of twinkling of the eye, or even quicker. Of course, Allah is powerful over everything.
16|78| Allah has brought you forth from your mothers‘ wombs when you knew nothing, and He made for you ears, eyes and hearts, so that you may be grateful.
16|79| Did they not look at the birds how they are controlled in the atmosphere of the sky? No one holds them but Allah. Surely, in that there are signs for a people who believe.
16|80| Allah has made your houses a place of comfort for you, and made for you houses from the hides of cattle, which you find so light on the day you travel and the day you camp, and out of their wool and their fur and their hair (He created) furnishings and goods of enjoyment for a period of time.
16|81| Allah has made for your benefit shades from what He has created, and made for you shelters in the mountains, and made for you shirts that protect you from heat, and shirts that protect you in your battles. This is how He perfects His favor upon you, so that you may submit.
16|82| If they still turn away, then, your responsibility is only to convey the message clearly.
16|83| They are aware of Allah‘s favor, yet they deny it, and most of them are ungrateful.
16|84| (Remember) the Day on which We shall raise up a witness from every people, then the disbelievers will not be allowed (to make excuses), nor shall they be asked to repent.
16|85| And when the unjust will see the punishment, it will not be lightened for them, nor will they be given respite.
16|86| When the Mushriks (i.e. those who ascribe partners to Allah) will see those whom they made partners with Allah, they will say: .Our Lord, these are the partners we made whom we called in worship besides you. Then, they (the partners) will turn to them saying: .You are indeed liars.
16|87| On that day they will tender submission to Allah, and all that they used to fabricate will have vanished from them.
16|88| For those who disbelieve and put obstructions in the way of Allah, We shall add up punishment after punishment for the mischief they used to make.
16|89| And (think of) the day We shall send to every people a witness from among them (to testify) against them, and We shall bring you (O prophet) as witness against these. And We have revealed to you the Book, an exposition of everything, and guidance, and mercy, and glad tidings for the Muslims.
16|90| Allah enjoins to do justice and to adopt good behavior and to give relatives (their due rights), and forbids shameful acts, evil deeds and oppressive attitude. He exhorts you, so that you may be mindful.
16|91| Fulfill the Covenant of Allah when you pledge, and do not break oaths after you swear them solemnly, while you have made Allah a witness over you. Surely, Allah knows all that you do.
16|92| Do not be like the woman who had broken her yarn into pieces after spinning it firmly, by taking your oaths as means of mischief between yourselves, merely because a group gets greater benefit than the other. In fact, Allah puts you to a test thereby and, of course, on the Day of Resurrection He will explain to you all those matters in which you disagreed.
16|93| If Allah so willed, He would have made all of you a single community, but He lets whom He wills go astray and takes whom He wills to the right path; and surely you will be questioned about what you used to do.
16|94| Do not make your oaths a means of mischief among yourselves, lest a foot should slip after it is firmly placed, and you taste evil consequences for your having prevented (others) from the path of Allah, and you incur a great punishment.
16|95| And do not take a paltry price against the pledge of Allah. Indeed, what is with Allah is much better for you, if you only knew.
16|96| What is with you shall perish and what is with Allah shall last. And certainly, We shall bless those who observed patience, with their reward for the best of what they used to do.
16|97| Whoever, male or female, has acted righteously, while being a believer, We shall certainly make him live a good life, and shall give such people their reward for the best of what they used to do.
16|98| So, when you recite the Qur‘an, seek refuge with Allah against Satan, the accursed.
16|99| He is such that he has no authority over those who believe and place trust in their Lord.
16|100| His authority is only over those who befriend him and those who associate partners with Allah.
16|101| Whenever We replace a verse with another verse — and Allah knows well what He reveals – they say, .You are but a forger. The fact rather is that most of them are ignorant.
16|102| Say, .This has been brought down by RuH-ul-Qudus (the Holy Spirit - Jibra‘il ) from your Lord rightly (as due), so that it may bring firmness to the believers and become guidance and good news for the Muslims.
16|103| We know well that they say, .There is a man who teaches him. The language of the one they refer to is non-Arabic while this is clear Arabic language.
16|104| Surely, those who do not believe in Allah‘s verses, Allah does not lead them to the right path, and for them there is a painful punishment.
16|105| It is (not the Prophet but) the disbelievers in Allah‘s verses who forge lies, and it is they who are the liars.
16|106| Whoever rejects his faith in Allah after having believed in Him — not the one who is compelled (to utter a word of disbelief) under duress while his heart is at peace with Faith, but the one who has laid his breast wide open for disbelief — upon such people is the wrath of Allah, and for them there is a heavy punishment.
16|107| That is because they have preferred the worldly life to the Hereafter, and that Allah does not lead the disbelieving people to the right path.
16|108| Those are the ones Allah has set a seal on whose hearts, ears and eyes; and they are the heedless.
16|109| Invariably, they are the losers in the Hereafter.
16|110| Then, your Lord — for those who left their homes after being persecuted, then fought in the way of Allah and stood patient — surely your Lord is, after all that, Most-Forgiving, Very-Merciful.
16|111| (All this will happen) on the day when everyone will come pleading for himself, and everyone will be given in full what he did, and they will not be wronged.
16|112| Allah gives an example: There was a town, secure and content with its sustenance coming in plenty from every place. Then, it turned ungrateful to the bounties of Allah; so, Allah made it to taste hunger and terror (that covered it) like a garment, as recompense of what its people used to do.
16|113| And, of course, a messenger from among themselves had come to them, but they rejected him; so the punishment seized them when they were wrongdoers.
16|114| So, eat the permissible and pure things from what Allah has provided you, and be grateful for the bounty of Allah, if you worship Him alone.
16|115| He has but prohibited for you the carrion, the blood, the flesh of swine and what has been invoked upon with a name other than that of Allah. However, if anyone is compelled by necessity - neither seeking pleasure, nor crossing the limit (of necessity) - then, Allah is Most-Forgiving, Very-Merciful.
16|116| Do not say about what your tongues describe falsely, .This is lawful and that is unlawful. so that you may forge the lie upon Allah. Surely, those who forge a lie upon Allah do not prosper.
16|117| (Let there be) a little enjoyment, and (then) for them there is a painful punishment.
16|118| For those who are Jews, We had prohibited that which We have already told you; and We did not wrong them, but it was they who used to wrong themselves.
16|119| Then your Lord – for those who did evil because of ignorance, then repented after that and corrected themselves – surely your Lord is, after all that, Most-Forgiving, Very-Merciful.
16|120| Surely, Ibrahim was an Ummah (a whole community in himself), devoted to Allah, a man of pure faith; and he was not among the Mushriks (i.e. those who associate partners with Allah)
16|121| He was grateful to His bounties. He (Allah) chose him and led him to the straight path.
16|122| We bestowed good upon him in this world; and in the Hereafter, he is among the righteous.
16|123| Then, We revealed to you, .Follow the way of Ibrahim, the upright, and he was not among the Mushriks.
16|124| The Sabbath was prescribed only for those people (i.e. Jews) who differed in it, and your Lord will certainly judge between them on the Day of Resurrection in those matters in which they used to differ.
16|125| Invite (people) to the way of your Lord with wisdom and good counsel. And argue with them in the best of manners. Surely, your Lord knows best the one who deviates from His way, and He knows best the ones who are on the right path.
16|126| And if you were to harm (them) in retaliation, harm them to the measure you were harmed. And if you opt for patience, it is definitely much better for those who are patient.
16|127| And be patient. Your patience is bestowed by none but Allah, and do not grieve over them, and do not be in distress for what they devise.
16|128| Surely, Allah is with those who fear Him and those who are good in their deeds
17|1| Glorious is He Who made his servant travel by night from Al-Masjid-ul-Haram to Al-Masjid-ul-AqSa whose environs We have blessed, so that We let him see some of Our signs. Surely, He is the All-Hearing, the All- Seeing.
17|2| And We gave Musa the Book and made it guidance for the children of Isra‘il (bearing the command) .Do not take anyone other than Me as guardian,
17|3| O you, the progeny of those whom We put on board with NuH. Surely, He was a very grateful servant.
17|4| And We declared to the children of Isra‘il in the Book: .You will surely spread mischief on the earth twice, and you will surely show utmost haughtiness.
17|5| So, when came the time appointed for the first of the two, We dispatched against you some servants belonging to us having strong aggressive power, who combed through the houses; and it was a promise, bound to be fulfilled.
17|6| Then We gave you your turn to overpower them, and increased your strength with wealth and sons, and made you greater in number,
17|7| (saying) ‘If you do good, you will do it for your own benefit, and if you do evil, it will be against yourselves‘. Later, when came the time appointed for the second, (We sent others,) so that they spoil your faces, and so that they enter into the Mosque as the former ones entered it the first time, and utterly destroy whatever they prevail upon.
17|8| May be your Lord would bestow mercy upon you. But if you do this again, We shall do that again, and We have made Jahannam (Hell) a prison for the disbelievers.
17|9| Surely, this Qur‘an guides to something that is most straightforward, and gives glad tidings to the believers who do good deeds that ready for them there is a great reward,
17|10| and that We have prepared a painful punishment for those who do not believe in the Hereafter.
17|11| Man prays for evil like his prayer for good, and man is so hasty.
17|12| We have made the night and the day two signs, then We made the sign of night marked by darkness and the sign of day bright, so that you may seek grace from your Lord, and that you may know how to number the years and how to compute, and We have expounded everything in detail.
17|13| We have tied up every human‘s fortune to his neck, and on the Day of Resurrection, We will bring forth a book for him that he will find wide open,
17|14| (and We will say to him) .Read your book. Enough are you today to take your own account.
17|15| Whoever adopts the right path does so for his own benefit, and whoever goes astray does so to his own detriment, and no bearer of burden shall bear the burden of another, and it is not Our way to punish (anyone) unless We send a Messenger.
17|16| And when We intend to destroy a habitation, We command its affluent people (to do good), then they commit sins therein, and thus the word (of punishment) becomes applicable to it (habitation), and We annihilate it totally.
17|17| How many a generation have We destroyed after NuH! And enough is your Lord to know, (and) watch the sins of His servants.
17|18| Whoever opts for the immediate (benefits from) life herein, We give him, right here in this life, as much as We will, to whomever We intend. Then We assign Jahannam for him where he shall enter condemned, discarded.
17|19| And whoever opts for the Hereafter and makes efforts for it as due, while he is a believer, then, the effort of such people is appreciated!
17|20| To all of them - both these and those - We extend the grants of your Lord. And the grant of your Lord is not barred (for anyone).
17|21| See how We made some of them excel some others (in this world) and, of course, the Hereafter is much higher in ranks and much greater in degrees of merit.
17|22| Do not set up any other god along with Allah, otherwise you will sit condemned, forsaken.
17|23| Your Lord has decreed that you worship none but Him, and do good to parents. If any one of them or both of them reach old age, do not say to them: uff (a word or expression of anger or contempt) and do not scold them, and address them with respectful words,
17|24| and submit yourself before them in humility out of compassion, and say, .My Lord, be merciful to them as they have brought me up in my childhood.
17|25| Your Lord knows best what is in your hearts. If you are righteous, then He is Most-Forgiving for those who turn to Him in repentance.
17|26| Give the relative his right, and the needy and the wayfarer. And do not squander recklessly.
17|27| Surely, squanderers are brothers of satans, and the Satan is very ungrateful to his Lord.
17|28| And if you turn away from them looking for a bounty from your Lord you are expecting, then speak to them in polite words.
17|29| And do not keep your hand tied to your neck, nor extend it to the full extent, lest you should be sitting reproached, empty-handed.
17|30| Indeed, your Lord expands sustenance for whomsoever He wills, and constricts (for whomsoever He wills). Surely, He is All-Aware of His servants, All-Seeing.
17|31| Do not kill your children for fear of poverty. We provide sustenance to them and to you, too. Killing them is a great sin indeed.
17|32| Do not even go close to fornication. It is indeed a shameful act, and an evil way to follow.
17|33| Do not kill any person the life of whom is sanctified by Allah, except for a just reason. And whoever is killed unjustly, We have invested his heir with authority (of equal retaliation), but he must not cross the limit in the matter of killing. Surely, he will be helped.
17|34| Do not go near the property of an orphan, except in a manner that is good, until he comes to his maturity. And fulfill the covenant. Surely, the covenant shall be asked about (on the Day of Reckoning).
17|35| And give full measure when you measure, and weigh with a straight balance. That is fair, and better at the end.
17|36| And do not follow a thing about which you have no knowledge. Surely, the ear, the eye and the heart - each one of them shall be interrogated about.
17|37| Do not walk on the earth in haughty style. You can neither tear the earth apart, nor can you match the mountains in height.
17|38| That which is evil, of all these, is detestable in the sight of your Lord.
17|39| This is part of the Wisdom your Lord has revealed to you. And do not set up any other god along with Allah, lest you should be thrown into Jahannam , reproached, rejected.
17|40| Is it, then, that your Lord has chosen you people to have sons, and has Himself opted for females from among the angels? Surely, you are uttering a serious statement.
17|41| Surely, We have explained things in various ways in this Qur‘an, so that they may pay heed to the advice; but it increases nothing in them except aversion.
17|42| Say, .Had there been other gods along with Him., as they say, .then they would have found out a way to the Lord of the Throne.
17|43| Pure is He, and Exalted, immensely above what they say.
17|44| All the seven skies and the earth and all those therein extol His purity. And there is not a single thing that does not extol His purity along with His praise, but you do not understand their extolling. Surely He is Forbearing, Most-Forgiving.
17|45| When you recite the Qur‘an, We place an invisible curtain between you and those who do not believe in the Hereafter,
17|46| and We put covers on their hearts barring them from understanding it, and (We put) deafness in their ears; and when you refer to your Lord alone (without referring to their presumed deities,) in the Qur‘an, they turn their backs in aversion.
17|47| We are fully aware of the reason for which they listen, when they listen to you, and when they are in secret consultation: when the transgressors say, .You are following none but a bewitched man.
17|48| See how they have made (silly) statements about you; so they have gone astray and cannot find a way.
17|49| And they say, .Once we are reduced to bones and dust, is it then that we will be raised, created anew?.
17|50| Say, .Be you stones or iron
17|51| or any creation you deem harder in your hearts. Thereupon they will ask, .Who will bring us back?. Say, .The One who created you for the first time. So, they will shake their heads before you and say, .When shall that be?. Say, .May be, it is near.
17|52| (It will be) on a day when He will call you, and you will respond praising Him, and you will think you did not stay (on the earth) but for a short while.
17|53| Tell My servants that they should speak that which is best. Surely, Satan creates discord among them. Indeed, Satan is an open enemy to mankind.
17|54| Your Lord knows you best. If He so wills, He will have mercy on you, and if He so wills, He will punish you, and We did not send you (O Prophet,) to become responsible for them.
17|55| Your Lord knows best about all those in the heavens and the earth, and We have certainly granted excellence to some prophets over some others, and We gave Dawud the Zabur (the Psalms).
17|56| Say, .Call those whom you assume (to be gods), besides Him, while they have no power to remove distress from you, nor to change it.
17|57| Those whom they invoke, do themselves seek the means of access to their Lord as to which of them becomes the closest, and they hope for His Mercy and fear His punishment. The punishment of your Lord is really something to be feared.
17|58| There is no town but We are to destroy it before the Doomsday, or punish it with severe punishment. That is what stands written in the Book.
17|59| Nothing made us refrain from sending the signs (demanded by the pagans,) except that the earlier people had rejected them. (For example,) We gave Thamud the she-camel, as an eye-opener, then they did wrong to her, and We do not send signs but as a warning.
17|60| (Remember) when We said to you that your Lord encompasses all humans. And We did not make the vision We showed to you, but a test for the people — and the tree cursed in the Qur‘an as well. And We warn them, yet it adds nothing to them but enormous rebellion.
17|61| (Remember) when We said to the angels, .Prostrate yourself before ‘Adam. So, they all prostrated, except Iblis (Satan). He said, .Shall I prostrate before the one You have created from mud?.
17|62| He (Iblis) added, .Tell me, this one whom You have honored more than me, if You give me respite till the Doomsday, I will subdue his progeny, except a few of them.
17|63| He (Allah) said, .Go then, for whoever of them follows you, the Hell shall be the recompense of you all, a full recompense.
17|64| Entice with your voice those of them whom you can, and rally against them your horsemen and your footmen, and share with them in their wealth and their children, and make promises to them. – and Satan promises them nothing but delusion -
17|65| .As for My servants, you have no control over them, and your Lord is enough to look after (everything).
17|66| Your Lord is the One who causes ships to sail for you through the sea, so that you may go in quest of His bounty; surely, He is Ever-Merciful for you.
17|67| you face a hardship at sea, vanished are those whom you used to invoke, except Him (Allah). Then, once He brings you safe to the land, you turn away (from Him); man is so ungrateful.
17|68| Do you, then, feel secure from that He makes a part of the land sink down along with you, or that He sends down a rain of stones on you, whereupon you will find no one to protect you?
17|69| Or, do you feel secure from that He takes you back to it (the sea) once again, and sends a heavy storm of wind upon you which drowns you because of your disbelief, and then you will find no one to help?
17|70| And We bestowed dignity on the children of ‘Adam and provided them with rides on the land and in the sea, and provided them with a variety of good things and made them much superior to many of those whom We have created.
17|71| (Think of) the Day when We will call every people with their books of deeds. Then the ones who will be given their book in their right hands will read their book (happily) and will not be wronged even to the measure of a fine thread.
17|72| But whoever is (too) blind in this (world to see the right path) will be (too) blind in the Hereafter (to reach the salvation), and much more astray from the path.
17|73| (O Prophet,) Surely, they were about to lure you away from what We have revealed to you, so that you forge something else against Us, and in that case they would have certainly made you a bosom friend.
17|74| Had We not made you firm, it was likely that you would have inclined towards them a little bit.
17|75| In that case, We would have surely made you taste a double (punishment) in life and a double (punishment) after death, then you would not have found anyone to help you against Us.
17|76| And they were likely to harass you in the land, so that they could expel you from there, and in that case, they will have not lived (there) after you, but a little.
17|77| Such has been Our way with the messengers We sent before you. And you will find no change in Our way.
17|78| (O Prophet,) establish Salah between the decline of the sun and the darkness of the night, and (establish) the recital at dawn. Surely, the recital at dawn is well attended.
17|79| And during the night, wake up for Salah of tahajjud , an additional prayer for you. It is very likely that your Lord will place you at Praised Station.
17|80| And say, .O my Lord, make me enter a rightful entrance and make me exit a rightful exit, and grant me from Your Own a power, favored (by You).
17|81| And say, .Truth has come and falsehood has vanished. Falsehood is surely bound to vanish.
17|82| We reveal the Qur‘an, which is cure and mercy for the believers; and it adds nothing to the unjust but loss.
17|83| When We bestow Our favor upon man, he avoids (to recognize it) and keeps himself far aside (from obedience), and when some evil touches him, he is in total despair.
17|84| Say, .Everyone acts in his own style. So, your Lord knows best which one is better guided in his way.
17|85| And they ask you about the soul. Say, .The soul is something from the command of my Lord, and you are not given from the knowledge but a little.
17|86| And if We so will, We will surely take away what We have revealed to you, then you shall find no one to rely upon against Us in this matter.
17|87| But it is a mercy from your Lord. Great is indeed His favor upon you.
17|88| Say, .If all the humans and jinns join together to produce anything like this Qur‘an, they will not (be able to) come up with anything like it, even if they assist one another.
17|89| Indeed We explained every subject in this Qur‘an in various ways for the benefit of mankind. Still, most of the people refused to do anything but reject.
17|90| They said, .We shall never believe in you unless you cause a spring to gush forth for us from the earth.
17|91| Or you have a garden of date palms and grapes, then you bring forth rivers from their midst in abundance.
17|92| Or you cause the sky to fall upon us in pieces, as you claimed, or you bring Allah and angels before us face to face.
17|93| Or you have a house made of gold. Or you ascend to the sky, and we will not believe in your ascension unless you send down to us a book we may read. Say, .I proclaim the Purity of my Lord. I am nothing but human, a messenger.
17|94| Nothing prevented people from believing, when guidance came to them, except that they said, .Has Allah sent a man as a messenger?.
17|95| Say, .Had there been angels (living) on the earth, walking about in peace, We would have certainly sent down an angel from the heavens as a messenger.
17|96| Say, .Allah is sufficient as witness between me and you. Surely, He is All-Aware, All-Watchful to His servants.
17|97| The one whom Allah guides is the guided one; and those whom He lets go astray, you will never find for them any helpers other than Him. And We shall gather them on the Day of Judgment, with their faces down—blind, dumb and deaf. Their abode is the Fire. Whenever it calms down, We increase its flames for them.
17|98| That is their punishment, because they rejected Our signs and said, .Is it that once we are reduced to bones and dust, is it then that we shall be raised, created anew?.
17|99| Have they not seen that Allah who has created the heavens and the earth has the power to create them as they were? He has appointed a time for them in which there is no doubt. Still, the wrongdoers refused to do anything but reject.
17|100| Say, .If you were to own the treasures of my Lord‘s blessing, you would certainly hold them back, lest it should be spent. Man is so niggardly.
17|101| Surely we gave Musa nine clear signs. So, ask the children of Isra‘il, when he came to them, Pharaoh said to him, .I am afraid, O Musa, you are under the spell of magic.
17|102| He (Musa) said, .You know well that these (signs) are sent down by none but by the Lord of the heavens and the earth as eye-openers. And, I am afraid O Pharaoh, you are going to be destroyed.
17|103| Then he (Pharaoh) tried to harass them to drive them out of the land, so We drowned him and those with him altogether,
17|104| and thereafter We said to the children of Isra‘il, .Live in the land. So, when the appointed time of the Hereafter will come, We shall bring you all joined together.
17|105| With truth We have sent it (the Qur‘an) down and with truth it descended, and We did not send you but as a bearer of good tidings and as a warner.
17|106| We have divided the Qur‘an in portions, so that you may recite it to the people gradually, and We have revealed it little by little.
17|107| Say, .Believe in it or do not believe in it; when it is recited to those who were given knowledge before it, they fall down on their faces in prostration
17|108| and say, .Pure is our Lord. Certainly, the word of our Lord was sure to be fulfilled.
17|109| They fall down on their faces weeping, and it increases humbleness in their hearts.
17|110| Say, .Call (Him by the name of) Allah or Ar-RaHman, in whichever way you call, His are the Best Names. Do not be (too) loud in your Salah, nor be (too) low in it, and seek a way in between.
17|111| Say, .Praise belongs to Allah who has neither had a son, nor is there any partner to Him in His kingdom, nor is anyone (needed) to protect Him from (any) weakness. And proclaim His greatness, an open proclamation.
18|1| Praise belongs to Allah who has sent down the Book to His servant, and allowed no crookedness in it,
18|2| a straightforward Book to warn of a severe punishment from Him, and to give the good news to the believers, who do righteous deeds, that they will have an excellent reward (Paradise)
18|3| in which they will dwell for ever,
18|4| and to warn those who have said that Allah has had a son,
18|5| while they have no knowledge about it, nor had their fathers. Grave is the word that comes out of their mouths. They say nothing but lie.
18|6| So, (O Prophet) perhaps you are going to kill yourself after them, out of grief, if they do not believe in this discourse.
18|7| Surely, We have made what is on earth an adornment for it, so that We test them as to who among them is better in deeds.
18|8| And surely, We are going to turn whatever is thereon into a barren land.
18|9| Do you think that the People of Kahf (the Cave) and Raqim (inscription) were unusual out of Our signs?
18|10| When the young men took refuge in the Cave and said, .Our Lord, bless us with mercy from Your own and provide us with guidance in our matters.
18|11| So, We sealed up their hearing (putting them to sleep) in the Cave for a number of years.
18|12| Thereafter We raised them up, so that We know which of the two groups had better calculated the period in which they remained (sleeping).
18|13| We narrate to you their story with truth. They were young men who believed in their Lord and We gave them more guidance.
18|14| We made their hearts firm when they stood up and said, .Our Lord is the Lord of the heavens and the earth. We shall never invoke any god other than Him, otherwise we would be saying something far from the truth.
18|15| These, our people, have adopted gods other than Him. Why do they not bring a clear proof in their favor? So, who is more unjust than the one who fabricates a lie against Allah?
18|16| When you have turned away from them, and those whom they worship, except Allah, then seek refuge in the cave, and your Lord will extend His mercy for you, and provide you ease in your matters.
18|17| You would see the sun, when it rose, turning away from their Cave towards the right; and when it set, it bypassed them towards the left, and they were (lying) in the hollow thereof. That is one of the signs of Allah. Whomsoever Allah guides is the one who gets the right path and whomsoever He lets go astray, for him you will find no one to help, no one to lead.
18|18| And you would think they were awake while they were asleep. We turned them on their sides, right and left. And their dog had its forelegs stretched out to the doorstep. If you had a look at them, you would have fled away from them and would have been filled with awe of them.
18|19| In this way We raised them up until they asked each other. One of them said, .How long did you tarry?. They said, .A day, or part of a day. They said, .Your Lord knows best how long you tarried. So, send one of you with this silver (coin) of yours to the city and let him look around which of the eatables are the purest and let him bring you some food from there. And he must act in polite manner, and must not let anyone know about you.
18|20| If they (the habitants of the city) will know about you, they will force you to revert to their faith, and in that case, you will never find success.
18|21| And in this way, We made them known to the people (of the city), so that they realize that Allah‘s promise is true, and that there is no doubt about the Hour (the Day of Resurrection). When they were disputing among themselves in their matter, they said, .Erect a building over them. Their Lord knows them best. Said those who prevailed in their matter, .We will certainly make a mosque over them.
18|22| Some will say, .(They were) three, the fourth of them being their dog,. and some will say, .Five, the sixth of them being their dog, just making conjectures. And others will say, .Seven, the eighth of them is their dog. Say, .My Lord knows best about their number. No one knows them except a few, so do not argue about them except an apparent argumentation. And do not ask anyone of these about them.
18|23| And never say about anything, .I will do this tomorrow,.
18|24| unless (you say - ‘if) Allah wills.‘ And remember your Lord if you forget, and say (to those who asked you about the story of the People of the Cave), .May be, my Lord will lead me to something closer than this to guidance.
18|25| They stayed in their Cave for three hundred years and added nine.
18|26| Say, .Allah knows best how long they stayed. To Him belongs the unseen of the heavens and the earth - how well He sees and how well He hears! They have no supporter other than Him and He lets no one share His authority.
18|27| And recite what has been revealed to you of the Book of your Lord. There is no one to change His words, and you will never find a refuge beside Him.
18|28| Keep yourself content with those who call their Lord morning and evening, seeking His pleasure, and let not your eyes overlook them, seeking the splendor of the worldly life. And do not obey the one whose heart We have made heedless of Our remembrance, and who has followed his desire and whose behavior has exceeded the limits.
18|29| And say, .The truth is from your Lord. Now, whoever so wills may believe and whoever so wills may deny. Surely, We have prepared for the unjust a fire, whose tent will envelop them. And if they will beg for help, they shall be helped with water like oily dregs that will scald the faces. Vile is the drink, and evil is the Fire as a resting-place.
18|30| As for those who believe and do righteous deeds,__of course, We do not waste the reward of those who are good in deeds.
18|31| Those are the ones for whom there are eternal gardens, rivers flowing beneath them. They will be adorned therein with bracelets of gold, and they will be dressed in green garments, made of fine silk and thick silk, reclining therein on couches. Excellent is the reward and beautiful is the Paradise as a resting-place.
18|32| Give them an example. There were two men; We gave one of them two gardens of grapes, and surrounded both of them with date-palms, and placed vegetation between them.
18|33| Both the gardens brought forth their fruit, and suppressed nothing from it, and We caused a stream to flow through them.
18|34| And he had wealth. So, he said to his companion while conversing with him, .I am greater than you in wealth and stronger in manpower.
18|35| And he entered his garden while he was doing wrong to himself. He said, .I do not think that this will ever perish,
18|36| and I do not think that the Hour (Day of Judgment) has to come. And even if I am sent back to my Lord, I will surely find a better place than this to resort to.
18|37| Said his companion, as he was conversing with him, .Do you deny Him who created you from dust, then from a drop (of semen), then He made you a perfect man?
18|38| As for me, I believe that Allah is my Lord, and I do not associate anyone with my Lord.
18|39| Why, when you entered your garden, did you not say, ‘(Everything is) as Allah wills. There is no power except with Allah‘? If you see me inferior to you in wealth and children,
18|40| then, it is likely that my Lord will give me (what is) better than your garden, and will send to it a punishment from the heavens, and it will become a barren land.
18|41| Or, its water will sink deep in the earth, so that you will never be able to search it out.
18|42| And its produce was overwhelmed by calamities and he stood wringing his hands (in anguish) over what he had invested in it, while it was fallen down on its trellises and he was saying, .I wish I had not ascribed any partner to my Lord!.
18|43| There were no supporters for him beside Allah, who could come to his help, nor was he able to defend himself.
18|44| That is where the power of protection rests with Allah, the True God. He is the best in rewarding and best in requiting.
18|45| Give them the example of the worldly life; it is like water We sent down from the sky, then the vegetation of the earth was mingled with it, and then it turned into chaff that is blown by the winds, and Allah is powerful over everything.
18|46| Wealth and children are the embellishment of the worldly life, and the everlasting virtues are better with your Lord, both in rewards and in creating good hopes
18|47| And (visualize) the Day when We will make mountains move, and you will see the earth fully exposed, and We shall gather them together, so as not to leave a single one of them.
18|48| And they shall be presented lined-up before your Lord. (It will be said to them,) .Lo! You have come to Us just as We had created you for the first time, while you claimed that We would not make any appointed time for you.
18|49| And the book (of deeds) will be placed (before them), then you will see the guilty people scared of its contents and saying, .Woe to us! What a book is this! It has missed nothing, minor or major, but has taken it into account. Thus they will find whatever they did present before them, and your Lord will not wrong anyone.
18|50| (Recall) when We said to the angels, .Prostrate yourselves before ‘Adam. So, they prostrated themselves, all of them but Iblis (Satan). He was of the Jinn, so he rebelled against the command of your Lord. Do you still take him and his progeny as friends instead of Me, while they are enemy to you? Evil is he as substitute (of obedience to Allah) for wrongdoers.
18|51| I did not make them witnesses of the creation of the heavens and the earth, nor of their own creation. I was not such that I should take the misleaders as helpers.
18|52| (Recall) the Day when He will say, .Call My ‘partners‘ whom you claimed as such. So, they will call them, but they will not respond to them, and We will put a destructive barrier between them.
18|53| And the sinners will see the Fire; so they will know that they will have to fall into it, and they will find no way to bypass it.
18|54| Indeed We have explained in this Qur‘an every subject in various ways for the benefit of the people, but out of all creation, man is most disputing.
18|55| The only thing that prevented people from believing, even after the guidance had come to them, and from seeking forgiveness from their Lord, is (their demand) that what used to come to the earlier people should come to them as well, or that the punishment should visit them face to face.
18|56| We send the messengers only as bearers of good tidings and warnings, and those who disbelieve raise disputes on the basis of the false (arguments), so that they may nullify the truth with it; and they have taken My signs, and the warnings given to them, as mockery.
18|57| Who is more unjust than the one who was reminded through the signs of his Lord, but he turned away from them, and forgot what his own hands sent ahead. Indeed We have put covers on their hearts that bar them from understanding it, and (We have created) deafness in their ears. And if you call them to guidance, even then they will never adopt the right path.
18|58| Your Lord is the Most Forgiving, the Lord of Mercy. If He seizes them for what they did, He may cause the punishment to befall them sooner, but there is an appointed time for them, from which they can never find a place of refuge.
18|59| These are the towns that We destroyed when they (i.e. their people) transgressed, and We had appointed a time for their destruction.
18|60| (Recall) when Musa said to his young man, .I shall not give up until I reach the meeting point of the two seas, or else I shall go on traveling for years.
18|61| So, when they reached the meeting point of the two seas, they forgot their fish, and it made its way into the sea as in a tunnel.
18|62| When they went further, he said to his young man, .Bring us our morning meal; we have, indeed, had much fatigue from this journey of ours.
18|63| He said, .You see, when we stayed at the rock, I forgot the fish. It was none but Satan who made me forget it to tell you about it – and it made its way into the sea in an amazing manner.
18|64| He said, .That was what we were looking for. So they returned, retracing their footsteps.
18|65| Then they found one of Our servants whom We blessed with mercy from Us and whom We gave knowledge, a knowledge from Our own.
18|66| Musa said to him, .May I have your company so that you teach me some of the rightful knowledge you have been given.
18|67| He said, .You can never bear with me patiently.
18|68| And how would you keep patient over something your comprehension cannot grasp?.
18|69| He (Musa) said, .You will find me patient, if Allah wills, and I shall not disobey any order from you.
18|70| He said, .Well, if you follow me, do not ask me about anything unless I myself start telling you about it.
18|71| So, they both moved ahead, until when they boarded a boat, he sliced it (by removing one of its planks). He (Musa) said, .Did you slice it to drown its people? In fact, you have done a terrible act.
18|72| He said, .Did I not say that you can never bear with me patiently?.
18|73| He (Musa) said, .Do not hold me punishable for what I forgot, and do not make my course too difficult for me.
18|74| So, they moved ahead until when they met a boy, he killed him (the boy). He (Musa) said, .Did you kill an innocent soul while he did not kill anyone? You have committed a heinous act indeed.
18|75| He said, .Did I not tell you that you can never bear with me patiently?.
18|76| He (Musa) said, .If I ask you about something after this, do not allow me your company. You have now reached a point where you have a valid excuse (to part with me) from my own side. .
18|77| Then, they moved ahead until they came to the people of a town; they asked its people for food, and they refused to host them. Then, they found there a wall tending to fall down. So he (KhaDir) set it right. He (Musa) said, .If you wished, you could have charged a fee for this.
18|78| He said, .Here is the point of parting ways between me and you. I shall now explain to you the reality of things about which you could not remain patient.
18|79| As for the boat, it belonged to some poor people who worked at sea. So I wanted to make it defective, as there was a king across them who used to usurp every boat by force.
18|80| As for the boy, his parents were believers. We apprehended that he would impose rebellion and infidelity upon them.
18|81| We, therefore, wished that their Lord would replace him with someone better than him in piety, and more akin to affection.
18|82| As for the wall, it belonged to two orphan boys in the city, and there was a treasure beneath it belonging to them, and their father was a pious man. So your Lord willed that they should reach their maturity and dig out their treasure, as a mercy from your Lord. I did not do it on my own accord. This is the reality of things about which you could not remain patient.
18|83| They ask you about Dhul-Qarnain. Say, .I shall now recite to you an account of him.
18|84| Surely, We gave him power on earth and gave him means to (have) everything (he needs).
18|85| So he followed a course,
18|86| until when he reached the point of sunset, he found it setting into a miry spring, and found a people near it. We said, .O Dhul-Qarnain, either punish them or adopt good behavior with them.
18|87| He said, .As for him who does wrong, we shall punish him, then he will be sent back to his Lord, and He will punish him with a severe punishment.
18|88| As for the one who believes and acts righteously, he will have the best (life) as reward, and we shall speak to him politely in our directions.
18|89| Thereafter, he followed a course,
18|90| until when he reached the point of sunrise, he found it rising over a people for whom We did not make any shelter against it.
18|91| Thus it was, and Our knowledge fully comprehends whatever (wealth and equipment) he had with him.
18|92| Thereafter he followed a course
18|93| until when he reached between the two mountains, he found by them a people who were almost unable to understand anything said.
18|94| They said, .O Dhul-Qarnain, the (tribes of) Ya‘juj and Ma‘juj (Gog and Magog) are mischief-makers on the earth. So, should we assign a tax for you on condition that you make a barrier between us and them?.
18|95| He said, .What my Lord has (already) given in my control is better enough (for me than the tax you are offering to me), so help me (only) with some (man) power, and I shall make a rampart between you and them.
18|96| Bring me big pieces of iron. (They proceeded accordingly) until when he leveled up (the gap) between the two cliffs, he said, .Blow. (They complied) until when he made it (like) fire, he said, .Bring me molten copper, and I will pour it upon this.
18|97| So they (Ya‘juj and Ma‘juj) were not able to climb it, nor were they able to make a hole in it.
18|98| He said, .This is a mercy from my Lord. Then, when the promise of my Lord will come, He will make it leveled to the ground. The promise of my Lord is true.
18|99| And on that day, (i.e. the Doomsday) We will leave them (all the people including Ya‘juj and Ma‘juj) surging over one another. And the Horn shall be blown, then We shall gather them together.
18|100| And on that day We will bring Jahannam fully exposed before the infidels
18|101| whose eyes were under a cover against My reminders, and they were not able to listen.
18|102| Do, then, the disbelievers deem (it fit) that they take My servants as patrons beside Me? Surely, We have prepared Jahannam as entertainment for the disbelievers.
18|103| Say, .Shall We tell you about the greatest losers in respect of (their) deeds?
18|104| Those are the ones whose effort in the worldly life has gone in vain, while they think they are doing well.
18|105| Those are the ones who rejected the signs of their Lord and (the concept of) meeting with Him, so their deeds have gone to waste, and We shall assign to them no weight at all.
18|106| That is their punishment, the Jahannam , for they disbelieved and made My signs and My messengers a mockery.
18|107| Surely those who believed and did righteous deeds, theirs are the Gardens of Firdaus as entertainment
18|108| where they will live forever, and will not wish to move from there.
18|109| Say, .If the ocean were to be ink for (writing) the Words of my Lord, the ocean would have been consumed before the Words of my Lord are exhausted, even though we were to bring another (ocean) like it in addition.
18|110| Say, .Surely, I am but a human being like you; it is revealed to me that your God is the One God. So the one who hopes to meet his Lord must do righteous deed and must not associate anyone in the worship of his Lord.
19|1| Kaf, Ha Ya, 'Ain, Sad
19|2| This is a narration of your Lord‘s mercy to His servant Zakariyya,
19|3| When he called his Lord in a low voice.
19|4| He said, .My Lord, I am in a state that bones in my body have turned feeble, and the head has flared up grey with old age, and I never remained, My Lord, unanswered in my prayer to You.
19|5| I fear (my) kinsmen after me, and my wife is barren, so bless me with an heir, from Your own side,
19|6| who inherits me and inherits the house of Ya‘qub. And make him, My Lord, a favourite one.
19|7| (Allah said) .O Zakariyya, We give you the good news of a boy whose name is YaHya. We did not create any one before him of the same name.
19|8| He Said, .My Lord, how shall there be a boy for me while my wife is barren, and I have reached the extreme of old age?.
19|9| He said, .So it is; your Lord said ‘it is easy for Me, and I did create you before, when you were nothing.‘.
19|10| He said, .My Lord, make for me a sign. He said, .Your sign is that you will not (be able to) speak to the people for three (consecutive) nights, even though you will be sound in health.
19|11| Then he came out to his people from the place of prayer, and directed them by gestures to proclaim the purity of Allah at morning and evening.
19|12| (When the child was born, Allah said to him,) .O YaHya, hold on to the Book firmly. And We gave him wisdom, while he was still a child,
19|13| and (blessed him with) love from our own, and purity; and he was God-fearing,
19|14| and he was good to his parents; and he was not oppressive (or) disobedient.
19|15| Peace on him the day he was born, the day he dies and the day he will be raised alive.
19|16| And mention in the Book (the story of) Maryam, when she secluded herself from her people to a place towards East,
19|17| then she used a barrier to hide herself from them. Then, We sent to her Our Spirit, (Jibra‘il) and he took before her the form of a perfect human being.
19|18| She said, .I seek refuge with the All-Merciful (Allah) against you, if you are God-fearing.
19|19| He said, .I am but a message-bearer of your Lord (sent) to give you a boy, purified.
19|20| She said, .How shall I have a boy while no human has ever touched me, nor have I ever been unchaste?.
19|21| He said, .So it is; your Lord said, ‘It is easy for Me, and (We will do this) so that We make it a sign for people and a mercy from Us, and this is a matter already destined.‘.
19|22| So she conceived him, and went in seclusion with him to a remote place.
19|23| Then the labour pains brought her to the trunk of a palm-tree. She said .O that I would have died before this, and would have been something gone, forgotten.
19|24| Then he called her from beneath her: .Do not grieve; your Lord has placed a stream beneath you.
19|25| Shake the trunk of the palm-tree towards yourself and, it will drop upon you ripe fresh dates.
19|26| So eat, drink and cool your eyes. Then if you see any human being, say (to him), .I have vowed a fast (of silence) for the All-Merciful (Allah,) and therefore, I shall never speak to any human today.
19|27| Then she came to her people carrying him (the baby). They said, .O Maryam you have committed something grave indeed.
19|28| O sister of Harun, neither your father was a man of evil nor was your mother unchaste.
19|29| So, she pointed towards him (the baby). They said, .How shall we speak to someone who is still a child in the cradle?.
19|30| Spoke he (the baby), .Verily I am the servant of Allah. He has given me the Book, and made me a prophet,
19|31| and He has made me a blessed one wherever I be, and has enjoined Salah and Zakah upon me as long as I am alive,
19|32| and (He has made me) good to my mother, and he did not make me oppressive (or) ill-fated.
19|33| And peace is upon me the day I was born, the day I shall die, and the day I shall be raised alive again.
19|34| That is ‘Isa, the son of Maryam, to say the truth in which they (Christians) are disputing.
19|35| It is not for Allah to have a son. Pure is He. When He decides a thing, He simply says to it, .Be. and it comes to be.
19|36| And (O Prophet, say to the people,) .Allah is surely my Lord and your Lord. So, worship Him. This is the straight path.
19|37| Then the groups among them fell in dispute. So, how evil is the fate of the disbelievers when they have to face the Great Day.
19|38| How strong will their hearing be, and how strong their vision, the day they will come to Us! But today the transgressors are straying in clear error.
19|39| Warn them of The Day of Remorse when the whole thing will be settled, while they are heedless and do not believe.
19|40| Surely We, only We, shall be the ultimate owner of the earth and all those on it, and to Us they will be returned.
19|41| And mention in the Book (the story of) Ibrahim. Indeed, he was Siddiq (a man of truth), a prophet,
19|42| when he said to his father, .My dear father, why do you worship something that does neither hear nor see, nor help you in any way?
19|43| My dear father, indeed there has come to me a knowledge that has not come to you; so, follow me, and I shall lead you to a straight path.
19|44| My dear father, do not worship the Satan. The Satan is surely rebellious to the All-Merciful, (Allah).
19|45| My dear father, I fear lest a punishment from the All- Merciful (Allah) should afflict you, and you become a companion of Satan.
19|46| He said, .Are you averse to my gods O Ibrahim? Should you not stop, I will definitely stone you. And leave me for good.
19|47| He said, .Peace on you. I shall seek forgiveness for you from my Lord. He has always been gracious to me.
19|48| And I go away from you and what you invoke besides Allah. And I shall invoke my Lord. Hopefully I shall not be a looser by invoking my Lord.
19|49| So, when he went away from them and what they worshipped besides Allah, We blessed him with IsHaq (Isaac) and Ya‘qub (Jacob) and We made each one of them a prophet,
19|50| and We bestowed on them (a great deal) of our mercy, and caused them to have a good name at a high level.
19|51| And mention in the Book (the story of) Musa. Indeed he was a chosen one and was a messenger, a prophet.
19|52| And We called him from the right side of the mount Tur (Sinai), and We brought him close to communicate in secret.
19|53| And, out of Our mercy, We granted him his brother Harun as a prophet.
19|54| And mention in the Book (the story of) Isma‘il. He was indeed true to his promise, and was a messenger, a prophet.
19|55| He used to enjoin Salah and Zakah upon his family, and was favourite to his Lord.
19|56| And mention in the Book (the story of) Idris. He was indeed a Siddiq (man of truth), a prophet.
19|57| We raised him to a high place.
19|58| Those are the people whom Allah has blessed with bounties, the prophets from the progeny of ‘Adam, and of those whom We caused to board (the Ark) along with NuH, and from the progeny of Ibrahim and Isra‘il (Jacob), and from those whom We guided and selected. When the verses of The RaHman (The All-Merciful) were recited before them, they used to fall down in Sajdah (prostration), while they were weeping.
19|59| Then came after them the successors who neglected Salah and followed (their selfish) desires. So they will soon face (the outcome of their) deviation,
19|60| except those who repent and believe and do good deeds, and therefore they will enter the Paradise and will not be wronged at all.
19|61| (They will enter) the Gardens of eternity, promised by the All-Merciful (Allah) to His servants, in the unseen world. They will surely reach (the places of) His promise.
19|62| They will not hear anything absurd therein, but a word of peace, and there they will have their provision at morn and eve.
19|63| That is the Paradise We will give as inheritance to those of Our servants who have been God-fearing.
19|64| (Jibra‘il X said to the Holy Prophet) .We do not descend but with the command of your Lord. To Him belongs what is in front of us and what is behind us and what is in between; and your Lord is not the One who forgets.
19|65| (He is) the Lord of the heavens and the earth and whatever lies between them. So, worship Him and persevere in His worship. Do you know any one worthy of His name?.
19|66| Man says, .Is it that, once I die, I shall be brought forth alive?.
19|67| Does not the man remember that We created him before, when he was nothing?
19|68| So, by your Lord, We will definitely gather them together, and the devils as well; then We will definitely make them present around the Jahannam , fallen on their knees.
19|69| Then, out of every group, We will certainly draw out those who were more rebellious against the All-Merciful (Allah).
19|70| Then of course, We are most aware of those who are more deserving to enter it (the Jahannam ).
19|71| There is none among you who does not have to arrive at it. This is undertaken by your Lord as an absolute decree, bound to be enforced.
19|72| Then We will save those who feared Allah, and will leave the wrongdoers in it, fallen on their knees.
19|73| When Our verses are recited to them in all their clarity, the disbelievers say to the believers, .Which of the two groups is superior in its place and better in its assembly?.
19|74| How many a generation We have destroyed before them who were better in assets and outlook!
19|75| Say, .Whoever stays straying, let his term be extended by the All-Merciful (Allah) still longer, until when they will see what they are being warned of: either the punishment or the Hour (of Doom), then they will know who was worse in his place and weaker in his forces.
19|76| Allah makes those on the right path excel in guidance. And the everlasting virtues are better with your Lord in respect of reward and better in their return.
19|77| Have you, then, seen him who rejected Our verses and said, .I shall certainly be given wealth and children.?
19|78| Has he peeped into the Unseen or taken a covenant with the All-Merciful (Allah)?
19|79| Never! We will write what he says and extend for him the punishment extensively.
19|80| And We will inherit from him what he is talking about, and he will come to Us all alone.
19|81| They have taken gods other than Allah, so that they may be a source of might for them.
19|82| Never! They (their fabricated deities) will soon reject their having worshipped them, and they will be just the opposite for them.
19|83| Have you not seen that We have sent the devils onto the disbelievers inciting them with all their incitements.
19|84| So make no hurry about them; We are but counting for them a count down.
19|85| The day We will assemble the God-fearing before the All-Merciful (Allah) as guests,
19|86| and will drive the sinners towards the Jahannam as herds of cattle (are driven) towards water,
19|87| none will have power to intercede, except the one who has entered into a covenant with the All-Merciful (Allah).
19|88| They say, .The All-Merciful (Allah) has got a son.
19|89| Indeed you have come up with such an abominable statement
19|90| that the heavens are well-nigh to explode at it, and the earth to burst apart, and the mountains to fall down crumbling,
19|91| for they have ascribed a son to the All-Merciful (Allah),
19|92| while it does not behove the All-Merciful to have a son.
19|93| There is none in the heavens and the earth, but bound to come to the All-Merciful as a salve.
19|94| He has fully encompassed them and precisely calculated their numbers,
19|95| and each one of them is bound to come to Him on the Day of Judgment, all alone.
19|96| Surely, those who believe and do righteous deeds, for them the All-Merciful (Allah) will create love.
19|97| So We have made it (the Qur‘an) easy through your tongue, so that you give with it the good news to the God-fearing, and warn with it an obstinate people.
19|98| And how many a generation We have destroyed before them! Do you sense (the presence of) any one of them, or hear from them even a whisper?
20|1| Ta-Ha
20|2| We did not reveal the Qur‘an to you to (make you) face hardship
20|3| rather to remind him who has the fear (of Allah),
20|4| it being a revelation from the One Who created the earth, and high heavens.
20|5| The RaHman (Allah, the All-Merciful) has positioned Himself on the Throne.
20|6| To Him belongs all that is in the heavens, all that is in the earth and whatever lies between them and whatever lies beneath the soil.
20|7| If you pronounce the word aloud, then (it makes no difference, for) He certainly knows the secret and what is even more hidden.
20|8| (Such is) Allah. There is no god but He. For Him are the Beautiful Names.
20|9| Has there come to you the story of Musa?
20|10| When he saw a fire and said to his family, .Stay here. I have noticed a fire. Perhaps I can bring you an ember from it, or find some guidance by the fire.
20|11| So when he came to it, he was called, .O Musa,
20|12| it is Me, your Lord, so remove your shoes; you are in the sacred valley of Tuwa.
20|13| I have chosen you (for prophet-hood), so listen to what is revealed:
20|14| Surely, I AM ALLAH. There is no god but Myself, so worship Me, and establish Salah for My remembrance.
20|15| Surely, the Hour (i.e. the Day of Judgment) has to come. I would keep it secret, so that everyone is given a return for the effort one makes.
20|16| So the one who does not believe in it and follows his desires must not make you neglectful of it, otherwise you will perish.
20|17| And what is that in your right hand, O Musa?.
20|18| He said, .It is my staff. I lean on it, and I beat down leaves with it for my sheep, and I have many other uses for it.
20|19| He said, .Throw it down O Musa.
20|20| So, he threw it down, and suddenly it was a snake, running around.
20|21| He said, .Pick it up, and be not scared. We shall restore it to its former state.
20|22| And press your hand under your arm, and it will come out (brightly) white without any disease, as another sign,
20|23| so that We may show you some of Our great signs.
20|24| Go to Pharaoh. He has really exceeded all bounds.
20|25| He said, .My Lord, put my heart at peace for me,
20|26| and make my task easy for me
20|27| and remove the knot from my tongue,
20|28| so that they may understand my speech.
20|29| And make for me an assistant from my own family,
20|30| that is, Harun, my brother.
20|31| Enhance with him my strength,
20|32| and make him share my task,
20|33| so that we proclaim Your purity in abundance
20|34| and remember You in abundance.
20|35| You are certainly watchful over us.
20|36| He said, .You have been granted your request O Musa.
20|37| And We had bestowed Our favour on you another time,
20|38| when We revealed to your mother what was to be revealed,
20|39| that is, ‘Put him (the baby) in the chest, then cast it into the river, then let the river throw it by the shore, and it will be picked up by one who is enemy to Me and enemy to him.‘ And I had cast love on you from Myself (so that you might be favourite of all), and that you might be brought up under My eye.
20|40| (Remember) when your sister was going (to the family of Pharaoh) and was saying, ‘Shall I lead you to one who nurses him?‘ Thus We brought you back to your mother, so that her eyes might have comfort and she might not grieve. And you had killed a person, then We brought you out of the trouble; and We tested you with a great ordeal. Then you lived a number of years amidst the people of Madyan. After all this, you came O Musa, to a destined point of time.
20|41| I have fashioned you for Myself.
20|42| Go, you and your brother, with My signs, and do not be slack in My remembrance.
20|43| Go, both of you, to Pharaoh; he has indeed transgressed all limits.
20|44| So speak to him in soft words. May be, he accepts the advice or fears (Allah).
20|45| They said, .Our Lord, we fear that he will hasten against us, or will become (more) rebellious (against You).
20|46| He said, .Do not be afraid. I AM surely with you both. I hear and I see.
20|47| So, come to him and say, ‘We are the messengers of your Lord. So, let the children of Isra‘il go with us, and do not persecute them. We have come to you with a sign from your Lord; and peace be upon the one who follows the guidance.
20|48| Verily, it has been revealed to us that the punishment is for the one who denies and turns away.‘.
20|49| He (Pharaoh) said, .Who then is the Lord of you two, O Musa?.
20|50| He (Musa) said, .Our Lord is the One who gave everything its due shape, then guided it.
20|51| He said, .Then, what is the status of the earlier generations?.
20|52| He replied, .The knowledge about those is with my Lord in a Book. My Lord does neither err nor forget.
20|53| (He is) the One who made the earth a cradle for you, and made in it pathways for you to move, and sent down water from the heavens; and We brought forth with it pairs of different vegetations :
20|54| Eat, and graze your cattle. Surely, in that there are signs for the people of understanding.
20|55| From this (dust) We created you, and in this we shall put you back, and from this We shall raise you up once again.
20|56| And We showed him (Pharaoh) all Our signs, yet he rejected and refused.
20|57| Said he, .Have you come to us to drive us out of our land with your sorcery, O Musa?
20|58| We will, then, bring to you a similar sorcery. So, make an appointment between you and us for an even place, not to be backed out, neither by us nor by you.
20|59| He (Musa) said, .Your appointment is the festival day, and the people should be assembled at forenoon.
20|60| So, Pharaoh turned back, and put his plot together, then came.
20|61| Musa said to them, .Pity on you, do not fabricate a lie against Allah, lest He should destroy you with a punishment. And loser is he who fabricates a lie.
20|62| Then, they disputed among themselves in their matter, and kept their talk secret.
20|63| Said they, .Certainly, these two are sorcerers who wish to drive you out from your land, and do away with your excellent way of life.
20|64| So, make your plot firm and come forth in one row. Successful today is the one who prevails.
20|65| They said, .O Musa, either you throw (first), or shall we be first to throw?.
20|66| He said, .Rather, you throw. Then, suddenly their ropes and sticks seemed to him, due to their magic, as if they were running.
20|67| So, Musa concealed some fear in his heart.
20|68| We said, .Do not be scared. Certainly, you are to be the upper most.
20|69| And throw what is in your right hand, and it will devour what they have concocted. What they have concocted is but a sleight of a magician. And the magician does not succeed wherever he comes from.
20|70| So, the magicians were led (by the truth) to fall in prostration. They said, .We have (now) believed in the Lord of Harun and Musa.
20|71| He (Pharaoh) said, .You have believed in him before I permit you. This man is in fact your master who has taught you the magic. So I will certainly cut off your hands and your legs from opposite sides, and will crucify you on the trunks of palm-trees, and you shall know whose punishment, out of us, is more severe and more lasting.
20|72| They said, .We will never prefer you over the clear signs that have come to us, and over Him who has created us. So, decide whatever you have to decide. You will decide only for this worldly life.
20|73| We have put our faith in our Lord, so that He forgives us for our sins and for the magic you compelled us to perform. And Allah is the Best and Everlasting.
20|74| Surely whoever comes to his Lord as a sinner, for him there is Jahannam in which he neither will die nor will live (a happy life).
20|75| And whoever will come to Him as believer, having done righteous deeds, for such people there are the highest ranks,
20|76| the eternal gardens beneath which rivers flow, in which they shall live for ever. That is the reward for the one who has purified himself.
20|77| And We revealed to Musa saying, .Set out with my servants at night, then make for them a dry path across the sea (with the strike of your staff), neither fearing to be caught up, nor having any fear (of drowning).
20|78| Then Pharaoh chased them with his troops. So, they were encircled by that (huge wave) from the sea which overwhelmed them.
20|79| Pharaoh held his people astray, and did not show them the right path.
20|80| O children of Isra‘il , We delivered you from your enemy and appointed for you the right side of the mount Tur (Sinai), and sent down for you the Mann and Salwa :
20|81| Eat from the good things We have provided to you, and do not exceed the limits in it, lest My wrath should descend on you. The one upon whom My wrath descends certainly falls into destruction.
20|82| Surely I am the Most-Forgiving for him who repents and believes and acts righteously, then follows the right path.
20|83| .What has caused you to hurry before your people, O Musa?.
20|84| He said, .Here they are just behind me, and I hurried towards You, my Lord, so that You be pleased.
20|85| He said, .We have then put your people to test after you (left them) and Samiriyy has misguided them.
20|86| So, Musa went back to his people, angry and sad. He said, .O my people, did your Lord not promise you a good promise? Did then the time become too long for you, or did you wish that wrath from your Lord befalls you, and hence you broke your promise to me?.
20|87| They said, .We did not break our promise to you of our own accord, but we were burdened with loads from the ornaments of the people; so we threw them, and thus did Samiriyy cast.
20|88| Then he brought forth for them a calf, which was (merely) a body with a lowing sound. Then they said, .This is your god and the god of Musa, and he (Musa) erred.
20|89| Have they not been seeing that it did not respond to them (even) with a word, nor did it have power to harm or benefit them?
20|90| Harun had already said to them, .O my people, you have only been led astray with it, and your Lord is the RaHman (All-Merciful). So follow me and obey my command.
20|91| They said, .We will never cease to stay with it in devotion, until Musa returns to us.
20|92| He (Musa) said, .O Harun, what did prevent you from following me when you saw them going astray?
20|93| Did you then disobey my command?.
20|94| He said, .O son of my mother, do not hold me by my beard, nor by my head. I feared that you would say, ‘You have caused discord among the children of Isra‘il and did not observe my advice.‘.
20|95| He (Musa) said, .What then is your case, O Samiriyy?.
20|96| He said, .I perceived something they did not perceive. So I picked up a handful from under the footstep of the messenger. Then, I cast it. And thus my inner self tempted me.
20|97| He (Musa) said, .Then go away; it is destined for you that, throughout your life, you will say: ‘Do not touch me‘. And, of course, you have another promise that will not be broken for you. And look at your god to which you stayed devoted. We will certainly burn it, then we will scatter it thoroughly in the sea.
20|98| Your God is Allah other than whom there is no god. He encompasses everything with knowledge.
20|99| This is how We narrate to you certain events of what has passed, and We have given to you, from Ourself, a (book of) advice.
20|100| Whoever turns away from it shall certainly bear a heavy burden on Doomsday,
20|101| all such people living under it forever. And how evil for them will be that burden on the Doomsday!
20|102| The Day when the Horn (Sur) will be blown, and We shall gather them together while they will have turned blue on that day,
20|103| and will be whispering among themselves, .You did not remain (in graves) more than ten (days).
20|104| We know very well what they say, when the best of them in his ways will say, .You did not remain more than one day.
20|105| They ask you about the mountains. So, say (to them), .My Lord will crush them into dust thoroughly,
20|106| then will turn them into a leveled plain
20|107| in which you will see neither a curve nor an uneven place.
20|108| That day they will follow the caller who will find no deviation (from anyone). And the voices will turn low in awe for the RaHman (All- Merciful, Allah). So, you will hear not but whispering.
20|109| That day no intercession will be of any use to anyone, except the one whom the RaHman (All-Merciful, Allah) has permitted and was pleased with his word.
20|110| He knows what is in front of them and what is behind them, and they do not encompass Him in (their) knowledge.
20|111| All faces will be humbled before (Allah,) the Ever-Alive, the All-Sustaining; and the loser will be the one who bears (the burden of his) injustice.
20|112| But whoever does righteous deeds, while he is a believer, shall fear neither injustice nor curtailment (of his rewards).
20|113| And in this way We have sent it down to you as an Arabic Qur‘an, and have detailed in it some warnings in various ways, so that they may fear, or it may produce a lesson for them.
20|114| So High above all is Allah, the True King! And do not hasten with (reciting) the Qur‘an before its revelation to you is concluded, and say, .My Lord, improve me in knowledge.
20|115| We had given a directive to ‘Adam earlier, then he forgot, and We did not find in him a firm resolve.
20|116| When We said to the angels, .Prostrate yourselves to ‘Adam. So, all of them fell prostrate, except Iblis , who refused.
20|117| So, We said .‘Adam, this is an enemy to you and to your wife. So let him not expel you from Paradise, lest you should get into trouble.
20|118| Here you have the privilege that you will not be hungry nor will you be unclad,
20|119| and you will not be thirsty, nor will you be exposed to sun.
20|120| Then the Satan instigated him. He said, .‘Adam, shall I guide you to the tree of eternity and to an empire that does not decay?.
20|121| So, both of them [‘Adam and Hawwa‘ (Eve)]ate from it, and their parts of shame were exposed to them, and they started stitching on themselves some of the leaves of Paradise. And ‘Adam disobeyed his Lord, and erred.
20|122| Thereafter his Lord chose him. So He accepted his repentance and gave (him) guidance.
20|123| He said (to ‘Adam and Iblis), .Go down from here, all of you, some of you enemies of some others. Then, should some guidance come to you from Me, the one who follows My guidance shall not go astray, nor shall he be in trouble.
20|124| As for the one who turns away from My message, he shall have a straitened life, and We shall raise him blind on the Day of Judgment.
20|125| He will say, .My Lord, why did you raise me blind while I was sighted?.
20|126| He will say, .In the similar manner as Our signs came to you, and you had ignored them. In the same way you will be ignored today.
20|127| Thus We recompense him who exceeds the limits and does not believe in the signs of his Lord. Certainly the punishment of the Hereafter is more severe and more lasting.
20|128| Did it give them no guidance (to realize) how many generations We have destroyed prior to them in whose dwellings they (often) walk around? Surely, in this there are signs for the men of reason.
20|129| But for a word from your Lord that had passed earlier, and an appointed time that had been fixed, it (the punishment) would have been inevitable (for them).
20|130| So, (O messenger,) endure with patience what they say, and proclaim the purity and praise of your Lord before sunrise and before sunset. And in some hours of night, proclaim His purity, and at points of the day as well, so that you may be pleased.
20|131| Never stretch your eyes towards the things We have given to some groups of them to enjoy, so that We put them to test thereby, it being merely glamour of the worldly life. And the bounty of your Lord is much better and more lasting.
20|132| Bid your family to perform Salah, and adhere to it yourself. We ask no provision from you. We give provision to you. And the ultimate end is in favour of Taqwa (God-fearing, and piety).
20|133| They say, .Why does he not bring to us a sign from his Lord?. Has there not come to them the clear sign of what is contained in the earlier Scriptures?
20|134| And if We had destroyed them with a punishment before it, they would have said, .Our Lord, why did you not send a messenger to us, so that we might have followed Your signs before we were humiliated and put to disgrace?.
20|135| Say, .Everyone is waiting. So wait, then you will know who the people of the straight path are and who has followed the right guidance.
21|1| The reckoning of the people has drawn near to them, while they are in negligence, turning away (from its signs).
21|2| No fresh message of advice comes to them from their Lord, but they listen to it as if they were playing,
21|3| their hearts paying no heed. And the wrongdoers whisper in secret, .This one is nothing but a mortal like you. Would you then go along with sorcery while you can see (the reality)?.
21|4| He (the prophet) said, .My Lord knows all that is spoken in the heavens and the earth, and He is the All-Hearing, the All-Knowing.
21|5| Further they said, .(The Qur‘an is) a mixture of jumble dreams. Rather, he (the prophet) has fabricated it. Rather, he is a poet. So, let him bring a sign to us, as the earlier ones were sent with.
21|6| Not a single town from those whom We destroyed came to believe before them. So, will they believe?
21|7| And We did not send before you messengers except men whom We inspired with revelation. So, ask the people (having the knowledge) of the Message, if you do not know.
21|8| We did not make them such bodies as ate no food, nor were they immortal.
21|9| Then We caused the promise to come true for them, so We saved them and those whom We willed, and destroyed the transgressors.
21|10| Surely, We have sent down to you (O people of Arabia) a book having a good counsel for you. So, do you not understand?
21|11| How many a town, that were unjust, have We crushed and raised up after them another people!
21|12| So, as soon as they sensed Our punishment (approaching them), they started fleeing from it.
21|13| (It was said to them,) .Do not flee, and go back to the luxuries you were made to enjoy, and to your dwellings. May be you are asked questions.
21|14| They said, .Alas for us! We were wrongdoers indeed.
21|15| Then, this continued to be their cry till We turned them into stubble, totally extinguished.
21|16| We did not create the heavens and the earth and what lies between them for play.
21|17| Had We intended to have a pastime, We would have had it from Our own, if We were ever to do so.
21|18| Instead, We launch the truth against falsehood, which gets it smashed, and in no time it is gone. Alas to you for what you describe!
21|19| To Him belong all those in the heavens and the earth. And those who are near to Him are not arrogant against His worship, nor are they sluggish.
21|20| They proclaim His purity night and day, never slackening.
21|21| Or have they adopted gods from the earth, who raise the dead?
21|22| Had there been gods beside Allah, in the heavens and the earth, both of them would have fallen in disorder. So pure is Allah, the Lord of the Throne, from what they describe.
21|23| He is not questioned of what He does, and they are questioned.
21|24| Is it that they have adopted gods besides Him? Say, .Bring your proof. Here is the (book carrying) advice for those with me, and the (books carrying) advice for those before me. Yet most of them do not know the truth, and therefore they are averse.
21|25| We did not send before you any messenger but We revealed to him that there is no god but I, so worship Me.
21|26| They said, .The RaHman (the All-Merciful, Allah) has taken children for Himself. Pure is He (from having children). They are but (His) honored servants.
21|27| They do not precede Him in speech, and only under His command they act.
21|28| He knows what is in front of them and what is behind them, and they make recommendation for none but for whom He likes, and in awe of Him they are fearful.
21|29| Should any one of them say, .I am god besides Him., We will recompense him with Jahannam (Hell). This is how We recompense the transgressors.
21|30| Did the disbelievers not observe that the heavens and the earth were closed, then We opened them? And We created from water every living thing. Would they still not believe?
21|31| And We created mountains on the earth, lest it should shake with them, and We have made therein paths and ways, so that they are guided.
21|32| We made the sky a protected roof; and they are averse to its signs.
21|33| He is the One who has created the night and the day, and the sun and the moon, each floating in an orbit.
21|34| We did not assign immortality to any human (even) before you. So, if you die, will they live for ever?
21|35| Every one has to taste death, and We test you through bad and good (situations) with a trial, and to Us you are to be returned.
21|36| When disbelievers see you, they do nothing but take you in jest (saying to one another,) .Is this the one who talks of your gods?. _ while they themselves reject even talking of the RaHman (All-Merciful).
21|37| Man is made of haste. I shall show you My signs, so do not seek haste from Me.
21|38| They say, .When will this promise be (fulfilled), if you are true?.
21|39| Only if the disbelievers were to know the time when they will not (be able to) keep off the fire from their faces or from their backs, nor will they be helped.
21|40| Rather, it will come upon them suddenly and will baffle them. So they will not be able to turn it back, nor will they be given respite.
21|41| In fact, messengers have been mocked at prior to you. So those who laughed at them were besieged by what they used to ridicule.
21|42| Say, .Who will guard you, during night and day, against the RaHman (All-Merciful, Allah)?. Rather, to the remembrance of their Lord they are averse.
21|43| Or do they have gods who protect them besides Us? They are not able to help even themselves, nor will they have anyone to side with them against Us.
21|44| But We have given benefits to these and their fathers until life was prolonged for them. So do they not see that We are coming to the land narrowing it down from all its sides? Then, are they the ones to prevail?
21|45| Say, .I warn you only by revelation, but the deaf do not listen to the call when they are warned.
21|46| If a whiff of your Lord‘s torment were to touch them, they would certainly say, .Alas to us! We were wrongdoers indeed.
21|47| We shall place scales to do justice on the Day of Judgment. So no one shall be wronged in the least. Even if it (a deed) is to the measure of a mustard seed, We will bring it forth, and We are enough to take account.
21|48| And We gave Musa and Harun the Criterion, and a light and an advice for the God-fearing,
21|49| __ those who have awe of their Lord without having seen Him, and are fearful of the Hour (of Judgment).
21|50| And this is a blessed advice We have sent down. Are you still rejecting it?
21|51| Even earlier We had given Ibrahim his right course, and We knew him well
21|52| when he said to his father and his people, .What are these statues you are devoted to?.
21|53| They said, .We found our fathers worshipping them,.
21|54| He said, .Surely you and your fathers have been in open error.
21|55| They said, .Did you come to us with truth or are you one of the triflers?.
21|56| He said, .No, your Lord is the Lord of the heavens and the earth, who has created them, and I am one of those who bear witness to it.
21|57| And I swear by Allah that I will devise something against your idols after you have gone away turning your backs.
21|58| Then, he turned all of them into pieces, except the big one of them, so that they may come back to it.
21|59| They said, .Who has done this to our gods? He is one of the wrongdoers indeed.
21|60| Some of them said, .We have heard a youth talking about them. He is called Ibrahim.
21|61| They said, .Then, bring him before the eyes of the people, so that they may see.
21|62| They said, .Is it you O Ibrahim who has done this to our gods?.
21|63| He said, .Rather, this is done by this chief of theirs. So, ask them if they can speak.
21|64| So they turned to one another and said, .In fact, you yourselves are the wrongdoers.
21|65| Then, hanging their heads they reversed their position (and replied to Ibrahim,) .You already knew that they do not speak.
21|66| He said, .Do you then worship, beside Allah, what does neither benefit you in the least nor harm you?
21|67| Fie upon you and upon what you worship other than Allah. Do you then not understand?.
21|68| They said, .(O people) burn him and help your gods, if you are to take action.
21|69| We said, .O fire, be cold and safe for Ibrahim.
21|70| And they intended to harm him, but We made them the worst losers.
21|71| And We rescued him and LuT towards the land we blessed for all the worlds.
21|72| And We blessed him with IsHaq and Ya‘qub as gift, and each one of them We made righteous.
21|73| And We made them the Imams who guided (people) under Our command, and We inspired them to do good deeds and to establish Salah and pay Zakah, and Us alone they worshipped.
21|74| As for LuT, We gave him wisdom and knowledge, and We delivered him from the town that used to do dirty deeds. Indeed, they were the people of evil, the sinners.
21|75| And We admitted him to Our mercy. Indeed, He was of the righteous.
21|76| And (remember) NuH, when he called (for help) earlier, so We responded to him and saved him and his family from the terrible agony,
21|77| and helped him against the people who gave the lie to Our verses. Indeed, they were the people of evil, therefore, We drowned them all.
21|78| And (remember) Dawud (David) and Sulaiman (Solomon), when they were adjudicating about the tillage in which the goats of other people wandered at night (and trampled it), and We were witness to their judgment.
21|79| So, We enabled Sulaiman to understand it. And to each one of them We gave wisdom and knowledge. And with Dawud We subjugated the mountains that pronounced tasbiH (Allah‘s purity), and the birds as well. And We were the One who did (it).
21|80| We taught him the skill of making armor as dress for you to protect you from what may harm you (in combat). So are you grateful?
21|81| And for Sulaiman, (We subjugated) the violent wind that blew under his command to the land in which We placed Our blessings. And We were the One who knew everything.
21|82| And from the devils, (We subjugated for him) those who dived in water for him and did jobs other than that. And We were the One who kept watch over them.
21|83| And (remember) Ayyub (Job), when he called his Lord saying, .Here I am, afflicted by pain and You are the most merciful of all the merciful.
21|84| So, We answered his prayer and removed whatever pain he had, and gave him (back) his family and the like thereof along with them, as a mercy from Our own Self and as a lesson for the worshippers.
21|85| And (remember) Isma‘il and Idris and Dhul-Kifl. Each one of them was of those who observed patience.
21|86| And We admitted them to Our mercy. Surely, they were of the righteous.
21|87| And (remember) Dhunnun (the man of the fish, namely Yunus X), when he walked away in anger and thought that We would never put him to trouble. Then, he called (Us) in depths of darkness saying, .There is no god but You. Pure are You. Indeed I was among the wrongdoers.
21|88| So We responded to him and rescued him from the distress. And this is how We rescue the believers.
21|89| And (remember) Zakariyya when he called his Lord, .My Lord, do not leave me alone and You are the best of inheritors.
21|90| So, We responded to him and gave him YaHya and made his wife good for him. They used to race towards the good deeds and call Us with hope and fear; and they were humble to Us.
21|91| And (remember) her who protected her private part (that is, Maryam). So, We blew in her (a life) through Our Spirit, and made her and her son (‘Isa X) a sign for all the worlds.
21|92| Surely, this is the fraternity of your Faith, a single Faith, and I am your Lord; so worship Me.
21|93| But they have separated their ways from one another. All of them have to return to Us.
21|94| So, whoever does righteous deeds, while he is a believer, his effort will not be rejected, and We are to put it on record.
21|95| It is banned for (the people of) a town that We destroyed that they come back
21|96| until when the Ya‘juj and Ma‘juj (Gog and Magog) are released, while they run down from every height,
21|97| and the True Promise draws near, then it will so happen that the eyes of the disbelievers shall remain upraised (in terror, and they will say,) .Alas to us! We were in negligence about this; rather we were transgressors.
21|98| Surely, you and whatever you worship other than Allah are the fuel of Jahannam. There you will have to arrive.
21|99| Had they been gods, they would not have arrived at it, and all of them will remain there forever.
21|100| For them, there will be screams in it and they will not hear.
21|101| As for those for whom the good (news) from Us has come earlier, they will be kept far away from it.
21|102| They will not hear the slightest of its sound, and they will remain forever in what their souls desire.
21|103| They shall not be grieved by the Biggest Panic, and the angels shall receive them (saying), .This is your day that you had been promised.
21|104| #NAME?
21|105| And We have written in Zabur (Psalms) after the advice that the land will be inherited by My righteous slaves.
21|106| Surely, in this (Qur‘an) there is a message conveyed to a people who worship (Allah).
21|107| And We have not sent you but as mercy for all the worlds.
21|108| Say, .What is revealed to me is simply that your God is One God. So do you submit?.
21|109| But, if they turn away, then say (to them), .I have warned you all alike, and I do not know whether what you have been warned of is near or far.
21|110| Surely, He knows what is spoken openly and He knows what you conceal.
21|111| And I do not know; perhaps it is a trial for you and an enjoyment for a while.
21|112| He (Our Messenger) said, .My Lord, judge with truth. And Our Lord is the RaHman (All-Merciful), the One whose help is sought against what you describe.
22|1| O mankind, fear your Lord. Indeed the quake of the (destined) Hour is something terrible.
22|2| The day you will see it, every suckling female will forget that which she suckles, and every female having pregnancy shall abort her fetus, and you will see people as if they are drunk, while they are not drunk, but Allah‘s torment is (so) severe.
22|3| Among the people there is one who debates about Allah without knowledge, and follows every rebellious Satan,
22|4| about whom it is destined that if someone takes him for friend, he will misguide him and lead him to the torment of the Fire.
22|5| O mankind, if you are in doubt about Resurrection, then (recall that) We created you from dust, then from a drop of semen, then from a clot, then from a piece of flesh, either shaped or unshaped, so that We manifest (Our power) to you. We retain in the wombs whatever We will to a specified term. Then We bring you out as babies, then (We nourish you) so that you reach your maturity. And among you there is one who dies, and among you there is one who is carried to the worst part of the age, so that he knows nothing even after having knowledge. And you see the land dry. Then once We send down water on it, it stirs and swells and puts forth every pleasant pair (of vegetation).
22|6| That is because Allah is the truth, and that He gives life to the dead, and that He is powerful to do everything,
22|7| and that the Hour (of Doom) has to come, in which there is no doubt, and that Allah will raise again all those in the graves.
22|8| Among men there is one who debates about Allah with no knowledge, no guidance and no enlightening book,
22|9| turning his side away to lead (people) astray from the way of Allah. For him there is disgrace in this world, and We will have him taste the punishment of Fire on the Day of Judgment
22|10| (and will say to him) .All this is due to what your hands sent ahead, and that Allah is not unjust to His servants.
22|11| And among men there is one who worships Allah (standing) on the verge: so if some good thing happens to him, he is satisfied with it, and if a trial befalls him, he turns his face back. He loses both this world and the Hereafter. That is the manifest loss.
22|12| He prays to someone, instead of Allah, who can neither harm him nor benefit him. That is the error that takes him too far from the right path.
22|13| He, rather, prays to someone whose harm is more likely than his benefit. Wretched is such a patron and wretched is such a companion.
22|14| Surely, Allah will admit those who believe and do good deeds into gardens beneath which rivers flow. Surely Allah does what He intends.
22|15| If someone thinks that Allah will never help him (the prophet) in this world and in the Hereafter, he should stretch a rope to the sky, then cut (Allah‘s communication) off (from the prophet) and see whether his effort can really remove what irritates (him).
22|16| And this is how We have sent it (the Qur‘an) down as clear signs, and the fact is that Allah leads whom He wills to the right path.
22|17| As for those who believe and the Jews and the Sabians and the Christians and the Magians and those who ascribe partners to Allah, Allah will judge between them on the Day of Judgment. Surely Allah is witness to every thing.
22|18| Have you not seen that to Allah prostrate all those in the skies and all those on the earth, and the sun, the moon, the stars, the mountains, the trees, the animals and many from mankind? And there are many on whom punishment has become due. And the one whom Allah puts to disgrace, there is none to give him respect. Surely Allah does what He wills.
22|19| These are two opponents who have disputed about their Lord. As for those who disbelieve, garments from fire shall be tailored for them, and boiling water shall be poured from over their heads
22|20| whereby everything in their bellies, as well as the skins, will be melted.
22|21| And for them there are hooked rods of iron.
22|22| Whenever, in their anguish, they will intend to come out of it (the fire), they will be turned back to it, and (it will be said to them,) .Taste the punishment of burning.
22|23| Surely Allah will admit those who believe and do good deeds to gardens beneath which rivers flow. They will be adorned therein with bracelets of gold and with pearls, and their dress therein will be (of) silk.
22|24| Guided they were to the good word (of faith) and guided they were to the path of (Allah,) the Praised One.
22|25| Surely (We will punish) those who disbelieve and prevent (people) from the way of Allah and from Al-Masjid-ul-Haram (the Sacred Mosque), which We have made for all men, where residents and visitors are all equal. And whoever intends therein to commit deviation with injustice, We will make him taste a painful punishment.
22|26| And (remember) when We pointed out for Ibrahim the place of the House (of Allah) saying, .Do not associate anything with Me as My partner, and purify My House for those who make Tawaf (circumambulation around it), and those who perform Qiyam (standing up in worship) and those who perform Ruku‘ (bowing down) and Sujud (prostration),
22|27| and announce among people about (the obligation of) Hajj, so that they should come to you on foot, and on every camel turned lean, traveling through every distant hilly pathway,
22|28| so that they witness benefits for them, and recite Allah‘s name in specified days, over the provision He gave them from the cattle. .So, eat thereof and feed the distressed, the poor.
22|29| Then, they must remove their dirt, and fulfill their vows, and make Tawaf of the Ancient House.
22|30| Having said that, whoever observes reverence of the things sanctified by Allah, it is good for him with his Lord. And permitted to you are the cattle, except those mentioned to you through recitation (of the verses). So refrain from the filth of the idols and refrain from a word of falsehood,
22|31| standing upright for (the obedience of) Allah, not ascribing any partner to Him. Whoever ascribes a partner to Allah, it is as if he falls down from the sky, and either the birds snatch him, or the wind drives him away to a far off place.
22|32| Having said that, if one observes the sanctity of the symbols of Allah, then such things emanate from the piety of the hearts.
22|33| And for you there are benefits in them (the cattle) up to a specified time. Then their place of sacrifice is by the Ancient House.
22|34| For every Ummah (religious community) We prescribed the act of sacrifice, so that they recite Allah‘s name over the provision He gave them from the cattle. So, your God is One God. Therefore, to Him alone you must submit. And give good news to those who turn to Him with humbleness -
22|35| those whose hearts are filled with awe when Allah is remembered, and who observe patience against whatever befalls them, and who are steadfast in Salah, and who spend (in the way of Allah) out of what We have given to them.
22|36| The big animals of sacrifice (like camels and cows) are made by Us among the symbols of Allah for you, in which there is much good for your benefit. So recite the name of Allah over them as they are lined up (for sacrifice). Then, once their flanks fall down (after slaughter), eat of them and feed the one who is content and the one who wishes to receive. Thus We have made them (the animals) subjugated to you, so that you may be grateful.
22|37| It is neither their flesh nor their blood that reaches Allah, but what does reach Him is the taqwa (the sense of obedience) on your part. Thus He has made them (the animals) subjugated to you, so that you proclaim Allah‘s glory for the guidance He gave you. And give good news to those who are good in their deeds.
22|38| Surely, Allah defends those who believe. Allah does not love any treacherous, ungrateful.
22|39| Permission (to fight) is given to those against whom fighting is launched, because they have been wronged, and Allah is powerful to give them victory.
22|40| (They are) the ones who were expelled from their homes without any just reason, except that they say .Our Lord is Allah. Had Allah not been repelling some people by means of some others, the monasteries, the churches, the synagogues and the mosques where Allah‘s name is abundantly recited would have been demolished. Allah will definitely help those who help Him (by defending the religion prescribed by Him.) Surely Allah is Powerful, Mighty.
22|41| (The ones who help Allah are) those who, when We give them power in the land, establish Salah, pay Zakah, bid what is Fair and forbid what is Unfair. And with Allah lies the fate of all matters.
22|42| And if they reject you, so did reject the people of NuH (Noah) and ‘Ad and Thamud,
22|43| and the people of Ibrahim and the people of LuT (Lot),
22|44| and the people of Madyan as well. Musa was (also) rejected. So, I gave some respite to the disbelievers, then seized them. So how was My censure?
22|45| How many towns have We destroyed, as they were wrongdoers! So, they are fallen down on their roofs, and (how many a) deserted well and (how many a) well-built castle!
22|46| Have they not, then, traveled on earth so that they should have had hearts to understand with, or ears to listen with? The fact is that it is not the eyes that turn blind, but what turns blind is the hearts contained in the chests.
22|47| They ask you to bring the punishment sooner, while Allah will never go back on His promise. In fact, one day with your Lord is like one thousand years according to your calculation.
22|48| And how many towns were there to whom I allowed respite, while they were wrongdoers, then I seized them. And to Me is the final return.
22|49| Say, .O people, I am no more than a plain warner for you.
22|50| So those who come to believe and do good deeds, for them there is forgiveness and dignified provision.
22|51| As for those who strive against Our signs, trying to defeat (the prophet or the believers), they are the people of the Fire.
22|52| We did not send any messenger before you nor a prophet, but (he faced a situation that) when he recited (the revelation), the Satan cast (doubts in the hearts of his opponents) about what he recited. So, Allah nullifies what the Satan casts, then Allah makes His verses firm, and Allah is All- Knowing, All-Wise
22|53| (All this is allowed to be done) so that He may make what Satan casts a trial for those in whose hearts there is a disease, and whose hearts are hard;__and surely the wrongdoers are in the utmost antagonism__
22|54| and so that those who have been given knowledge may know that it (i.e. the revelation recited by the prophet) is the truth from your Lord, and they may believe in it and their hearts may become humble towards it. Allah is the Guide of the believers to the straight path.
22|55| Those who disbelieve will remain in doubt about it (the Qur‘an) forever, until the Hour (of Judgment) comes upon them suddenly, or there comes to them the punishment of a barren day.
22|56| The kingdom, on that day, is for Allah. He will judge between them. So, those who believed and did good deeds shall be in gardens of bliss.
22|57| As for those who disbelieved and rejected Our signs, they are the ones for whom there is a humiliating punishment.
22|58| Those who left their homeland in the way of Allah, then were slain or died, Allah will certainly give them a good provision, and surely, Allah is the best provider.
22|59| He will definitely admit them to an entrance they will be pleased with, and Allah is surely All-Knowing, Forbearing.
22|60| Having said this, whoever afflicts (someone) with a punishment equal to what he was afflicted with (by the latter), and still he (the former) is (again) subjected to aggression (by the latter), Allah will certainly help him. Indeed, Allah is Most-Pardoning, Most-Forgiving.
22|61| That is because Allah makes night enter into the day and makes day enter into the night and that Allah is All-Hearing, All-Seeing.
22|62| That is because Allah is the truth and that whatever they invoke beside Him is false and that Allah is the High, the Great.
22|63| Did you not see that Allah has sent down water from the sky, whereby the land becomes green? Surely, Allah is All-Kind, All-Aware.
22|64| To Him belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth, and surely Allah is the All-Independent, Ever-Praised.
22|65| Did you not see that Allah has subjugated to you everything on the earth, and the ships that sail at sea with His command? And He holds the sky so as it cannot fall on the earth except with His permission. Surely Allah is Very-Kind to the people, Very-Merciful.
22|66| He is the One who gave life to you, then He brings death to you, then He will give you life (again). Surely, man is very ungrateful.
22|67| For every Ummah (religious community) We have appointed a way of worship they are to observe. Therefore, they should never quarrel with you in the matter. And do call (them) to your Lord. Surely, you are on straight Guidance.
22|68| And if they dispute with you, say (to them), .Allah is the best aware of what you do.
22|69| Allah will judge between you, on the Day of Judgment, about what you used to dispute.
22|70| Do you not know that Allah knows all that is in the sky and the earth? Surely, that is contained in a Book. Indeed it is so easy for Allah.
22|71| They worship, besides Allah, the objects for which He did never send down an authority (or proof) and about which they have no knowledge. And for the wrongdoers there is no helper.
22|72| When Our verses are recited to them in all their clarity, you (can) recognize disgust on the faces of the disbelievers. They seem to attack those who recite to them Our verses. Say, .Shall I, then, tell you about something more disgusting than that? The Fire! Allah has promised it to those who disbelieve. And it is an evil end.
22|73| O people, here is a parable set forth to you, so listen to it carefully: All those whom you invoke besides Allah can never create (even) a fly, even though they all join hands together for that. And if a fly snatches something away from them, they cannot release it from its possession. (Equally) feeble are the invoker and the invoked.
22|74| They did not recognize Allah in His true esteem. Indeed Allah is Powerful, Mighty.
22|75| Allah chooses messengers from angels and from men. Surely, Allah is All-Hearing, All-Seeing.
22|76| He knows what is in front of them and what is behind them, and to Allah all matters are to be returned.
22|77| O you who believe, bow down in Ruku‘ and bow down in Sajdah, and worship your Lord and do good deeds, so that you achieve success.
22|78| Struggle for (seeking the pleasure of) Allah, a struggle that is owed to Him. He has chosen you and did not impose any hardship on you in the religion, the faith of your father Ibrahim. He (Allah) named you as Muslims earlier and also in this (Qur‘an), so that the Messenger becomes a witness to you, and you become witnesses to (other) people. So establish Salah, pay Zakah and hold fast to Allah. He is your patron. So, how excellent He is as a patron, and how excellent as a supporter!
23|1| Success is really attained by the believers
23|2| who concentrate their attention in humbleness when offering Salah (prayers)
23|3| and who keep themselves away from vain things,
23|4| and who are performers of Zakah ,
23|5| and who guard their private parts
23|6| except from their wives or from those (bondwomen who are) owned by their hands, as they are not to be blamed.
23|7| However, those who seek (sexual pleasure) beyond that are the transgressors
23|8| – and (success is attained) by those who honestly look after their trusts and covenant,
23|9| and who consistently observe their prayers.
23|10| Those are the inheritors
23|11| who will inherit Firdaus (the Paradise). They will be there forever.
23|12| We have created man from an extract of clay.
23|13| Then We made him a sperm-drop in a firm resting place.
23|14| Then We turned the sperm-drop into a clot, then We turned the clot into a fetus-lump, then We turned the fetus-lump into bones, then We clothed the bones with flesh; thereafter We developed it into another creature. So, glorious is Allah, the Best of the creators.
23|15| Then, after all this, you are to die.
23|16| Then you are to be raised again on the Day of Judgment.
23|17| And We created above you seven paths (heavens), and We were never neglectful of the creation.
23|18| And We sent down water from the sky in due measure, then We lodged it in the earth, and of course, We are able to take it away.
23|19| Then We produced with it gardens of date-palms and vines for your benefit. For you there are many fruits in them, and of them you eat
23|20| – and (We produced) a tree (of olive) that comes forth from the (mount) Tur of Sinai, which grows with oil and with a dressing for those who eat.
23|21| And indeed there is a sure lesson in the cattle for you. We give you a drink from that which lies in their bellies, and for you there are many benefits in them, and of them you eat,
23|22| and on them and on the boats you are transported.
23|23| Surely, We sent NuH to his nation. So he said, .My people, worship Allah. You have no god whatsoever other than Him. So, do you not fear Allah?.
23|24| So, said the disbelieving chiefs from among his nation, .This (man) is nothing but a human being like you. He wishes to impose his superiority over you. Had Allah willed, He would have sent down angels (instead of him). We have not heard of such a thing among our forefathers.
23|25| He is none but a man suffering from madness; so wait for (what happens to) him until some time.
23|26| He said, .My Lord, help me, for they have rejected me.
23|27| So, We sent Our revelation to him, saying, .Make the ship under Our eyes and Our revelation. So, when Our command will come, and the oven will gush forth, take on its board a pair of two from each (species) along with your family, except those of them against whom the word has already come to pass. And do not speak to Me (in favor) of those who have done wrong. They are sure to be drowned.
23|28| So, when you and those with you are well seated in the ship, say, ‘Praise is for Allah who saved us from the wrongdoing people.‘
23|29| And say, ‘My Lord, make me land a blessed landing, and You are the best of those who bring (someone) to land‘.
23|30| Surely, there are signs in it, and We do always test (people).
23|31| Then after them We created another generation,
23|32| and sent among them a messenger from themselves (to convey the message): .Worship Allah; you have no god whatsoever other than Him. So do you not fear Allah?.
23|33| Then said the chiefs of his nation who were disbelievers and who denied facing the Hereafter and whom We made affluent in the worldly life, .This (man) is nothing but a human being. He eats from what you eat from, and drinks from what you drink.
23|34| If you obey a human like yourselves, then you will be absolute losers.
23|35| Does he promise you that, when you die and are turned into dust and bones, you are to be brought forth?
23|36| Far too improbable is what you are being promised.
23|37| There is nothing but our worldly life. We die and we live, and we are not to be raised again.
23|38| He is nothing but a man who has forged a lie against Allah, and we are not going to believe in him.
23|39| He said, .My Lord, help me, for they have rejected me.
23|40| He (Allah) said, .In a little while they will have to be remorseful.
23|41| So the Cry seized them according to the true (promise), and We turned them in to scum. So, away with the wrongdoing people.
23|42| Then, after them, We created another generation.
23|43| No community can go ahead of its appointed time, nor can they become late.
23|44| Thereafter, We sent Our messengers successively. Whenever its messenger came to a community, they rejected him. Then We made some of them follow others (in destruction) and turned them into tales (of history). So, away with a people who do not believe.
23|45| Thereafter, We sent Musa and his brother Harun with Our signs and a clear proof
23|46| towards Fir‘aun (Pharaoh) and his advisors. But they showed arrogance and they were haughty people.
23|47| So they said, .shall we believe in two humans who are like ourselves and whose people are serving us as slaves?.
23|48| Thus they rejected both of them and were among the destroyed.
23|49| And, of course, We gave Musa the Book, so that they may take the right path.
23|50| And We made the son of Maryam (Mary) and his mother a sign, and gave them shelter on a height, having a place of rest and running springs.
23|51| O messengers, eat from the good things, and act righteously. Of whatever you do, I am fully aware.
23|52| Surely, this is your creed, a single creed, and I am your Lord. So fear Me.
23|53| But they split up ways from one another (dividing themselves) into factions, each faction happy with what lies before it.
23|54| So leave them in their negligence for some time.
23|55| Do they think that by consistently providing them with wealth and children,
23|56| We are accelerating the (real) good things to them? The fact, however, is that they do not understand (the reality).
23|57| (Contrarily) those who are anxious out of awe of their Lord,
23|58| and those who believe in the verses of their Lord
23|59| and those who do not associate any partner to their Lord,
23|60| And those who give whatever they give, with their hearts full of fear that to their Lord they are to return
23|61| – those people are accelerating towards the (real) good things, and they are the foremost to attain them.
23|62| We do not place a burden on anyone except according to his ability. With Us there is a book which speaks with truth, and they shall not be wronged.
23|63| But their hearts are in ignorance about this, and they have deeds, other than that, which they are continuously doing.
23|64| Until when We will seize their affluent ones with punishment, they will suddenly start crying.
23|65| (Then it will be said to them,) .Do not cry today. You will not be helped by Us.
23|66| My verses used to be recited to you, but you used to turn back on your heels
23|67| in arrogance, making it a subject of tales at night, talking nonsense (about it).
23|68| Then, is it that they did not ponder over the Word (of Allah), or there has come to them something that did not come to their forefathers?
23|69| Or did they not recognize their messenger and therefore they denied him?
23|70| Or do they say, .He is suffering from madness?. No, but he has come to them with truth, but it is the truth that most of them dislike.
23|71| Had the truth followed their desires, the heavens and the earth and all those therein would have fallen in total disorder. However, We have brought to them their advice, but it is their advice that they are averse to.
23|72| Or is it that you (O Prophet) demand remuneration from them? But the remuneration from your Lord is best, and He is the best of all givers.
23|73| Surely you are inviting them to a straight path,
23|74| and those who do not believe in the Hereafter are surely the deviators from the Path.
23|75| And if We have mercy on them and remove whatever distress they have, they would still persist obstinately in their rebellion, wandering blindly (in disbelief).
23|76| We have already seized them with punishment, but they did not turn humble to their Lord, nor do they supplicate in humility,
23|77| until when We will open against them the door of a severe punishment, they will be taken aback in despair.
23|78| He is the One who created for you ears and eyes and hearts. Little you are grateful.
23|79| And He is the One who created you on the earth, and it is He unto whom you will be gathered together.
23|80| And He is the One who gives life and brings death, and it is He who controls the alternation of night and day. So, do you not understand?
23|81| But they say as the earlier people had said.
23|82| They said, .Is it that, when we will die and become dust and bones – is it that we will be raised again?
23|83| This is what has been promised to us and to our fathers before. It is nothing but the tales of the ancients.
23|84| Say, .Whose is the earth and all those therein if you have knowledge?.
23|85| They will say, .Allah‘s. Say, .Would you still pay no heed?
23|86| Say, .Who is the Lord of the seven heavens and the Lord of the Great Throne?.
23|87| They will say, .(All this belongs) to Allah. Say, .Would you still not fear Allah?.
23|88| Say, .Who is the One in whose hand lies the kingdom of every thing and who gives protection, and no protection can be given against him, if you have knowledge?.
23|89| They will say, .(All this belongs) to Allah. Say, .Then by which magic are you drawn crazy?.
23|90| The fact is that We have brought to them The Truth, and they are absolute liars.
23|91| Allah has not taken a son to Himself, nor was there any god with Him. Had there been so, every god would have taken away what he created, and each one of them would have been aggressive against the other. Pure is Allah from what they describe.
23|92| He is the Knower of the hidden and the manifest. So, He is far higher than their ascribing of partners to Him.
23|93| (O prophet) say (in prayer), .O my Lord, if You are to show me (in my life) that (punishment) which they (the infidels) are threatened with,
23|94| then, my Lord, do not place me among the wrongdoing people.
23|95| And of course, We do have the power to show you that with which We have threatened them.
23|96| Repel evil with that which is best. We are well aware of what they describe.
23|97| And say, .My Lord, I seek refuge in You from the strokes of the satans (devils),
23|98| and I seek refuge in You, my Lord, even from their coming near me.
23|99| (The infidels go on doing their misdeeds) until when death comes to one of them, he will say, .My Lord send me back,
23|100| so that I may act righteously in that (world) which I have left behind. Never! It is simply a word he utters, and in front of such people there is a barrier till the day when they will be resurrected.
23|101| Thereafter, when the Sur (the trumpet) is blown, no ties of kinship will remain between them any more, nor will they inquire about one another.
23|102| So, the one whose scales (of good deeds) turn out to be heavy, then such people are the successful ones,
23|103| and the one whose scales turn out to be light, then such people are the ones who harmed their own selves; in Jahannam (Hell) they are to remain for ever.
23|104| Fire will scorch their faces, and they will be disfigured therein.
23|105| (It will be said to such people), .Were My verses not used to be recited to you and you used to reject them?.
23|106| They will say, .Our Lord, our wretchedness prevailed over us, and we were a people wandering astray.
23|107| Our Lord, get us out from here; if we do this again, then of course, we will be transgressors.
23|108| He (Allah) will say, .Stay in it, humiliated, and do not speak to Me.
23|109| There was indeed a group of My servants who used to say, ‘Our Lord, we adhere to the (true) faith, so forgive us and have mercy upon us, and you are the best of all the merciful.‘
23|110| But you made fun of them, so much so that they caused you to forget My remembrance, and you used to laugh at them.
23|111| Today I have so recompensed them for their observing patience that they are the triumphant.
23|112| He (Allah) will say (to unbelievers), .How long did you stay on the earth by number of years?.
23|113| They will say, .We stayed for a day or for a part of a day. So, ask those (angels) who have (exact) calculation.
23|114| He will say, .You did not stay but for a little. Would that you had understood (this at that time)!
23|115| So did you think that We created you for nothing, and that you will not be brought back to Us?.
23|116| So, High above all is Allah, the King, the True. There is no god but He, the Lord of the Noble Throne.
23|117| And whoever invokes another god with Allah, while he has no proof for it, his reckoning is only with his Lord. Surely, the infidels will not achieve success.
23|118| And say (O prophet) .My Lord, grant pardon and have mercy, for you are the best of all the merciful.
24|1| This is a Surah We have sent down and enjoined, and sent down in it clear signs, so that you may receive the advice.
24|2| The fornicating woman and the fornicating man, flog each one of them with one hundred stripes. No pity for them should prevail upon you in the matter of Allah‘s religion, if you really believe in Allah and the Last Day; and a group of believers must witness their punishment.
24|3| A man who is fornicator does not (like to) marry but a woman who is a fornicator or a polytheist; and a woman who is a fornicator does not (like to) marry but a man who is a fornicator or a polytheist. And this (i.e. preferring to marry such spouses) has been prohibited for the believers.
24|4| Those who accuse the chaste women (of fornication), but they do not produce four witnesses, flog them with eighty stripes and do not accept their any evidence any more. They are the sinners,
24|5| except those who repent afterwards and mend their ways; then, Allah is All-Forgiving, Very-Merciful.
24|6| Those who accuse their wives (of adultery) while they have no witnesses except their own selves, then the evidence of one of them would be to swear four oaths by Allah that he is truthful,
24|7| and the fifth (oath) that Allah‘s curse be on him if he is one of the liars.
24|8| And it will remove the punishment from the woman if she swears four oaths by Allah that he (the accuser husband) is certainly one of the liars,
24|9| and the fifth (oath) that Allah‘s wrath be on her if he is one of the truthful.
24|10| Had it not been for the grace of Allah upon you, and His mercy, and (had it not been) that Allah is Most-Relenting, All-Wise, (you would have faced severe hardships).
24|11| Those who have come up with the false imputation are a gang among you. Do not think it is bad for you; rather, it is good for you. Every one of them is liable for what he earned of the sin. And the one who played the major role in it, for him there is a mighty punishment.
24|12| Why - when you (O believers) heard of it – did the believing men and the believing women not think well about their own selves, and (why did they not) say, .This is a manifest lie.
24|13| Why did they (the accusers) not bring four witnesses to prove this? So, as they did not bring the witnesses, they are the liars in the sight of Allah.
24|14| Had it not been for the grace of Allah upon you, and His mercy in this world and in the Hereafter, a severe punishment would have reached you for what you indulged in -
24|15| when you were welcoming it with your tongues, and were saying with your mouths something of which you had no knowledge, and were taking it as a trivial matter, while in the sight of Allah it was grave.
24|16| And why, when you heard of it, did you not say, .It is not for us to speak about this. Pure are You (O Allah). This is a terrible calumny.
24|17| Allah admonishes you never to repeat something like this, if you are believers.
24|18| Allah makes the signs clear to you, and Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise.
24|19| Surely, those who like that lewdness spreads among the believers, for them there is painful punishment in this world and the Hereafter. Allah knows, and you do not know.
24|20| Had it not been for the grace of Allah upon you, and His mercy, and that Allah is Very-Kind, Very-Merciful (you would have been destroyed).
24|21| O you who believe, do not follow the footsteps of Satan. Whoever follows the footsteps of Satan, (should know that) he orders (one to commit) shameful acts and evil deeds. Had it not been for the grace of Allah upon you, and His mercy, not a single person from you would have ever attained purity. But Allah purifies whomsoever He wills. Allah is All-Hearing, All-Knowing.
24|22| The men of grace and wealth among you should not swear against giving (their charitable gifts) to the kinsmen and the poor and to those who have migrated in the way of Allah, and they should forgive and forego. Do you not like that Allah forgives you? Allah is Most-Forgiving, Very- Merciful.
24|23| Surely, those who level a false charge against the chaste, natve and believing women are cursed in this world and the Hereafter, and for them there is a mighty punishment
24|24| on the Day when their tongues, their hands and their legs will testify against themselves of what they used to do.
24|25| On that day Allah will give them their rightful recompense in full, and they will know that Allah is the Very Truth who makes all things manifest.
24|26| Vile women are for vile men, and vile men are for vile women; and good women are for good men, and good men are for good women. Those are free from what they (the accusers) say. For them there is forgiveness, and a graceful provision.
24|27| O you who believe, do not enter any houses, other than your own houses unless you seek permission and greet their inmates with Salam . That is good for you, so that you may be heedful.
24|28| We did not send you (O prophet,) but to the entire mankind, as a bearer of good news and as a warner, but most people do not know.
24|29| There is no sin on you if you enter uninhabited houses in which you have rightful benefit. Allah knows what you reveal and what you conceal.
24|30| Tell the believing men that they must lower their gazes and guard their private parts; it is more decent for them. Surely Allah is All-Aware of what they do.
24|31| And tell the believing women that they must lower their gazes and guard their private parts, and must not expose their adornment, except that which appears thereof, and must wrap their bosoms with their shawls, and must not expose their adornment, except to their husbands or their fathers or the fathers of their husbands, or to their sons or the sons of their husbands, or to their brothers or the sons of their brothers or the sons of their sisters, or to their women, or to those owned by their right hands, or male attendants having no (sexual) urge, or to the children who are not yet conscious of the shames of women. And let them not stamp their feet in a way that the adornment they conceal is known. And repent to Allah O believers, all of you, so that you may achieve success.
24|32| Arrange the marriage of the spouseless among you, and the capable from among your bondmen and bondwomen. If they are poor, Allah will enrich them out of His grace. Allah is All-Encompassing, All-Knowing.
24|33| And those who cannot afford marriage should keep themselves chaste until Allah enriches them out of His grace. And those of your slaves who wish to enter the contract of Kitabah (emancipation by paying money), contract Kitabah with them, if you recognize some good in them. And give them out of the wealth of Allah that He has given to you. And do not compel your maids to prostitution – if they wish to observe chastity – in order that you may seek the temporary benefit of the worldly life. If one compels them, then after their being compelled, Allah is Most- Forgiving, Very-Merciful.
24|34| Indeed We have sent down to you enlightening verses, and an exemplary description of those who passed away before you, and a good counsel for the God-fearing.
24|35| Allah is the Light of the heavens and the earth. The example of His light is that of a niche, in which there is a lamp; the lamp is in a glass – the glass looks like a brilliant star – it is lit by (the oil of) a blessed tree, the olive, which is neither eastern, nor western. Its oil is about to emit light even though the fire has not touched it – (it is) light upon light. Allah guides to His light whomsoever He wills; Allah describes examples for the people, and Allah knows everything well.
24|36| (The guided people worship Allah) in the houses that Allah has permitted to be raised, and where His name is recounted and His purity is pronounced, in the morning and in the evening,
24|37| by the men whom no trade or sale makes neglectful of the remembrance of Allah, nor from establishing Salah and paying Zakah ; they are fearful of a day in which the hearts and the eyes will be over-turned.
24|38| The fate (of such people) is that Allah will reward them for the best deeds they did, and will give them more out of His grace. Allah gives whom He wills without counting.
24|39| As for those who disbelieve, their deeds are like a mirage in a desert plain, which a thirsty person deems to be water, until when he comes to it, he finds it nothing, and finds (the decree of) Allah with him, so He pays him his account in full. Allah is swift at reckoning.
24|40| Or (their deeds) are like layers of darkness in a vast deep sea overwhelmed by a wave, above which there is another wave, above which there are clouds – layers of darkness, one above the other. When one puts forth his hand, he can hardly see it; and the one to whom Allah does not give light can have no light at all.
24|41| Did you not realize that purity of Allah is proclaimed by all those in the heavens and the earth, and by the birds with their wings spread out? Everyone knows one‘s own (way of) praying (to Allah) and one‘s own (way of) proclaiming Allah‘s purity. And Allah knows well what they do.
24|42| To Allah belongs the Kingdom of the heavens and the earth, and towards Allah is the final return.
24|43| Do you not realize that Allah drives the clouds, then joins them together, then turns them into a heap? Then you see the rain coming out from their midst. He sends down from the sky mountains (of clouds) having hail in them, then He afflicts with it whomsoever He wills and turns it away from whomsoever He wills. The flash of its lightning seems to snatch away the eyes.
24|44| Allah alternates the night and the day. Surely, in that there is a lesson for those who have eyes to see.
24|45| Allah has created every moving creature from water. So, some of them move on their bellies; and some of them move on two legs, and some of them move on four. Allah creates what He wills. Surely, Allah is powerful over everything.
24|46| We have surely sent down enlightening verses, and Allah guides whom He wills to the straight path.
24|47| They say, .We have believed in Allah and in the messenger, and have adopted obedience., then a group from them goes back after all this. Those are no believers.
24|48| When they are summoned to Allah and His messenger that he (the messenger) may judge between them, in no time a group of them turns averse.
24|49| And if the right is theirs, they would come to him as (if they are) submissive ones.
24|50| Is there a malady in their hearts or do they have doubt or do they fear that Allah and His messenger will do injustice to them? Rather they themselves are the unjust.
24|51| The only reply of the (true) believers, when they are summoned to Allah and His messenger that he (the messenger) may judge between them, is that they say, .We listen and obey. Such people are the successful.
24|52| Whoever obeys Allah and His messenger and has awe of Him and observes Taqwa for His sake, then such people are the victorious.
24|53| And they (the hypocrites) swear by Allah on forceful oaths that if you (O prophet) order them, they will certainly leave (their homes for Jihad ). Say, .do not swear, (the reality of your) obedience is known. Indeed Allah is fully aware of what you do.
24|54| Say, .Obey Allah and obey the messenger. But if you turn away, then on him (the messenger) lies (the responsibility of) what he is burdened with, and on you lies (the responsibility of) what you are burdened with. And if you obey him, you will get the right path. The duty of the Messenger is no more than to convey the message clearly.
24|55| Allah has promised those of you who believe and do good deeds that He will certainly make them (His) vicegerents in the land, as He made those before them, and will certainly establish for them their religion which He has chosen for them, and will certainly give them peace in place of fear in which they were before; (provided that) they worship Me, ascribing no partner to Me. And those who turn infidel after that are the transgressors.
24|56| Establish Salah and pay Zakah and obey the messenger, so that you may be favored with mercy.
24|57| Never think that the disbelievers are (able) to frustrate (Allah‘s plan) on the earth. Their abode is the Fire. Indeed it is an evil terminus.
24|58| O you who believe, the slaves owned by you, and those of you who have not reached puberty, must seek your permission (to see you) at three times: before the prayer of Fajr, and when you take off your clothes at noon, and after the prayer of ‘Isha‘. These are three times of privacy for you. There is no harm, neither to you nor to them, after these (three times). They are your frequent visitors, as some of you are (frequent visitors) of the others. This is how Allah explains the verses to you. Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise.
24|59| When the children from among you reach puberty, they must seek permission, as the permission is sought by those before them. This is how Allah explains His verses to you. Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise.
24|60| And those old women who have no hope for marriage, there is no sin on them, if they take off their (extra) clothes while they do not display their adornment. Still, that they refrain (even from this) is better for them. Allah is All-Hearing, All-Knowing.
24|61| There is no blame on a blind person, nor is there any blame on any lame one, nor is there any blame on a sick person, nor on yourselves in that you eat (something) from your own homes or from the homes of your fathers or the homes of your mothers or the homes of your brothers or the homes of your sisters or the homes of your paternal uncles, or the homes of your paternal aunts or the homes of your maternal uncles or the homes of your maternal aunts or from the places the keys of which you have under your control, or from (the home of) your friend. There is no sin on you if you eat together or separately. So when you enter homes, greet one another with Salam , a greeting prescribed by Allah, which is blessed, pleasant. This is how Allah explains the verses to you, so that you may understand.
24|62| The believers are only those who believe in Allah and His messenger and who, when they are with him for a collective matter, do not leave unless they seek his permission. Surely, those who seek your permission are the ones who believe in Allah and His messenger. So, if they seek permission from you for some business of theirs, give permission to whom you wish from among them, and pray to Allah for their forgiveness. Surely, Allah is Most-Forgiving, Very-Merciful.
24|63| Do not take the call of the messenger among you as a call of one of you to another. Allah definitely knows those of you who sneak out hiding themselves under the cover of others. So, those who violate his (messenger‘s) order must beware, lest they are visited by a trial or they are visited by a painful punishment.
24|64| Remember! To Allah belongs all that is there in the heavens and the earth. He knows the condition in which you are at present; and the Day on which they will be returned to Him, He will tell them what they did. Allah is fully aware of everything.
25|1| Glorious is the One who has revealed the Criterion to His servant, so that he may be a warner to all the worlds,
25|2| the One to whom belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth, and who did neither have a son, nor is there any partner to him in the Kingdom, and who has created everything and designed it in a perfect measure.
25|3| Yet they have adopted other gods, beside Him, who do not create any thing, as they themselves are created, and they possess no power to cause harm or benefit even to themselves, nor do they have any control over death or life or resurrection.
25|4| The disbelievers said, .This is nothing but a lie he (the messenger) has fabricated and some other people have helped him in it. Thus they came up with sheer injustice and falsehood.
25|5| And they said, .(These are) the tales of the ancients he (the messenger) has caused to be written, and they are read out to him at morn and eve.
25|6| Say, .It is sent down by the One who knows the secret in the heavens and the earth. Indeed He is Most-Forgiving, Very-Merciful.
25|7| They said, .What sort of messenger is this who eats food and walks in the markets? Why is it that an angel has not been sent down to him who would have been a warner along with him.
25|8| Or a treasure should have been thrown down to him, or he should have a garden to eat from it?. And the transgressors said (to the believers,) .You are following none but a bewitched man.
25|9| See how they coined similes for you, so they have gone astray and cannot find a way.
25|10| Glorious is the One who, if He so wills, would give you better than that - gardens beneath which rivers flow, and would give you palaces.
25|11| But they have disbelieved the Hour (the Day of Judgment) and for those who disbelieve the Hour, We have prepared a flaming fire.
25|12| When it will see them from a distant place, they will hear (the sounds of) its raging and breathing,
25|13| and when they will be thrown into a narrow place therein, while they will be chained together, they will call for death.
25|14| (Then it will be said to them,) .Do not call for one death today, but call for many a death.
25|15| Say, .Is that better or the eternal paradise the God-fearing are promised?. It will be a reward for them and a final abode.
25|16| For them there will be whatever they wish, while they will be eternal. This is a promise undertaken by your Lord, (the fulfillment of) which is worth praying for.
25|17| (Remember) the Day when He will gather them and what they used to worship beside Allah and will say (to the latter ones), .Did you mislead these My servants, or did they themselves lose the way?.
25|18| They will say, .Pure are You. It was not for us to adopt other guardians than You. Instead, You gave them and their fathers (worldly) benefits till they forgot the advice, and became a ruined people.
25|19| Thus they will refute you in what you say, and you will not be able to repulse (the punishment,) or to receive help. Whoever commits injustice from among you, We will make him taste a painful punishment.
25|20| We did not send any messengers before you (O prophet,) but all of them used to eat food and walk in the markets. And We have made some of you a test for some others. Would you observe patience? And your Lord is Ever-seeing.
25|21| Said those who do not even expect to meet Us, .Why the angels are not sent down to us or why do we not see our Lord?. Indeed they think too highly of themselves, and have gone too far in rebellion.
25|22| The Day they will see the angels, there will be no good news for the sinners that day, and they will say, .(We need) a shelter, fully protected!.
25|23| And We will proceed to whatever deeds they did, and will turn them into scattered dust.
25|24| The people of Paradise, on that day, will be the best in (terms of their) abode and best in (terms of their) resting-place.
25|25| The Day the sky will break open with a cloud, and the angels will be sent down in a majestic descent,
25|26| the Kingdom on that day will be for the RaHman (the All-Merciful, Allah), and it will be a difficult day for the disbelievers.
25|27| And (Be mindful of) the Day the wrongdoer will bite his hands saying, .Would that I had taken a path along with the messenger!
25|28| Woe to me! Would that I had not taken so-and-so for my friend!
25|29| Indeed he led me astray from the advice after it had come to me. And the Satan is man‘s betrayer.
25|30| And the messenger will say, .O my Lord, my people had taken this Qur‘an as deserted.
25|31| In a similar way We made for every prophet an enemy from among the sinners, but your Lord suffices as a guide and as a supporter.
25|32| Said those who disbelieved, .Why has the Qur‘an not been revealed to him all at once?. (It has been sent down) in this way (i.e. in parts) so that We make your heart firm, and We revealed it little by little.
25|33| They bring to you no hypothesis, but We bring to you the correct position and (an answer) better explained.
25|34| Those who will be driven on their faces to Hell - they are the worst in situation and far more astray from the path.
25|35| Surely We gave Musa the Book, and appointed his brother Harun as a minister with him.
25|36| So we said, .Go, both of you, to the people who have rejected Our signs. Then We annihilated them totally.
25|37| As for the people of NuH, when they rejected the messengers, We drowned them and made them an example for mankind, and We have prepared a painful punishment for the transgressors.
25|38| And (We annihilated also the peoples of) ‘Ad and Thamud and the people of Rass, and many generations in between them.
25|39| To each (of them) We cited examples, and each of them We brought to utter ruin.
25|40| Indeed they (the pagans of Makkah) have passed by the town that was afflicted by an evil rain sent down to it. So, have they not been seeing it? Rather, they do not believe in Resurrection.
25|41| When they see you, they take you only as a laughing stock, (saying) .Is this the man whom Allah has sent as a messenger?
25|42| He would have almost led us astray from our gods, had we not been so firm towards them. They will know when they will see the punishment, who is farther astray in his way.
25|43| Tell me about the one who has taken his desire as his god, would you then, become a guardian for him?
25|44| Or do you think that most of them listen or understand? They are but like cattle. Rather, they are even farther astray from the (right) way.
25|45| Have you not observed how your Lord stretched out the shadow (of the sun)? If He so willed, He would have made it stand still. Then We made the sun an indicator for it.
25|46| Then We pulled it toward Us in a gradual manner.
25|47| He is the One who has made the night an apparel for you, and the sleep a means of rest, and has made the day a means of revival.
25|48| And He is the One who has sent the winds conveying good news before His mercy, and We have sent down purifying water from the heavens,
25|49| so that We revive a dead land therewith, and give drink to the many cattle and humans created by Us.
25|50| And We have distributed it (the water) among them, so that they may take lesson. Yet most of the people refused all but ungratefulness.
25|51| Had We so willed, We would have sent a (separate) warner for every town, (but, according to Our wisdom, We have sent Muhammad as a prophet for all these towns)
25|52| So, (O Prophet,) do not obey the infidels, and strive against them with it (the Qur‘an), in utmost endeavor.
25|53| He is the One who joined the two seas, so as this is sweet, very sweet, and this is bitter, very bitter, and made between them a buffer and an insurmountable barrier.
25|54| And He is the One who created man from water, then made of him relations created by lineage and relations created by marriage. Your Lord is All-Powerful.
25|55| They worship, instead of Allah, what can neither give them any benefit nor can cause them any harm. The disbeliever is always a supporter (of Satan) against his Lord.
25|56| We did not send you but as a bearer of good news and as a warner.
25|57| Say, .I do not demand from you any return, except that one should adopt the (proper) way to his Lord, if he so wills.
25|58| And place your trust in the Ever-Living who cannot die, and proclaim His purity along with His praise. Enough is He to be aware of the sins of His servants,
25|59| the One who created in six days the heavens and the earth and whatever lies between them, then He positioned Himself on the Throne. (He is) the RaHman (the All-Merciful, Allah). So ask about Him someone who knows.
25|60| And when it is said to them, .Prostrate yourselves to the RaHman (the All-Merciful, Allah),. they say .What is RaHman? Shall we prostrate ourselves to the one to whom you direct us?. And it increases nothing in them except aversion.
25|61| Glorious is the One who made stellar formations in the sky, and placed therein a lamp (i.e. the sun) and a bright moon.
25|62| And He is the One who made the day and the night following each other, for the one who wishes to be mindful or wishes to show gratitude.
25|63| The servants of the RaHman (the All-Merciful, Allah) are those who walk on the earth humbly, and when the ignorant people speak to them, they reply peacefully,
25|64| and those who pass the night prostrating themselves and standing before their Lord,
25|65| and those who say, .Our Lord, avert from us the punishment of Jahannam (the Hell); indeed, its punishment is a persisting affliction.
25|66| Indeed, it is evil as an abode and a place to dwell in
25|67| - and those who, when they spend, are neither extravagant nor miserly, and it (i.e. their spending) is moderate in between (the two extremes,)
25|68| - and those who do not invoke any other god along with Allah, and do not kill a person whom Allah has given sanctity, except rightfully, nor do they fornicate; and whoever does it, shall face the recompense of his sin,
25|69| the punishment will be doubled for him, and he will remain there disdained, for ever,
25|70| except the one who repents and believes and does good deeds, then Allah will replace the evils of such people by good deeds, and Allah is Most- Forgiving, Very-Merciful.
25|71| Whoever repents and does righteous deeds turns to Allah truly
25|72| — and those who do not witness falsehood, and when they pass by the absurd things, Pass by them with dignity,
25|73| and those who, when they are reminded of the verses of their Lord, do not fall at them as deaf and blind ones,
25|74| - and those who say, .Our Lord, Give us, from our spouses and our children, comfort of eyes, and make us heads of the God-fearing.
25|75| Such people will be rewarded with the high place - because they observed patience - and will be received therein with prayers of their eternal life and peace,
25|76| living in it (the Paradise) for ever. It is best as an abode and as a place to dwell in.
25|77| Say (O Prophet), .My Lord will never care about you, if you will not invoke Him. Now since you rejected (the truth), the punishment will be inseparable from you.
26|1| Ta sin mim.
26|2| These are the verses of the manifest Book.
26|3| (O Prophet,) perhaps you are going to let yourself collapse in grief because they do not believe.
26|4| If We so will, We can send down to them a sign from the sky, for which their necks will stay bent in submission.
26|5| Never a new message comes to them from the RaHman (the All-Merciful Allah), but they become averse to it.
26|6| Thus they rejected (the Truth); well, soon will come to them the real descriptions of what they used to ridicule.
26|7| Have they not looked at the earth, how many of the noble pairs (of vegetation) We have caused to grow in it?
26|8| Surely, in this there is a sign, but most of them are not believers,
26|9| and indeed your Lord is the Mighty, the Merciful.
26|10| (Remember) when your Lord called Musa saying, .Go to the transgressing people,
26|11| the people of Pharaoh. Do they not fear Allah?.
26|12| He (Musa) said, .My Lord, I fear that they will reject me.
26|13| My heart gets straitened, and my tongue is not fluent; so send for Harun.
26|14| Moreover, they have (leveled) a charge of offence against me, and I fear they will kill me;.
26|15| He (Allah) said, .Never! (They will not be able to kill you.) So go, both of you, with Our signs. We are with you, listening (to the conversation you will have with him.)
26|16| So go, both of you, to Pharaoh and say, ‘We both are messengers of the Lord of all the worlds,
26|17| (sent with the message) that you must send the children of Isra‘il with us‘.
26|18| He (Pharaoh) said, .Did we not nourish you among us as a child? And you remained amidst us for years,
26|19| and you did the blunder you did; still you are ungrateful.
26|20| He said, .I did that at a time when I was mistaken.
26|21| Then I fled away from you when I feared you. Thereafter my Lord granted wisdom to me, and made me one of the messengers.
26|22| As for the favor with which you are obliging me, it is that you have enslaved the children of Isra‘il.
26|23| Pharaoh said, .What is the Lord of the worlds?.
26|24| He (Musa) said, .Lord of the heavens and the earth and whatever there is between them, if you are to believe.
26|25| He (The Pharaoh) said to those around him, .Are you not hearing?.
26|26| He (Musa) said, .Your Lord and the Lord of your early forefathers.
26|27| He (Pharaoh) said, .Your messenger who is sent to you is a mad man indeed.
26|28| He (Musa) said, .Lord of the East and the West and whatever lies between them, if you are to understand.
26|29| He (Pharaoh) said, .If you adopt a God other than me, I will certainly put you to prison.
26|30| He (Musa) said .Will you (do this) even if I bring to you something evident?.
26|31| He said, .Then bring it, if you are truthful.
26|32| So, he threw down his staff, and in no time it was a serpent, clearly visible,
26|33| and he drew out his hand, and right then it was a white light to the onlookers.
26|34| He (Pharaoh) said to the chiefs around him .This man is certainly an expert sorcerer.
26|35| He wants to expel you from your land with his sorcery. So what do you suggest?.
26|36| They said, .Leave him and his brother alone for some time, and send heralds to the cities,
26|37| so that they bring to you every highly expert sorcerer.
26|38| So the sorcerers were assembled for the appointed time of a known day,
26|39| and it was said to the people, .Would you assemble,
26|40| so that we may follow the sorcerers if they are victorious?.
26|41| So, when the sorcerers came, they said to Pharaoh, .Will there be a sure reward for us, if we are the victorious?.
26|42| He said, .Yes, and of course, you will then be among the closer ones.
26|43| Musa said to them, .Throw you down what you are to throw.
26|44| So they threw down their ropes and their staffs and said, .By the majesty of Pharaoh, we will be the triumphant for sure.
26|45| Then Musa threw down his staff, and in no time it started swallowing the falsehood they invented.
26|46| So the sorcerers were made (by the truth they saw) to fall down in prostration.
26|47| They said, .We have believed in the Lord of the worlds,
26|48| the Lord of Musa and Harun.
26|49| He (Pharaoh) said, .You have believed in him before I permit you. Surely, he (Musa) is the chief of you all, who has taught you sorcery. So you will soon know (your fate). I will cut off your hands and feet from different sides, and will crucify you all together.
26|50| They said, .There is no harm. We will return to our Lord.
26|51| We really hope that our Lord will forgive us our faults, as we are the first of the believers.
26|52| And We revealed to Musa saying, .Make My servants travel at night. You will be pursued.
26|53| So Pharaoh sent into the cities (his) men to muster (people)
26|54| saying, .These are a small band,
26|55| and indeed they are enraging us,
26|56| and we are a host, well-armed.
26|57| Thus We expelled them (i.e. the people of Pharaoh) from gardens and springs,
26|58| and from treasures and a noble abode.
26|59| Thus it was. And We made the children of Isra‘il inherit all such things.
26|60| So they (the people of Pharaoh) pursued them (the people of Musa) at the time of sunrise.
26|61| And when the two hosts saw each other, the companions of Musa said, .Surely we are overtaken.
26|62| He said, .Never! Indeed with me is my Lord. He will guide me.
26|63| So We revealed to Musa saying, .Strike the sea with your staff. So it was severed apart, and each part became like a big mountain.
26|64| Then We brought others close to that place.
26|65| And We saved Musa and all those with him.
26|66| Then we drowned the others.
26|67| Surely, in this there is a sign, but most of them are not believers,
26|68| and indeed your Lord is the Mighty, the Merciful.
26|69| And recite before them the narrative of Ibrahim,
26|70| when he said to his father and to his people, .What do you worship?.
26|71| They said, .We worship idols, and stay devoted to them.
26|72| He said, .Do they listen to you when you call (them)
26|73| or do they bring benefit to you or harm?.
26|74| They said, .No, but we have found our fathers doing like this.
26|75| He said, .Have you then ever considered what you have been worshipping,
26|76| you and your ancient fathers,
26|77| they all are an enemy to me, except the Lord of the worlds,
26|78| who created me, and who guides me,
26|79| and Who feeds me and gives me drink,
26|80| and when I become sick, He heals me,
26|81| and who will make me die, then will give me life,
26|82| and who, I hope, will forgive my fault on the Day of Retribution.
26|83| O my Lord, give me wisdom, and make me join the righteous,
26|84| and destine for me a truthful description among the next generations,
26|85| and make me among those who will inherit the Garden of Bliss,
26|86| and forgive my father. Indeed he was one of those who went astray,
26|87| and do not put me to disgrace on the Day when all will be raised to life,
26|88| the Day when neither wealth will be of any use (to any one) nor sons,
26|89| except to him who will come to Allah with a sound heart,
26|90| and the Paradise will be brought near to the God-fearing
26|91| and the Hell will be fully uncovered for the perverse,
26|92| and it will be said to them, ‘Where is that which you used to worship
26|93| beside Allah? Can they help you or help themselves?‘
26|94| So they (their false gods) will be thrown on their faces into it - they and the erring people
26|95| and the entire army of Iblis (Satan), all together.
26|96| They will say when they will be quarreling there with each other,
26|97| #NAME?
26|98| when we used to equate you with the Lord of the worlds,
26|99| and it is only the sinners who misguided us.
26|100| Now we have neither any intercessors
26|101| nor any true friend.
26|102| Would that we have a chance to return whereby we may join the believers!‘.
26|103| Surely, in this there is a sign, but most of them are not believers,
26|104| and indeed your Lord is the Mighty, the Merciful.
26|105| The people of NuH rejected the messengers
26|106| when their brother NuH said to them, .Do you not fear Allah?
26|107| I am an honest messenger for you.
26|108| So, fear Allah and obey me.
26|109| I do not claim from you any reward for it. My reward is with none but with the Lord of the worlds;
26|110| so, fear Allah and obey me.
26|111| They said, .Shall we believe in you while you are followed by the lowest people?.
26|112| He said, .I do not know about what they do;
26|113| their account is with none but with my Lord, if you have sense.
26|114| And I am not the one who would drive the believers away;
26|115| I am no more than a plain warner.
26|116| They said, .Should you not stop, O NuH, you will surely be stoned.
26|117| He said, .My Lord, my people have rejected me.
26|118| So judge between me and them with an open verdict, and save me and all the believers who are with me.
26|119| So We saved him and those with him in the Ark that was fully occupied.
26|120| Then We drowned, after that, all the remaining.
26|121| Surely, in this there is a sign, but most of them are not believers
26|122| and indeed your Lord is the Mighty, the Very-Merciful.
26|123| The (people of) ‘Ad rejected the messengers
26|124| when their brother Hud said to them, .Do you not fear Allah?
26|125| I am an honest messenger for you,
26|126| so fear Allah and obey me.
26|127| I do not claim from you any reward for it. My reward is with none but with the Lord of the worlds.
26|128| Do you erect on every height a monument, having no sound purpose,
26|129| and take the objects of architecture as if you are going to live forever,
26|130| and when you seize (someone) you seize as tyrants?
26|131| So fear Allah and obey me.
26|132| And fear the One who has supported you with what you know.
26|133| He has supported you with cattle and sons,
26|134| and with gardens and springs.
26|135| In fact I fear for you the punishment of a horrible day.
26|136| They said, .It is all equal for us, whether you give us advice or you do not become one of the advisors.
26|137| This is nothing but the practice of the ancient,
26|138| and we are not going to be punished.
26|139| Thus they rejected him, so We destroyed them. Surely, in this there is a sign, but most of them are not believers,
26|140| and indeed your Lord is the Mighty, the Merciful.
26|141| The (people of) Thamud rejected the messengers
26|142| when their brother SaliH said to them, .Do you not fear Allah?
26|143| I am an honest messenger for you.
26|144| So, fear Allah and obey me.
26|145| I do not claim from you any reward for it. My reward is with none but with the Lord of the worlds.
26|146| Will you be left secure in whatever is here,
26|147| in gardens and springs,
26|148| and in farms and date-palms, the spathes of which are interwoven?
26|149| You hew out houses from the hills with pride.
26|150| So fear Allah and obey me,
26|151| and do not obey the order of the transgressors
26|152| who make mischief on the land and who do not set things right.
26|153| They said, .You are merely one of those bewitched.
26|154| You are nothing but a human like us. So, bring a sign if you are one of the truthful.
26|155| He said, .This is a she-camel. She has a share of water, and you have a share of water on a specified day.
26|156| So do not touch her with evil (intent), lest you should be seized by a painful punishment.
26|157| But they killed her, then they became remorseful,
26|158| and the punishment seized them. Surely, in this there is a sign, but most of them are not believers,
26|159| and indeed your Lord is the Mighty, the Merciful.
26|160| The people of LuT rejected the messengers
26|161| when their brother LuT said to them, .Do you not fear Allah?
26|162| I am an honest messenger for you.
26|163| So fear Allah and obey me.
26|164| I do not claim from you any reward for it. My reward is with none but with the Lord of the worlds.
26|165| Do you go to the males (for having sex) out of the whole universe,
26|166| and leave your wives whom your Lord has created for you? Indeed you are a people who cross (all) limits.
26|167| They said, .If you do not stop O LuT, you shall be included among the outcast.
26|168| He said .Indeed, I am annoyed with your act.
26|169| My Lord, save me and my family from what they do.
26|170| So We saved him and his family, all of them
26|171| except an old woman among those who remained behind.
26|172| Then We destroyed the others,
26|173| and subjected them to a terrible rain. So evil was the rain of those who were warned.
26|174| Surely, in this there is a sign, but most of them are not believers,
26|175| and indeed your Lord is the Mighty, the Merciful.
26|176| The people of Aaikah rejected the messengers
26|177| when Shu‘aib said to them, .Do you not fear Allah?
26|178| I am an honest messenger for you.
26|179| So fear Allah and obey me.
26|180| And I do not claim from you any reward for it; my reward is with none but with the Lord of the worlds.
26|181| Give full measure, and do not be among those who bring loss to others.
26|182| Weigh with an even balance,
26|183| and do not make people short of their things, and do not spread disorder in the land as mischief-makers,
26|184| and be fearful of the One who created you and the former generations.
26|185| They said, .You are but one of the bewitched men.
26|186| You are no more than a human like us, and in fact we consider you to be one of the liars.
26|187| So cause a piece from the sky to fall down upon us, if you are one of the truthful.
26|188| He said, .My Lord knows well what you do.
26|189| Thus they rejected him, so they were seized by the torment of the Day of Canopy. Indeed it was the punishment of a terrible day.
26|190| Surely, in this there is a sign, but most of them are not believers,
26|191| and indeed your Lord is the Mighty, the Merciful.
26|192| This (Qur‘an) is the revelation of the Lord of the worlds.
26|193| The Trusted Spirit has brought it down
26|194| upon your heart, so that you become one of the warners
26|195| in plain Arabic language.
26|196| And of course, it is (mentioned) in the Scriptures of the former people.
26|197| Is it not a proof for them that the knowledgeable of the children of Isra‘il recognize him (the prophet)?
26|198| Even if We had revealed it to a Non-Arab,
26|199| and he had recited it to them, they would not have believed in it.
26|200| This is how We have made it pass through the hearts of the sinners.
26|201| They will not believe in it until they will see the painful punishment
26|202| and it will come to them suddenly while they will not be anticipating (it),
26|203| and (then) they will say, .Is it (possible) that we are given some respite?.
26|204| Is it then Our punishment that they are trying to hasten up?
26|205| So tell me, if We give them enjoyment for years,
26|206| then comes to them what they are warned of,
26|207| what help can they receive from the comforts they were given to enjoy?
26|208| We did not destroy any town unless it has had warners
26|209| to give advice, and We have never been unjust.
26|210| And this (Qur‘an) is not brought down by devils.
26|211| It neither suits them, nor are they able to (do this).
26|212| In fact, they are kept far away from hearing (it at the time of revelation).
26|213| So do not invoke any other god along with Allah, otherwise you will be among those who are to be punished.
26|214| And warn the nearest people of your clan,
26|215| and be kind with humbleness to the believers who followed you.
26|216| So if they disobey you, then say, .I disown what you do,.
26|217| and place your trust in the Mighty, the Merciful,
26|218| Who sees you when you stand (in prayer,)
26|219| and (sees) your movement among those who prostrate themselves.
26|220| Surely, He is the All-Hearing, the All-Knowing.
26|221| Shall I tell you on whom the devils descend?
26|222| They descend on every sinful liar.
26|223| They give ear to hear (secretly,) and most of them tell lies.
26|224| As for the poets, they are followed by the straying people.
26|225| Did you not see that they wander in every valley,
26|226| and that they say what they do not?
26|227| Except those who believe and do righteous deeds and remember Allah very much, and defend themselves after they are wronged. And the wrongdoers will soon know to which place they are going to return.
27|1| Ta Sin . These are the verses of the Qur‘an and an enlightening book,
27|2| a guidance and good news to the believers
27|3| who establish Salah and pay Zakah and who have faith in the Hereafter.
27|4| As for those who do not believe in the Hereafter, We have made their deeds look beautiful to them. So they are wandering astray.
27|5| Those are the people who deserve the worst punishment and who are the worst losers in the Hereafter.
27|6| Indeed you are being given the Qur‘an by a Wise, Knowledgeable Being.
27|7| (Remember) when Musa said to his family, .I have noticed a fire. I shall bring to you some news from it, or bring to you a live ember, so that you may warm yourselves.
27|8| So when he came to it, he was called: .Blessed is the one who is in the fire and the one who is around it. And pure is Allah, the Lord of the worlds.
27|9| O Musa, the fact is that I AM ALLAH, the Mighty, the Wise.
27|10| And cast your staff down. So when he saw it moving, as if it was a snake, he retreated turning his back, and did not look behind. .O Musa, be not scared. I am such that the messengers are not scared before Me,
27|11| except him who did wrong, then after (having done) evil, replaced (it) with good, then I am Most-Forgiving, Very-Merciful.
27|12| And put your hand into your bosom, and it will come out white, without any evil, as one of the nine signs (sent) to Pharaoh and his people. Surely they have been a sinful people.
27|13| So when Our signs came to them as eye-openers, they said, .This is a clear magic.
27|14| And they denied them out of sheer injustice and arrogance, though their hearts believed them (to be true). See, then, how was the fate of the mischief-makers.
27|15| Surely We gave knowledge to Dawud and Sulaiman, and they said, .Praise belongs to Allah who made us excel many of His believing servants.
27|16| And Sulaiman inherited (the traits of) Dawud and said, .O people we have been taught the speech of birds, and all sorts of things are given to us. Indeed, this is the evident grace (of Allah).
27|17| And mustered for Sulaiman were his forces from among the Jinns and the humans and the birds. So all of them were kept under (his) control,
27|18| until when they reached the valley of the ants, one of the ants said, .O ants, enter your dwelling places, lest Sulaiman and his armies crush you unknowingly.
27|19| So he (Sulaiman) smiled, laughing on her speech and said, .My Lord, enable me to become grateful to Your favor that you have bestowed on me and on my parents, and to do good deeds that You like, and admit me, with Your mercy, among Your righteous servants.
27|20| And (once) he (Sulaiman) checked the birds and said, .How is it with me that I do not see the hudhud (hoopoe)? Rather he has disappeared.
27|21| I will punish him with a severe punishment or slaughter him unless he brings to me a clear plea.
27|22| Then the hoopoe did not take long and said (to Sulaiman), .I have discovered what you did not, and have brought to you a sure information from Saba‘ (Sheba).
27|23| I have found a woman ruling over them, and all sorts of things are given to her, and she has a great throne.
27|24| I have found her and her people prostrating themselves to the sun, instead of Allah, and the Satan has beautified their deeds for them, and has prevented them from the way, so they do not take the right path,
27|25| that is, they do not prostrate to Allah who brings forth what is hidden in the heavens and the earth,__and who knows whatever you conceal and whatever you reveal.
27|26| Allah! There is no god but He, the Lord of the Great Throne.
27|27| He (Sulaiman) said, .We shall see whether you have told the truth or you are one of the liars.
27|28| Go with this letter of mine, and deliver it down to them, then turn back from them, and see how they react.
27|29| She (the queen) said (to her officials after receiving the letter), .O chieftains, there has been delivered to me an esteemed letter.
27|30| It is from Sulaiman, and it is (in the following words :) With the name of Allah, the All-Merciful, the Very-Merciful.
27|31| Do not rebel against me, and come to me in submission.
27|32| She said, .O chieftains, advise me in the matter I have (before me). I am not the one who decides a matter absolutely unless you are present with me.
27|33| They said, .We are powerful and tough fighters, and the decision lies with you; so consider what command you should give.
27|34| She said, .In fact when the kings enter a town, they put it to disorder, and put its honorable citizens to disgrace, and this is how they normally do.
27|35| And I am going to send a gift to them, then see, what response the envoys will bring back.
27|36| So when he (the envoy) came to Sulaiman, he said, .Are you extending a financial aid to me? So what Allah has given me is much better than what He has given to you. But you yourselves are proud of your gift.
27|37| Go back to them, and we will bring to them forces they have no power to face, and we will certainly drive them out from there in humiliation while they are disgraced.
27|38| He said, .O chieftains, which one of you will bring her throne to me before they come to me submissively?.
27|39| A stalwart of the Jinn said, .I will bring it to you before you rise up from your place, and for this (task) I am powerful, reliable.
27|40| Said the one who had the knowledge of the book, .I will bring it to you before your glance returns to you. So when he saw it (the throne) well placed before him, he said, .This is by the grace of my Lord, so that He may test me whether I am grateful or ungrateful. Whoever is grateful is grateful for his own benefit, and whoever is ungrateful, then my Lord is Need-Free, Bountiful.
27|41| He said, .Disguise the throne for her, and we will see whether she discovers the truth, or she does not recognize it.
27|42| So when she came, it was said (to her), .Is your throne like this?. She said, .It seems to be the same. We have been made to recognize the truth even before this, and we have already submitted.
27|43| And she was prevented (from submitting before this) by that which she used to worship instead of Allah. Indeed she was from a disbelieving people.
27|44| It was said to her, .Enter the palace. Then once she saw it, she thought it was flowing water, and uncovered her legs. He (Sulaiman) said, .This is a palace made of glasses. She said, .My Lord, I had surely wronged myself, and now I submit, along with Sulaiman, to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds.
27|45| And We sent to Thamud their brother SaliH saying (to them), .Worship Allah. Then suddenly they became two groups quarrelling with each other.
27|46| He said, .My people, why do you seek evil to come sooner before good? Why do you not seek forgiveness from Allah, so that you are treated with mercy?.
27|47| They said, .We regard you and those with you as a sign of bad omen. He said, .Your omen is with Allah, but you are a people put to a test.
27|48| And there were nine persons in the city who used to make mischief on the earth and did not put things right.
27|49| They said, .Let us swear a mutual oath by Allah that we shall attack him (SaliH) and his family at night, then will say to his heir, ‘We did not witness the destruction of his family, and we are really truthful.‘.
27|50| Thus they devised a plan, and We devised a plan, while they were not aware.
27|51| So, look how was the fate of their plan, that We annihilated them and their people altogether.
27|52| Now those are their houses, lying empty because of their transgression. Surely, in this there are signs for a people who have knowledge.
27|53| And We saved those who believed and who used to be God-fearing.
27|54| And (We sent) LuT when he said to his people, .Do you commit the shameful act while you can see (its shamefulness)?
27|55| Is it that you really come to men lustfully instead of women? No, you are a people committing acts of ignorance.
27|56| So, the answer of his people was not else but that they said, .Expel the family of LuT from your town. They are a people who over-indulge in purity.
27|57| So, We saved him and his family, except his wife. We destined her to remain among those who stayed behind.
27|58| And We rained on them a rain. So evil was the rain of those who were warned.
27|59| Say, .Praise belongs to Allah, and peace be on those of His servants whom He has chosen. Is Allah better or that which they associate (with Him as His partners)?
27|60| Or the One who created the heavens and the earth and sent down for you water from the sky? Then We caused to grow with it gardens, full of glamour. It was not within your ability to grow their trees. Is there any god along with Allah? No, but they are a people who equate (others with Allah).
27|61| Or the One who made the earth a place to settle and made rivers amidst it and made mountains for (making) it (firm), and made a barrier between two seas? Is there any god along with Allah? No, but most of them do not have knowledge.
27|62| Or the One who responds to a helpless person when He prays to Him and removes distress, and who makes you vicegerents of the earth? Is there any god along with Allah? No, but little you heed to advice.
27|63| Or the One who guides you in depths of darkness on land and sea, and who sends the winds bearing good news before His mercy? Is there any god along with Allah? Allah is far higher than the partners they ascribe to Him.
27|64| Or the One who originated creation, then will reproduce it, and who gives you provision from the sky and the earth? Is there any god along with Allah? Say, .Bring your proof if you are true.
27|65| Say, .No one in the heavens and the earth has the knowledge of the Unseen except Allah. And they do not know when they will be raised again.
27|66| Rather, their knowledge has failed in respect of the Hereafter. Rather, they are in doubt about it. Rather, they are blind to it.
27|67| And said those who disbelieved, .Is it that, when we and our fathers become dust,__is it that we shall really be brought forth?
27|68| Indeed, it was promised to us and to our fathers even before this. This is nothing but the tales of the ancients.
27|69| Say, .Travel in the land and see how was the fate of the sinners.
27|70| And do not grieve for them, nor should your heart be straitened because of what they plan.
27|71| They say, .When shall this promise come to pass if you are true?.
27|72| Say, .It is not unlikely that some part of that (punishment) which you are asking to come soon is already following you closely.
27|73| And surely, your Lord is graceful for the mankind, but most of the people are not grateful.
27|74| Of course, your Lord knows for sure what their hearts conceal and what they reveal.
27|75| There is nothing hidden in the heavens and the earth that is not (recorded) in a manifest book.
27|76| Surely this Qur‘an mentions to the children of Isra‘il most of the matters in which they dispute.
27|77| It is guidance and mercy for the believers.
27|78| And surely your Lord will decide between them by His judgment, and He is the All-Mighty, the All-Knowing.
27|79| So trust in Allah. Surely you are on the clear truth.
27|80| Surely, you cannot make the dead to hear, nor can you make the deaf to hear your call when they turn their backs in retreat,
27|81| nor can you show the right path to the blind against their wandering astray. You can make no one to listen (to you) except those who believe in Our verses, then submit themselves (to Allah).
27|82| When the word will come to fall upon them, We will bring forth for them a beast from the earth who will speak to them that the human beings (i.e the infidels) did not believe in Our signs.
27|83| And (remember) the day when We will gather from every nation a host of those who used to reject Our verses, and they will be kept under control.
27|84| Until when they will come, He (Allah) will say, .Did you reject My verses while you did not comprehend them with knowledge, or what was it that you used to do?
27|85| And the Word will come to fall on them because of their transgression, so they will not (be able to) speak.
27|86| Did they not see that We made the night, so that they may have rest in it, and (made) the day to make them see? Surely, in this there are signs for a people who believe.
27|87| And (remember) the day when the Horn will be blown; so all those in the heavens and the earth will be in panic, except those whom Allah wills. And All (of them) will come to Him in humility.
27|88| And you see the mountains (at present) supposing them as fixed (forever), while (on that Day) they will fly like the flight of clouds - an act of Allah who has perfected every thing. Surely, He is All-Aware of what you do.
27|89| Whoever will come with the good deed will have (a reward) better than that, and such people will be immune on that day from any panic.
27|90| And whoever will come with evil deed, the faces of such people will be thrown down into the Fire. You will not be recompensed but for what you used to do.
27|91| I am but ordered to worship the Lord of this city, which is sanctified by Him. And to Him belongs every thing, and I am ordered to be one of the Muslims (who submit themselves to Allah),
27|92| and to recite the Qur‘an; so whoever takes the right path, takes it for his own benefit. As for the one who goes astray, say (to him), .I am only one of the warners.
27|93| And say, .Praise belongs to Allah. He will show you His signs, then you will recognize them. And your Lord is not unaware of what you do.
28|1| Ta Sin Mim.
28|2| These are verses of the clear Book.
28|3| We recite to you a part of the story of Musa and Pharaoh with truth for a people who believe.
28|4| Indeed, Pharaoh had become high-handed in the land, and had divided its people into different groups; he used to persecute a group of them, slaughtering their sons and keeping their women alive. Indeed he was one of the mischief-makers,
28|5| while We intended to favor those who were held as weak in the land, and to make them leaders and make them inheritors,
28|6| and give them power in the land, and to show Pharaoh, Haman and their armies the very thing they were fearing from them.
28|7| We inspired the mother of Musa saying, .Suckle him (Musa). Then once you fear about him, cast him in the river, and do not fear, and do not grieve. Surely We are going to bring him back to you and appoint him one of (Our) messengers.
28|8| So the family of Pharaoh picked him up, so that he becomes for them an enemy and a (cause of) grief. Indeed Pharaoh, Haman and their armies were mistaken.
28|9| And the wife of Pharaoh said, (to Pharaoh about Musa), .He may be a delight of eye for me and you. Do not kill him. It is hoped that he will be of benefit to us, or we will adopt him as a son. And they were not aware (of what was going to happen).
28|10| And the heart of the mother of Musa became restless; indeed she was about to disclose this (the real facts about Musa), had We not strengthened her heart to remain among those who have firm belief (in Allah‘s promise).
28|11| She said to his sister, .Keep track of him. So she watched him from a distance, while they were not aware.
28|12| And We had already barred him (Musa) from (accepting) any suckling women, so she (his sister) said (to Pharaoh‘s people), .Shall I point out to you a family who will nurse him for you, and they will be his well-wishers?.
28|13| Thus We brought him back to his mother, so that her eye might have comfort and she might not grieve, and so that she might know that Allah‘s promise is true, but most of them do not know.
28|14| And when he reached his maturity and became perfect, We gave him wisdom and knowledge. This is how We reward those who are good in their deeds.
28|15| Once he entered the city at a time when its people were heedless; so he found in it two men fighting each other: This one was from his own group, and that one from his enemies. So the one from his own group called him for help against the one who was from his enemies. So Musa gave him a blow with his fist and finished him off. (Then) He (Musa) said (out of remorse), .This is some of Satan‘s act. He is indeed a clear enemy who misleads (people).
28|16| He said, .O my Lord, I have wronged myself, so forgive me. So He forgave him. 6 Indeed He is the most Forgiving, Very-Merciful.
28|17| He (Musa) said, .O my Lord! As You have favored me, I will never be a supporter of the sinners.
28|18| Then next morning he was fearful in the city, waiting (for what comes next) when the man who sought his help the day before, shouted to him for help (again). Musa said to him, .You are surely a clear trouble-maker.
28|19| Thereafter when he intended to grasp at the one who was an enemy to both of them, he (i.e. the Israelite) said, .O Musa, do you want to kill me as you have killed a person yesterday? Your intention is only to become a tyrant in the land, and you do not intend to be one of the peace- makers.
28|20| And there came a man running from the farthest part of the city. He said, .The chiefs are counseling each other about you, so that they kill you. So, leave (the city). I am one of your well-wishers.
28|21| So, he went out of it (the city), looking around in a state of fear. He said, .O my Lord, save me from the cruel people.
28|22| When he set out towards Madyan, he said, .I hope my Lord will guide me to the straight path.
28|23| And when he arrived at the waters of Madyan, he found a large number of people watering (their animals) and found, aloof from them, two women keeping (their animals) back. He said, .What is the matter with you?. They said, .We cannot water (our animals) until these shepherds take (their animals) back after watering them, and our father is very old man.
28|24| So he (Musa) watered (their animals) for them, then he turned to a shade and said, .My Lord, I am in need of whatever good you send down to me.
28|25| Then one of the two women came to him, walking bashfully. She said, .My father is calling you, so that he may give you a reward for watering our animals. So when he (Musa) came to him (the father of the women) and narrated to him the whole story, the latter said, .Do not fear; you have escaped from the wrongdoing people.
28|26| One of the two women said, .Dear father, hire him; the best man you can hire is someone who is strong, trustworthy.
28|27| He (the father) said (to Musa), .I wish to marry to you one of these two daughters of mine on condition that you act as my employee for eight years. Then if you complete ten (years) it will be of your own accord. And I do not want to put you in any trouble; you will find me, Insha‘allah (God-willing) one of the righteous.
28|28| He (Musa) said, .This is (done) between me and you. Whichever of the two terms I fulfill, there should be no excess against me, and Allah is witness to what we are saying.
28|29| So, when Musa completed the term and set forth with his wife, he noticed a fire from the direction of (the mount) Tur, he said to his wife, .Stay here; I have noticed a fire. May be I bring to you some information or an ember from the fire, so that you may warm yourself.
28|30| So when he came to it, he was called by a voice coming from a side of the right valley in the blessed ground, from the tree, saying, .O Musa, I AM ALLAH, the Lord of the worlds,.
28|31| and saying, .Throw down your staff. So when he saw it moving as if it were a snake, he turned back in retreat, and did not look back. (Allah said to him), .O Musa come forward and do not fear; you are one of those in peace.
28|32| Insert your hand into your bosom, and it will come out white without any evil (disease), and press your arm to your side for (removing) fear. Thus these are two proofs from your Lord (sent) to Pharaoh and his chiefs. Indeed they are transgressing people.
28|33| He said, .My Lord, I have killed a person from them, therefore I fear that they will kill me.
28|34| And my brother Harun is more eloquent than me in speech; so send him with me as a helper to bear me out. I am afraid, they will give the lie to me.
28|35| He (Allah) said, .We will strengthen your arm with your brother, and will give both of you such a power that they will have no access to you (to cause any harm) because of Our signs. You and your followers will be the victors.
28|36| So when Musa came to them with Our clear signs, they said, .This is nothing but a forged magic, and we have never heard of such a thing happening in the days of our forefathers.
28|37| Musa said, .My Lord is best aware of the one who has brought guidance from Him and who is going to meet the best end of the abode. It is certain that the wrongdoers will not succeed.
28|38| And Pharaoh said (to his people,) .O courtiers, I do not recognize any god for you other than me. So kindle for me, O Haman, a fire on the clay (to bake bricks) and build for me a tower, so that I may look on to the God of Musa. I deem him to be one of the liars.
28|39| (Thus) he and his hosts showed arrogance in the land with no justification and thought that they would not be returned to Us.
28|40| So We seized him and his hosts and threw them into the sea. Look then, how was the fate of the wrongdoers.
28|41| We made them leaders who called (people) towards hell; and on the Day of Judgment, they will not be helped.
28|42| And We made a curse to pursue them in this world; and on the Day of Judgment they will be among those dejected.
28|43| And We gave Musa, after We destroyed the earlier generations, the Book having insights for people and a guidance and mercy, so that they may receive the advice.
28|44| And (O prophet,) you were not there at the Western side (of the mount Tur) when We delegated the matter to Musa, nor were you among those present,
28|45| but We created generations (after him) and a long time passed over them. And you were not dwelling among the people of Madyan, reciting Our verses to them, but it is We who do send messengers.
28|46| And you were not at the side of (the mount) Tur when We called (Musa), but it (your prophet-hood through which you knew all this) is a mercy from your Lord, so that you warn a people to whom no warner has come before you, that they may receive the advice.
28|47| And (We have sent you as a messenger) lest, in case they suffered a calamity because of what their hands sent ahead, they should say, .Our Lord, why did You not send a messenger to us, so that we might have followed your verses and been among the believers?.
28|48| But when the Truth came to them from Us, they said, .Why has he (the messenger) not been given (a book) similar to what Musa had been given?. Is it not that they denied what Musa had been given before? They said, .Both (Qur‘an and Torah) are works of magic that support each other. And they said, .We disbelieve each one of them.
28|49| Say, .Then bring a book from Allah which is better than both, in guidance, and I shall follow it, if you are true.
28|50| So if they do not respond to you, be sure that they are only following their desires. And who is more astray than the one who follows his desire without guidance from Allah. Surely Allah does not take the wrongdoing people onto the right path.
28|51| And We have conveyed (Our) word to them one after the other, so that they may receive the advice.
28|52| As for those to whom We gave the Book before this, they believe in it (Qur‘an).
28|53| And when this (Qur‘an) is recited to them, they say, .We believe in it. It is the truth from our Lord, and we are the ones who had submitted (to it) even before it (was revealed).
28|54| Such people will be given their reward twice, because they observed patience. And they repel evil with good, and spend from what We have given to them.
28|55| And when they hear absurd talk, they withdraw from it and say, .Our deeds are for us and your deeds are for you. Peace be on you. We do not desire (to be entangled with) the ignorant people.
28|56| You cannot give guidance to whomsoever you wish, but Allah gives guidance to whomsoever He wills, and He best knows the ones who are on the right path.
28|57| They said, .If we follow the guidance with you (O Muhammad), we will be driven out of our land. Is it not that We have established them in the peaceful Haram (sanctuary) to which the fruits of everything are drawn as a provision from Us? But most of them do not know.
28|58| And how many a town have We destroyed that were over-proud of their means of living. Now, those are their habitations, which were never inhabited after them except a few, and We alone were the inheritors.
28|59| And your Lord is not such as He would destroy the towns unless he had sent to their central place a messenger who recites to them Our verses, nor are We such as would destroy the towns unless their people are wrongdoers.
28|60| Moreover, whatever of anything you are given is (no more than) an enjoyment of the worldly life and its decoration, and that which lies with Allah is much better and far more lasting. So do you not use reason?
28|61| Is then the one, to whom We have made a good promise which he is going to meet, like the one whom We have given the benefit of enjoying the worldly life, then on the Day of Judgment he will be among those arraigned?
28|62| (Remember) the Day when He will call them and say, .Where are My ‘partners‘ you used to claim?
28|63| Those against whom the word will come true will say, .Our Lord, these are the ones whom we led astray. We led them astray as we ourselves went astray. We negate before you our responsibility (in respect of them); it was not we whom they worshipped.
28|64| And it will be said, .Call those whom you held as co-gods. So they will call them, but they will not respond to them, and they will see the punishment. Would that they had taken the right path!
28|65| (Remember) the Day when He (Allah) will call them and say, .What response did you give to the messengers?.
28|66| So all events will become too obscure for them (to give a correct reply), and they will not (be able to) consult each other.
28|67| As for the one who repents and becomes a believer and acts righteously, hopefully he will be among the successful.
28|68| Your Lord creates what He wills and chooses. Choice is not theirs. Pure is Allah and far higher than their ascribing of partners to Him.
28|69| Your Lord knows what their hearts conceal and what they reveal.
28|70| And He is Allah. There is no god but He. Praise is only for Him in the beginning and at the end, and He alone has the right to judge, and to Him you are to be returned.
28|71| Say, .Tell me, if Allah were to impose the night over you, continuing forever up to the Day of Judgment, which god, other than Allah, would bring to you light? Then, do you not listen?.
28|72| Say, .Tell me, if Allah were to impose the day over you, continuing for ever up to the Day of Judgment, which god, other than Allah, would bring to you night in which you may have rest? Then, do you not see?.
28|73| And it is out of His mercy that He has made day and night for you, so that you may have rest in it, and so that you may search for His grace, and so that you may be grateful.
28|74| And (remember) the Day when He (Allah) will call them (the disbelievers) and say, .Where are My ‘partners‘ you used to claim?.
28|75| And We will draw out a witness from every community (to prove their disbelief) and will say, .Bring your proof. Then they will know that truth is from Allah, and all that they used to forge shall vanish from them.
28|76| Indeed Qarun was from the people of Musa, then he rebelled against them. And We had given to him such treasures as their keys would weigh too heavy for a strong group of people. (Remember) when his people said to him, .Do not exult. Surely, Allah does not like the exultant.
28|77| And seek the (betterment of) the Ultimate Abode with what Allah has given to you, and do not neglect your share from this world, and do good as Allah did good to you, and do not seek to make mischief in the land. Surely, Allah does not like the mischief-makers.
28|78| He said, .This is given to me because of the knowledge (I have) with me. Did he not know that Allah had destroyed, from the generations before him, those who were stronger than him in power and greater than him in multitude? And the sinners have not to be asked about their sins.
28|79| Then (once) he came out before his people in his embellishment. Said those who are desirous of the worldly life, .Would that we had the like of what Qarun has been given! He is a man of great fortune indeed.
28|80| And said those who were given knowledge, .Woe to you, Allah‘s reward is much better for him who believes and acts righteously. But this is given to none but to those who observe restraint.
28|81| Then We made him and his home sink into the earth. So there was no group for him who could help him against Allah, nor was he one of those who could defend themselves.
28|82| And those who wished to be in his position the day before, started saying, .Oh, it seems that Allah extends provision to whom He wills and straitens (for whom He wills). Had Allah not favored us, He would have made us sink (too). Oh, it seems that the infidels do not succeed.
28|83| As for that Ultimate Abode (the Hereafter), We assign it to those who do not intend haughtiness on earth nor mischief. And the (best) end is for the God-fearing.
28|84| Whoever brings good deed shall have better than it, and whoever brings evil deed, then those who commit evils shall not be punished except for what they used to do.
28|85| Surely the One who has enjoined the Qur‘an upon you will surely bring you back to a place of return. Say, .My Lord best knows the one who has come with guidance and the one who is in manifest error.
28|86| You were not expecting that the Book would be sent down to you, but it was a mercy from your Lord. So, never be a supporter for the infidels.
28|87| And let them not prevent you from Allah‘s verses after they are sent down to you, and call (people) to your Lord, and never become one of those who associate partners with Allah.
28|88| And do not invoke any other god along with Allah. There is no god but He. Every thing is going to perish except His Face. He alone has the right to judge, and to Him you are to be returned.
29|1| Alif , Lam , Mim .
29|2| Do people think that they will be left (at ease) only on their saying, .We believe. and will not be put to any test?
29|3| Indeed We have tested those who were before them. So Allah will surely know the ones who are truthful, and He will surely know the liars.
29|4| Or do those who commit evils think that they will outstrip Us? Evil is what they predicate.
29|5| Whoever hopes to meet Allah (must be sure that) Allah‘s appointed time has to come, and He is the All-Hearing, the All-Knowing.
29|6| Whoever strives, strives for his own benefit. Surely Allah is independent of all the worlds.
29|7| Those who believe and do righteous deeds, We will expiate their bad deeds and will give them a better reward (than their expectation) for what they used to do.
29|8| We have instructed man to do good to his parents. And if they insist upon you that you should ascribe partners to Me, then do not obey them. To Me is your return; then I shall tell you what you used to do.
29|9| And those who believe and do righteous deeds, We shall include them among the righteous.
29|10| Among men there are those who say, .We believe in Allah., but when they are persecuted in (the way of) Allah, they take the persecution of men, as equal to the punishment of Allah. And should any help come from your Lord, they will certainly say, .We were with you. Is it not that Allah knows well what lies in the hearts of the people of all the worlds?
29|11| Allah will certainly know those who believe and He will certainly know the hypocrites.
29|12| Those who disbelieve say to those who believe, .Follow our way, and we will bear the burden of your sins. And they are not (able) to bear the burden of their sins in the least. Indeed they are pure liars.
29|13| They shall certainly bear their own loads, and some other loads along with their own loads, and they will certainly be questioned about what they used to forge.
29|14| We sent NuH to his people. So he stayed with them one thousand, less fifty, years. Then the Deluge seized them, and they were transgressors.
29|15| So We saved him and the people of the Ark, and made it a sign for all the worlds.
29|16| And (We sent) Ibrahim when he said to his people, .Worship Allah and fear Him. That is better for you if you know.
29|17| You only worship idols beside Allah, and you invent a lie. In fact those whom you worship beside Allah do not have power to give you provision. So seek provision with Allah and worship Him and be grateful to Him. To Him you are to be returned.
29|18| And if you reject me, then many nations have rejected their messengers before you. The messenger has no more obligation than to convey the message clearly.
29|19| Did they not see how Allah originates the creation, then He will do it again. Surely this is easy for Allah.
29|20| Say, .Go about in the land and look how He has originated the creation. Then Allah will create the subsequent creation. Surely Allah is powerful to do everything.
29|21| He punishes whom He wills and has mercy on whom He wills. And to Him you are to be turned back.
29|22| You are not (able) to frustrate (Allah) neither in the earth nor in the sky. And, apart from Allah, you have neither a protector nor a helper.
29|23| And those who deny the signs of Allah and meeting with Him — those will despair of My mercy, and those are the ones for whom there is a painful punishment.
29|24| So, the response of his (Ibrahim) people was none but that they said, .Kill him. or .Burn him. So Allah saved him from the fire. Surely in this there are signs for a people who believe.
29|25| And he (Ibrahim) said, .You have adopted idols instead of Allah, only because of love (you have) with each other in the worldly life. Then on the Day of Judgment you will reject each other, and will curse each other. And your abode is the Fire, and you will have no helpers.
29|26| So LuT believed in him, and he (Ibrahim) said, .I am going to leave my homeland towards my Lord. Surely He is the Mighty, the Wise.
29|27| And We granted him IsHaq (Isaac) and Ya‘qub (Jacob), and assigned prophet-hood and Book to his progeny, and gave him his reward in the world; and of course, in the Hereafter, he will be one of the righteous.
29|28| And (We sent) LuT when he said to his people, .Indeed you commit the shameful act that no one in the worlds has ever preceded you in it.
29|29| Is it (not) a fact that you go for men (to satisfy your lust) and rob the wayfarers and commit evil in your gathering?. So the answer of his people was none but that they said, .Bring us Allah‘s punishment, if you are one of the truthful.
29|30| He said, .My Lord, help me against the people who make mischief.
29|31| And when Our messengers came to Ibrahim with the good news, they said, .We are going to destroy the people of this town. Surely its people have been transgressors.
29|32| He said, .There is LuT in it. They said, .We know well who is in it. We will certainly save him and his family except his wife who will be among those remaining behind.
29|33| And when Our messengers came to LuT, he grieved for them and his heart was straitened because of them, but they said, .We are going to save you and your family, except your wife who will be among those remaining behind.
29|34| We are going to bring down on the people of this town a punishment from the sky, because they used to act sinfully.
29|35| And We left from it (the town) an evident sign for a people who understand.
29|36| And (We sent) to Madyan their brother Shu‘aib. So he said, .O my people, worship Allah and fear the Last Day, and do not roam about in the land as mischief makers.
29|37| So they gave the lie to him, then they were seized by the earthquake and they remained in their homes lying on their faces.
29|38| And (We destroyed) ‘Ad and Thamud, and it is visible to you through their dwellings. And the Satan had beautified for them their deeds, so he prevented them from the (right) way, even though they were people of insight.
29|39| And (We also destroyed) Qarun and Pharaoh and Haman. Indeed Musa came to them with clear signs; so they acted arrogantly on the earth, and were not (able) to escape.
29|40| Thus We seized each one of them for his sin. So to some of them We sent a violent wind; and some of them were seized by a Cry; and some of them We made to sink in the earth; and some of them We drowned. And Allah was not to do injustice to them, but they used to do injustice to their own selves.
29|41| The example of those who have adopted patrons other than Allah is like the spider that has made a house, while indeed the weakest of houses is the house of the spider. If only they know.
29|42| Surely, Allah knows whatever thing they invoke beside Allah, and He is the Mighty, the Wise.
29|43| We site these examples for people, but no one understands them except the knowledgeable ones.
29|44| Allah has created the heavens and the earth with truth. Surely in this there is a sign for the believers.
29|45| Recite (O Prophet) what is revealed to you of the Book, and establish Salah . Surely Salah restrains one from shameful and evil acts. Indeed remembrance of Allah is the greatest of all things. Allah knows what you do.
29|46| Do not debate with the people of the Book unless it is in the best manner, except with those of them who commit injustice. And say, .We believe in what is sent down to us and sent down to you, and our God and your God is One, and to Him we submit (ourselves).
29|47| Thus We have sent down the Book to you. So those to whom We have given the Book believe in it. And from these (the people of Makkah) there are ones who believe in it, and no one rejects Our verses except the infidels.
29|48| You (O Prophet,) have never been reciting any book before this, nor have you been writing it with your right hand; had it been so, the adherents of falsehood would have raised doubts.
29|49| But it (the Qur‘an in itself) is (a package of) evident signs in the hearts of those who are given knowledge. And no one rejects our verses except the wrongdoers.
29|50| And they say, .Why is it that no signs (miracles) have been sent down to him from his Lord?. Say, .Signs are only with Allah, and I am only a plain warner.
29|51| Is it not sufficient for them that We have sent down to you the Book that is being recited to them? Surely in it there is mercy and advice for a people who believe.
29|52| Say, .Allah is enough as a witness between me and you. He knows what is in the heavens and the earth. And those who believe in falsity and do not believe in Allah,__those are the losers.
29|53| They ask you to bring the punishment soon. Had there not been an appointed time, the punishment would have come to them. It will surely come to them suddenly while they will not be aware.
29|54| They ask you to bring the punishment soon, while the Jahannam is surely going to engulf the disbelievers
29|55| on the Day when the punishment will envelop them from above them and from under their feet and He (Allah) will say, .Taste what you used to do.
29|56| O My servants who believe, surely My earth is vast. So, Me alone you must worship.
29|57| Every person has to taste death, then to Us you are to be returned.
29|58| As for those who believe and do righteous deeds, We shall accommodate them in mansions of the Paradise beneath which rivers flow, where they will live forever. Excellent is the reward of the workers,
29|59| who observe restraint patiently and place their trust in their Lord alone.
29|60| How many an animal there is that does not carry its provision. Allah gives provision to it as well as to you, and He is the All-Hearing, the All- knowing.
29|61| If you ask them as to who has created the heavens and the earth and has subjugated the sun and the moon, they will certainly say, .Allah. How then are they driven aback (by their whims?)
29|62| Allah extends provision to whom He wills from His servants, and straitens it (for whom He wills). Surely Allah knows every thing well.
29|63| And if you ask them as to who sends down water from the sky, then revives the land with it, they will certainly say, .Allah. Say, .Praise is for Allah. But most of them do not understand.
29|64| This worldly life is nothing but an amusement and play, and the Last Abode is the real life indeed. Only if they know!
29|65| So when they embark on a ship, they invoke Allah, having their faith purely in Him. But when He saves them (and brings them) to the land, in no time they start committing shirk (ascribing partners to Allah),
29|66| thus becoming ungrateful for what We gave to them. Let them have some enjoyment, then they will soon come to know (the ill-fate of their attitude).
29|67| Did they not see that We have made a peaceful sanctuary (Haram ) while (other) people around them are being snatched away? Do they still believe in falsity and reject Allah‘s grace?
29|68| Who is more unjust than the one who forges a lie against Allah or rejects the truth when it comes to him? Is there not in Jahannam a home for disbelievers?
29|69| As for those who strive in Our way, We will certainly take them onto Our paths, and indeed Allah is with those who are good in deeds.
30|1| Alif, Lam , Mim .
30|2| The Romans have been defeated
30|3| in the nearer land; and they, after their defeat, will triumph
30|4| within a few years. To Allah belonged the matter before and (to Him it belongs) thereafter. And on that day the believers will rejoice
30|5| with Allah‘s help. He helps whomsoever He wills. And He is the Mighty, the Very-Merciful.
30|6| It is a promise from Allah. Allah does not fail in His promise, but most of the people do not know.
30|7| They know something superficial of the worldly life, but of the Hereafter they are negligent.
30|8| Did they not reflect in their own selves? Allah did not create the heavens and the earth and what is between them but with a just cause and for an appointed time. Yet many of the people are disbelievers in the meeting with their Lord.
30|9| Have they not traveled on earth to see how was the end of those before them? They were stronger than these in power, and they had tilled the land and had made it more populous than these have made it, and their messengers had come to them with clear proofs. So Allah was not such as could do injustice to them, but they used to do injustice to themselves.
30|10| Then the end of those who did evil was evil, because they rejected the verses of Allah and used to make mockery of them.
30|11| Allah originates the creation, then He will create it again, then to Him you are to be returned.
30|12| On the day when the Hour (Qiyamah : the Day of Judgement)) will take place, the guilty will be taken aback in grief and despair.
30|13| They will have no intercessors from among their (so-called) ‘partners of Allah‘, and they themselves will reject their (such) ‘partners‘.
30|14| And the day when the Hour (Qiyamah : the Day of Judgement)) will take place__it will be on that day that they will turn into separate groups.
30|15| Then, those who had believed and had done righteous deeds__they will be in a garden, extremely delighted.
30|16| As for those who had disbelieved and rejected Our verses and the meeting of the Hereafter, they will be brought for punishment.
30|17| So, proclaim Allah‘s purity (from shirk) when you see the evening and when you see the morning.
30|18| And to Him be praise in the heavens and the earth, and in the afternoon and when you enter the time of auhr (soon after the decline of the sun towards West).
30|19| He brings out the living from the dead, and brings out the dead from the living, and gives life to the land after it is dead. And in similar way you will be brought out (from graves).
30|20| It is among His signs that He has created you from dust, then soon you are human beings scattered around.
30|21| And it is among His signs that He has created for you wives from among yourselves, so that you may find tranquility in them, and He has created love and kindness between you. Surely in this there are signs for a people who reflect.
30|22| And among His signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth and the difference of your tongues and colors. Surely in this there are signs for the persons having knowledge.
30|23| And among His signs is your sleep by night and day, and your search for His grace. Surely in this there are signs for a people who listen.
30|24| And it is among His signs that He shows you the lightening which causes fear and hope, and that He sends down water from the sky, then He revives the earth with it after its death. Surely in this there are signs for a people who understand.
30|25| And it is among His signs that the sky and the earth stand firm by His command. Then, when He will call you from the earth, by a single call, you will be coming out all at once.
30|26| To Him belong all those in the heavens and the earth. All (of them) are obedient to Him.
30|27| It is He who originates the creation, then will create it again; and it is easier for Him. His is the highest description in the heavens and the earth, and He is the Mighty, the Wise.
30|28| He (Allah) gives you an example from yourselves: Do you have, from among your slaves, any partners in the wealth that We have given to you, so as they and you are equal in it, (and) so as you fear them like you fear each other? This is how We explain the signs for a people who understand.
30|29| But the wrongdoers have followed their desires without knowledge. So who can guide the one whom Allah leaves astray? For such people there are no helpers.
30|30| So, set your face to the Faith uprightly, this (faith) being the nature designed by Allah on which He has created the mankind. There is no change in Allah‘s creation. That is the straight faith, but most of the people do not know.
30|31| (Set your face to the Faith) turning totally towards Him, and fear Him, and establish Salah, and do not be among those who associate partners with Allah
30|32| #NAME?
30|33| When the people are visited by some affliction, they invoke their Lord with exclusive concentration on Him. Then once He gives them a taste of His mercy, a group of them starts at once ascribing partners to their Lord,
30|34| so as to become ungrateful for what We gave to them. So enjoy yourselves awhile; then you will soon come to know.
30|35| Is it that We have sent down to them any authority that speaks to them about their associating partners with Him?
30|36| When We give people a taste of mercy, they are happy with it, and if they are touched by an evil because of what their hands sent ahead, they are at once in despair.
30|37| Did they not see that Allah extends provision to whomsoever He wills, and straitens (it for whomsoever He wills)? Surely in this there are signs for a people who believe.
30|38| So give to the kinsman his right, and to the needy and the wayfarer. That is better for those who seek Allah‘s pleasure, and it is they who will be successful.
30|39| Whatever Riba (increased amount) you give, so that it may increase in the wealth of the people, it does not increase with Allah; and whatever Zakah you give, seeking Allah‘s pleasure with it, (it is multiplied by Allah, and) it is such people who multiply (their wealth in real terms.)
30|40| Allah is the One who created you, then gave sustenance to you, then He will make you dead, then He will make you alive. Is there any one from your (so-called) ‘partners of God‘ who can do anything of that (kind)? Pure is He, and far higher than what they associate (with Him).
30|41| Calamities have appeared on land and sea because of what the hands of the people have earned, so that He (Allah) makes them taste some of what they did, in order that they may return (to the right way).
30|42| Say, .Go about in the land, and see how was the end of those who were before. Most of them were Mushriks (i.e. those who ascribe partners to Allah).
30|43| Then set your face to the straight Faith before the arrival of a day that will never be repulsed by Allah. On that Day the people will be split apart.
30|44| Whoever disbelieves, his unbelief will be against him; and whoever acts righteously, then such people are paving the path for themselves,
30|45| so that Allah may give reward, out of His grace, to those who believed and did righteous deeds. Surely He does not love the unbelievers.
30|46| And among His signs is that He sends winds giving good news (of rain), and so that He gives you a taste of His mercy, and that the ships may sail with His command, and that you may search for His grace, and you may be grateful.
30|47| We had indeed sent before you messengers to their people. So they came to them with clear proofs. Then We took vengeance upon those who were guilty; and it was due on Us to help the believers.
30|48| Allah is the One who sends the winds, so they stir up a cloud, then He spreads it in the sky however he wills, and makes it (split) into pieces. Then you see the rain coming out from its midst. So, once He makes it reach those whom He wills from His slaves, they start rejoicing,
30|49| even though they were absolutely hopeless before it was sent down to them.
30|50| So, look to the effects of Allah‘s mercy, how He gives life to the earth after its death. Surely, That (Allah) is the One who will give life to the dead; and He has the power to do everything.
30|51| Should We send a (harmful) wind, and they see it (the tillage) turning yellow, then they will turn ungrateful, even after all the aforesaid (bounties of Allah).
30|52| So, you cannot make the dead to hear, nor can you make the deaf to hear the call when they turn their backs in retreat.
30|53| Nor are you (able) to show the right path to the blind against their straying. You can make none to listen except those who believe in Our signs, hence they submit.
30|54| Allah is the One who created you in a state of weakness, then He created strength after weakness, then created weakness and old age after strength. He creates what He wills, and He is All-Knowing, All-Powerful.
30|55| And on the Day when the Hour (Qiyamah : the Day of Judgement) will take place, the sinners will swear that they did not remain (in the graves) more than one hour. In the similar way they used to be contrary (to truth in their worldly life).
30|56| As for those who were given knowledge and belief, they will say, .You remained, according to the destiny written by Allah, up to the Day of Resurrection. So this is the Day of Resurrection, but you had no belief.
30|57| So, on that Day, their apology will not benefit the wrongdoers, nor will they be asked to repent.
30|58| Indeed We have given in this Qur‘an all kinds of examples for the benefit of mankind. (Still) if you bring to them a sign, the disbelievers will certainly say, .You are nothing but men of falsehood.
30|59| Thus Allah seals up the hearts of those who do not believe.
30|60| So, be patient. Surely Allah‘s promise is true, and let not the disbelievers shake your firmness.
31|1| Alif Lam Mim .
31|2| These are verses of the Wise Book,
31|3| a guidance and mercy for those who are good in their deeds
31|4| who are steadfast in Salah and who pay Zakah and have faith in the Hereafter.
31|5| It is these who are on guidance given by their Lord, and it is just these who are successful.
31|6| There is a man among the people who buys discourses of distracting amusements, so that he may mislead (people) from the Way of Allah, and make a mockery of it. For such people there is a disgraceful punishment.
31|7| And when Our verses are recited to him, he turns away in arrogance, as if he did not hear them, as if there is heaviness in his ears. So give him the ‘good‘ news of a painful punishment.
31|8| Surely, for those who believe and do righteous deeds there are gardens of bliss
31|9| in which they will live forever - an absolute promise of Allah. He is the Mighty, the Wise.
31|10| He has created the skies without the pillars that you may see, and placed mountains on the earth, lest it shakes with you, and spread over it all kinds of creatures. And We sent down water from the heavens, and caused to grow in it every noble pair.
31|11| This is the creation of Allah. Now, show me what is created by those others, besides Him. Rather, the transgressors are in open error.
31|12| We gave wisdom to Luqman, and said, .Be grateful to Allah;. and whoever is grateful is, in fact, grateful for his own benefit, and whoever is ungrateful, then Allah is free of all needs, worthy of all praise.
31|13| (Remember) when Luqman said to his son, while he was advising him, .My dear son, do not ascribe partners to Allah. Indeed, ascribing partners to Allah (shirk) is grave transgression.
31|14| We commanded man (to be good) in respect of his parents. His mother carried him (in her womb) despite weakness upon weakness, and his weaning is in two years. (We said to man,) .Be grateful to Me, and to your parents. To Me is the ultimate return.
31|15| However, if they force you to ascribe partners to Me about whom you (can) have no (source of) knowledge, then do not obey them. Remain with them in this world with due fairness, but follow the way of the one who has turned himself towards Me. Then, towards Me is your return, so I shall tell you what you had been doing.
31|16| (Luqman went on saying to his son,) .My dear son, in fact, if there be anything to the measure of a grain of rye, and it be (hidden) in a rock or in the heavens or in the earth, Allah will bring it forth. Surely, Allah is All-Fine, All-Aware.
31|17| My dear son, establish Salah , and bid the Fair and forbid the Unfair, and observe patience on what befalls you. Surely, this is among the matters of determination;
31|18| and do not turn your cheek away from people, and do not walk on the earth haughtily. Surely, Allah does not like anyone who is arrogant, proud;
31|19| and be moderate in your walk, and lower your voice. Surely, the ugliest of voices is the voice of the donkeys.
31|20| Have you not seen that Allah has subjugated for you what is in the heavens and what is on the earth, and has perfected His blessings on you, both outward and inward? But among people there are those who debate about Allah with no knowledge, no guidance and no book to enlighten.
31|21| When it is said to them, .follow what Allah has sent down,. they say, .Instead, we would follow that on which we have found our fathers. Is it so, even though the Satan has been calling them to the punishment of the flaming Fire?
31|22| And whoever submits his self to Allah and is good in deeds, he in fact holds on to the strongest ring. Towards Allah is the ultimate end of all matters.
31|23| And whoever disbelieves, let not his disbelief grieve you. To Us is their return. Then We will tell them what they did. Surely, Allah is All Aware of what lies in the hearts.
31|24| We let them enjoy a little, then We will drag them to a heavy punishment.
31|25| And if you ask them as to who has created the heavens and the earth, they will certainly say, .Allah. Say, .AlHamdulillah . (Praise be to Allah). But most of them do not know.
31|26| To Allah belongs what is in the heavens and the earth. Surely, it is Allah who is free of all needs, worthy of every praise.
31|27| And if all trees that are on the earth were to be pens, and the ocean (converted into ink) is supported by seven seas following it, the words of Allah would not come to an end. Surely, Allah is Mighty, Wise.
31|28| Creation and resurrection of all of you is no more (to Allah) than that of one single person. Surely, Allah is All-Hearing, All Seeing.
31|29| Did you not see that Allah makes the night enter into the day, and makes the day enter into the night, and He has subjugated the sun and the moon, each running towards an appointed time, and that Allah is fully aware of what you do?
31|30| That is because Allah is the only Real One and what they invoke other than Him is false and Allah is the High, the Great.
31|31| Did you not see that the ships sail through the sea by the grace of Allah, so that He shows you some of His signs? In that, indeed, there are signs for every man of patience and gratitude.
31|32| And when they are covered by waves like canopies, they pray to Allah, having faith exclusively in Him. Then, once He brings them safe to the land, some of them remain balanced, (while others turn ungrateful by denying Allah‘s signs.) And no one denies Our signs except every ungrateful traitor.
31|33| O people, fear your Lord and fear a day when no father will help his son, nor will a son be helpful to his father at all. Surely, the promise of Allah is true. So, the worldly life must not deceive you, nor should you ever be deceived about Allah by the Deceiver.
31|34| Surely, it is Allah with whom rests the knowledge of the Hour; and He sends down the rain, and He knows what is in the wombs. No one knows what he will earn tomorrow, and no one knows in which land he will die. Surely, Allah is All Knowing, All Aware.
32|1| Alif Lam Mim.
32|2| (This) revelation of the Book – in which there is no doubt - is from the Lord of the worlds.
32|3| Is it that they say, .He has fabricated it.? No, it is the truth from your Lord, so that you (O prophet,) may warn a people to whom no warner has come before you; may be they take the right path.
32|4| Allah is the One who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days, then He positioned Himself on the Throne. Other than Him, there is neither a guardian for you, nor an intercessor. Would you then not observe the advice?
32|5| He manages (every) matter from the sky to the earth, then it (every matter) will ascend to Him in a day the measure of which is one thousand years according to the way you count.
32|6| That One is the All-knower of the Unseen and the seen, the All-Mighty, the Very-Merciful,
32|7| who made well whatever He created, and started the creation of man from clay.
32|8| Then He made his progeny from a drop of semen, from despised water.
32|9| Then He gave him a proportioned shape, and breathed into him of His spirit. And He granted you the (power of) hearing and the eyes and the hearts. Little you give thanks.
32|10| And they said, .Is it that when we disappear in the earth__is it that we really come into a new creation?. Rather they are ones who deny the meeting with their Lord.
32|11| Say, .The angel of death who has been assigned for you will take your soul in full, then you will be brought back to your Lord.
32|12| And (you will wonder) if you see the sinners hanging their heads before their Lord (and saying,) .Our Lord, we have now seen and heard, so send us back, and we will do righteous deeds. Surely, (now) we are believers.
32|13| And if We had so willed, We would have led everybody to his right path (by force), but the word from Me had come to pass: .I will certainly fill the Jahannam with jinn and human beings together.
32|14| So, have a taste, because you had forgotten the meeting of this day of yours. We have forgotten you; and taste the eternal punishment for what you used to do.
32|15| Only those people believe in Our verses who, when they are reminded of them, fall in prostration and pronounce the purity and praise of their Lord, and who do not wax proud.
32|16| Their sides remain apart from their beds. They call their Lord with fear and hope, and spend (in charity) out of what We have given to them.
32|17| So, no one knows the delight of eyes that has been reserved for them in secret, as a reward of what they used to do.
32|18| So, can one who is a believer become like one who is a sinner? They cannot become equal.
32|19| As for those who believe and do righteous deeds, for them there are gardens to dwell, as an honorable hospitality for what they used to do.
32|20| And the ones who disobeyed, their abode is the Fire. Whenever they wish to come out from it, they will be turned back into it, and it will be said to them, .Taste the punishment of fire that you used to deny.
32|21| And We will certainly make them taste the nearer punishment before the greater punishment, so that they may return.
32|22| And who is more unjust than the one who was reminded of the verses of his Lord, then he turned away from them. Surely, We have to take vengeance upon the sinners.
32|23| It is a fact that We gave the Book to Musa. So be not in doubt about receiving it, and We made it a guidance for the children of Isra‘il .
32|24| And We appointed leaders from among them who guided (people) under Our command, when they observed patience, and kept firm belief in Our verses.
32|25| Surely, your Lord will judge between them on the Day of Judgment in what they used to differ.
32|26| Has it not been a source of guidance for them as to how many generations We have destroyed before them who used to walk in their dwellings? Surely in this there are signs. So, do they not listen?
32|27| Have they not seen that We drive water to the dry land, then We bring forth crops thereby from which their cattle and they themselves have food? So, do they not perceive?
32|28| And they say, .When will this decision take place if you are truthful (in your claim)?.
32|29| Say, .On the day of decision their belief will not be of any use to disbelievers, nor shall they be given any respite.
32|30| So, just ignore them (O prophet,) and wait. They (too) are waiting.
33|1| O Prophet, fear Allah and do not obey the disbelievers and the hypocrites. Surely Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise.
33|2| Follow what is revealed to you from your Lord. Surely Allah is All-Aware of what you do;
33|3| and place your trust in Allah. Allah is enough as a guardian.
33|4| Allah has not made for any man two hearts in his chest cavity, nor did he make your wives whom you subjected to Zihar, your mothers, nor did he make your adopted sons your (real) sons. That is (merely) a word uttered by your mouths. And Allah says the truth and He shows the (right) way.
33|5| Call them by (the name of) their (real) fathers; It is more equitable in the sight of Allah. And if you do not know their fathers, then they are your brothers in faith and your friends. There is no sin on you in the mistake you make, but in that which you do with intention of your heart; and Allah is Most-Forgiving, Very-Merciful.
33|6| The Prophet is closer to the believers than their own selves, and his wives are their mothers; and those having mutual kinship are closer to one another (for the purpose of inheritance) than (other) believers and emigrants according to the Book of Allah, unless you do some good to your friends (by making a will in their favor). This had been written in the Book (the Preserved Tablet).
33|7| And (recall) when We took from the prophets their covenant, and from you and from NuH and Ibrahim and Musa and ‘Isa, the son of Maryam, and We did take from them a firm covenant,
33|8| so that He (Allah) may ask the truthful ones about their truth. And He has prepared a painful punishment for the disbelievers.
33|9| O you who believe, remember Allah‘s favor to you, when the forces (of the infidels) came upon you, and We sent upon them a wind, and the forces (of angels) you did not see. Allah is watchful of whatever you do.
33|10| (Recall) when they came upon you from above you and from below you, and when the eyes were distracted, and the hearts reached the throats, and you were thinking about Allah all sorts of thoughts.
33|11| At that occasion, the believers were put to a trial and were shaken with a violent convulsion.
33|12| (Remember) when the hypocrites and those having malady in their hearts were saying, .Allah and His messenger did not promise us but deceitfully;
33|13| and when a group of them said, .O people of Yathrib (Madinah), there is no place for you to stay; so go back. And a group of them was seeking permission (to leave) from the prophet, saying, .In fact our homes are vulnerable,. while they were not vulnerable; they wanted nothing but to escape.
33|14| And if it (Madinah) is entered (by the enemy, in their presence,) from all its sides and they are asked (to join) the mischief, they would readily commit it, and would not remain in them (their homes) but for a short while
33|15| despite that they had already made a covenant with Allah that they would not turn their backs; and a covenant with Allah has to be answered for.
33|16| Say, .Flight will never be of any use to you, if you flee from death or killing, and even then you will not be left to enjoy (life) but for a little while.
33|17| Say, .Who is there to protect you from Allah, if He intends evil to you, or (who is there to prevent Him) if He intends mercy for you?. Beside Allah, they will not find for themselves either a friend or a helper.
33|18| Allah does know the ones from among you who prevent (others from joining the battle) and those who say to their brothers, .Come along with us,. and who do not come to the battle but for a little while,
33|19| (and that too) with a greed against you (i.e. to extract a share of spoils from you). But when fear comes, you will see them looking towards you, rolling their eyes, like the one who gets faint because of death. Then once fear is gone, they assail you with sharp tongues, in greed for the good (i.e. the wealth acquired as spoils). These people did not accept faith (in real terms), therefore Allah has nullified their acts. All this is so easy for Allah.
33|20| They think that the coalition forces have not (yet) gone. And should the coalition forces come (again), they would like to be living in countryside among the Bedouins, asking (others) about your news. And even if they were to remain among you, they would not fight, but a little.
33|21| There is indeed a good model for you in the Messenger of Allah - for the one who has hope in Allah and the Last Day, and remembers Allah profusely.
33|22| When the believers saw the coalition forces, they said, .This is what Allah and His messenger had promised to us, and Allah and His messenger had told the truth. It only improved them further in faith and submission.
33|23| Among the believers, there are men who came true to the covenant they had with Allah. So, some of them have fulfilled their vows (by sacrificing their lives in the way of Allah), and some of them are (still) waiting, and they did not change (their commitment) in the least.
33|24| (All this happened) so that Allah may give reward to the truthful ones for their truthfulness, and punish the hypocrites, if He so wills, or accept their repentance. Surely, Allah is Most-Forgiving, Very- Merciful.
33|25| Allah has turned back the disbelievers with all their rage, having achieved no good; and Allah sufficed the believers against fighting. And Allah is Powerful, Mighty.
33|26| He has brought those of the people of the Book (the Jews) who had backed them, down from their fortresses, and cast awe into their hearts, so as to make you kill some of them and take others as captives;
33|27| and He let you inherit their land and their homes and their wealth, and a land you have not trodden (so far) . And Allah is Powerful to do any thing.
33|28| O prophet, say to your wives, .If you intend (to have the pleasure of) worldly life and its charm, then come on, and I shall give you some stuff, and release you in a handsome fashion;
33|29| but if you intend (to gain the pleasure of) Allah and His messenger and (the betterment of) the Hereafter, then, Allah has prepared a great reward for those of you who are good in their deeds.
33|30| O wives of the Prophet, whoever from among you will commit a clearly shameful act, the punishment will be doubled for her; and it is easy for Allah to do so.
33|31| And whoever of you stays obedient to Allah and His messenger, and acts righteously, We shall give her twice her reward, and We have prepared for her a prestigious provision.
33|32| O wives of the prophet, you are not like any other women, if you observe taqwa (righteousness). So, do not be too soft in your speech, lest someone having disease in his heart should develop fancies (about you); and do speak with appropriate words.
33|33| Remain in your homes, and do not display (your) beauty as it used to be displayed in the days of earlier ignorance; and establish Salah, and pay Zakah, and obey Allah and His messenger. Allah only intends to keep (all sorts of) filth away from you, O members of the family (of the prophet), and to make you pure through a perfect purification.
33|34| And be mindful of Allah‘s verses and the wisdom that is recited in your homes. Surely, Allah is All-Kind, All-Aware.
33|35| Surely, Muslim men and Muslim women, believing men and believing women, devout men and devout women, truthful men and truthful women, patient men and patient women, humble men and humble women, and the men who give Sadaqah (charity) and the women who give Sadaqah, and the men who fast and the women who fast, and the men who guard their private parts (against evil acts) and the women who guard (theirs), and the men who remember Allah much and the women who remember (Him) – for them, Allah has prepared forgiveness and a great reward.
33|36| It is not open for a believing man or a believing woman, once Allah and His messenger have decided a thing, that they should have a choice about their matter; and whoever disobeys Allah and His messenger, he indeed gets off the track, falling into an open error.
33|37| (Remember) when you (O Prophet,) were saying to the one who was favored by Allah and favored by you. Keep your wife to your self, and fear Allah. And you were concealing in your heart what Allah was going to reveal, and you were fearing people, while Allah is more entitled to be feared by you. So, when Zaid finished his desire for her, We gave her into your marriage, so that there may not be a problem for the believers in marrying wives of their adopted sons, when they finish their desire for them; and Allah‘s decree had to be enforced.
33|38| There is no problem for the prophet in (doing) what Allah has prescribed for him, a customary practice of Allah in the case of those who have gone before – and Allah‘s command is pre-determined by destiny –
33|39| those who convey the messages of Allah and have awe of Him, and have no awe of anyone except Allah. Allah is sufficient to take account (of everyone).
33|40| MuHammad is not a father of any of your men, but he is a messenger of Allah and the last of the prophets. And Allah has the Knowledge of every thing.
33|41| O you who believe, remember Allah abundantly,
33|42| and proclaim His purity at morn and eve.
33|43| He is such that He and His angels send blessings to you, so that He brings you out from all sorts of darkness into Light; and He is Very-Merciful to the believers.
33|44| Their greeting, on the Day when they will meet Him, will be, .Salam . . And He has prepared for them a noble reward.
33|45| O prophet, We have sent you as a witness and as a bearer of good news and a warner,
33|46| and as the one who calls (people) towards Allah with His permission, and as a luminous lamp.
33|47| So give good news to the believers that they are going to receive a huge bounty from Allah;
33|48| and do not obey the infidels and the hypocrites, and just ignore any hurt (that afflicts you) from them, and place your trust in Allah. Allah is sufficient (for you) to take care of all matters.
33|49| O you who believe, when you marry the believing women, and then divorce them before you have touched them, then they have no obligation of any ‘iddah (waiting period) for you that you may count. So give them (due) benefits, and release them in a pleasant manner.
33|50| O prophet, We have made lawful for you all your wives whom you have given their dowers, and those (bondwomen) whom you own, out of the captives Allah has given to you as spoils of war, and daughters of your paternal uncle, and daughters of your paternal aunts, and daughters of your maternal uncle, and daughters of your maternal aunts, who have migrated with you, and a believing woman who offers herself for (marrying) the prophet without dower, if the prophet wishes to bring her into his marriage, these rules being exclusive for you, and not for the (rest of the) believers, — We know what We have prescribed for them in respect of their wives and the slave-girls they own — so that there should be no difficulty for you. Allah is Most-Forgiving, Very-Merciful.
33|51| You may postpone (the turn) of any one you wish from among them, and may accommodate with you any one you wish. And should you recall any one from those whom you kept aside, there is no blame on you. It is more likely, in this way, that their eyes will stay content, and they will not grieve, and all of them will be happy with whatever you give to them. Allah knows whatever lies in your hearts, and Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise.
33|52| No women are lawful for you after this, nor is it lawful that you replace them (the present wives) with other wives, even though their goodness may attract you, except the bond-women you own. And Allah is watchful of every thing.
33|53| O you who believe, do not enter the houses of the Prophet, unless you are permitted for a meal, not (so early as) to wait for its preparation. But when you are invited, go inside. Then, once you have had the meal, just disperse, and (do) not (sit for long) being keen for a chat. This (conduct of yours) hurts the Prophet, but he feels shy of (telling) you (about it), but Allah is not shy of the truth. And when you ask any thing from them (the blessed wives of the Prophet), ask them from behind a curtain. That is better for the purity of your hearts and their hearts. It is not allowed for you that you hurt Allah‘s Messenger, nor that you ever marry his wives after him. Indeed, it would be an enormity in the sight of Allah.
33|54| If you disclose any thing, or conceal it, Allah is All-Knowing about every thing.
33|55| There is no sin for them (the wives of the Prophet) in (appearing without Hijab before) their fathers, or their brothers, or the sons of their brothers, or the sons of their sisters, or their own (Muslim) women, or their slave-girls. And (O wives of the Prophet,) fear Allah. Surely, Allah is witness to every thing.
33|56| Surely, Allah and His angels send blessings to the Prophet. O you who believe, do pray Allah to bless him, and send your Salam (prayer for his being in peace) to him in abundance.
33|57| Surely, those who annoy Allah and His Messenger are cursed by Allah in this world and in the Hereafter, and He has prepared for them a humiliating punishment.
33|58| As for those who hurt believing men and believing women without their having done anything (wrong), they shall bear the burden of slander and a manifest sin.
33|59| O prophet, tell your wives and your daughters and the women of the believers that they should draw down their shawls over them. That will make it more likely that they are recognized, hence not teased. And Allah is Most-Forgiving, Very-Merciful.
33|60| If the hypocrites and those having malady in their hearts and the ones who spread rumors in Madinah do not stop (their evil deeds), We will certainly stir you up against them, then they shall no longer live in it as your neighbors, but for a little while,
33|61| (and that too in a state of being) accursed. Wherever they are found, they shall be seized, and shall be killed thoroughly
33|62| _ a consistent practice of Allah in the matter of those who have gone before. And you will never find a change in Allah‘s consistent practice.
33|63| People ask you about the Hour (i.e. the Day of Judgment). Say,. Its knowledge is only with Allah. And what can let you know? May be, the Hour is near.
33|64| Surely, Allah has cursed the infidels, and has prepared for them a flaming fire,
33|65| wherein they will live forever, finding no one to protect or to help.
33|66| The Day their faces will be rolled in the fire, they will say, .Oh, would that we had obeyed Allah and obeyed the Messenger!.
33|67| And they will say, .Our Lord, we obeyed our chiefs and our elders, and they made us to go astray from the path.
33|68| Our Lord, give them twice the punishment, and send a curse on them, an enormous curse.
33|69| O you who believe, be not like those who annoyed Musa, then Allah cleared him of what they alleged; and he was honorable in the sight of Allah.
33|70| O you who believe, fear Allah, and speak in straightforward words.
33|71| (If you do so,) Allah will correct your deeds for your benefit, and forgive your sins for you. Whoever obeys Allah and His Messenger achieves a great success.
33|72| We did offer the Trust to the heavens and the earth and the mountains, but they refused to bear its burden and were afraid of it, and man picked it up. Indeed he is unjust (to himself), unaware (of the end).
33|73| The result (of all this) is that Allah will punish the hypocrites, men and women, and the Mushriks, men and women, and will accept the repentance of the believing men and women. Surely Allah is Most-Forgiving, Very-Merciful.
34|1| Praise be to Allah, to whom belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is on the earth; and for Him is the praise in the Hereafter, and He is the Wise, the All-Aware.
34|2| He knows all that goes into the earth and all that comes out from it, and all that comes down from the sky and all that ascends thereto. He is the Very-Merciful, the Most-Forgiving.
34|3| Said those who disbelieve, .The Hour (i.e. the Day of Judgment) will not come to us. Say, .Why not? By my Lord, the knower of the Unseen, it will come to you. Nothing in the heavens and in the earth, even to the measure of a particle, can escape Him, nor is there anything smaller than that or bigger, but it is recorded in a manifest book.
34|4| (The Hour will come,) so that He rewards those who believed and did righteous deeds. For such people, there is forgiveness (from Allah) and a noble provision.
34|5| As for those who strived against Our signs to defeat (the messenger), for such people there is a painful punishment of the divine wrath.
34|6| Those who are blessed with knowledge see that what is sent to you from your Lord is the truth, and it guides (people) to the path of the All- Mighty, the Ever-Praised.
34|7| And the disbelievers said, .Shall we point out to you a man who informs you that, when you are totally torn into pieces, you shall be (raised) in a new creation?.
34|8| Has he forged a lie against Allah, or is there a madness in him?. No, but those who do not believe in the Hereafter are in torment and far astray from the right path.
34|9| Have they not, then, looked to the sky and the earth that lies before them and behind them? If We so will, We would make the earth swallow them up, or cause pieces of the sky to fall upon them. Surely, in this there is a sign for a servant (of Allah) who turns to Him.
34|10| Surely We bestowed grace on Dawud from Us: .O mountains, pronounce with him Allah‘s purity repeatedly – and you too O birds!. And We made the iron soft for him
34|11| (saying to him,) .Make coats of armour, and maintain balance in combining rings, and do, all of you, righteous deeds. Surely I am watchful of what you do.
34|12| And for Sulaiman (We subjugated) the wind; its journey in the morning was (equal to the journey of) one month, and its journey in the afternoon was (equal to the journey) of another month. And We caused a stream of copper to flow for him. And there were some Jinns who worked before him with the leave of his Lord. Whoever of them would deviate from Our command, We would make him taste the punishment of the blazing fire.
34|13| They used to make for him whatever he wished of castles, images, basins as (large as) tanks, and big cookware fixed (in their places). .Do good, O family of Dawud, in thankfulness. Very few from My slaves are thankful.
34|14| So, when We decided (that) death (should come) upon him, nothing gave them any indication of his death, except a creature of the earth that had eaten up his sceptre. So, when he fell down, the Jinns came to know that if they had the knowledge of the Unseen, they would not have stayed (so long) in the humiliating punishment.
34|15| There was indeed a sign for (the community of) Saba‘ in their home-land: two gardens, (one) on the right and (one) on the left. .Eat of the provision from your Lord, and be grateful to Him – (You have) an excellent city, and a Most-Forgiving Lord.
34|16| Then they turned away. So We sent to them the flood of the dam, and replaced their two gardens with two gardens having fruits of bitter taste, and tamarisk and some bushes of wild lotes.
34|17| Thus We punished them because of their ungratefulness. We do not give (such a) punishment but to the ungrateful.
34|18| And We had set visible townships, all the way between them and the towns blessed by Us, and phased the journey between them in measured phases: .Travel along them at nights and days peacefully.
34|19| Then they said, .Our Lord, make (the phases of) our journeys more distant. And they wronged themselves, therefore We turned them into stories, and tore them into pieces. Surely in this there are signs for everyone who is ever-patient, fully grateful.
34|20| Iblis (Satan)has found his assessment true about them. So they followed him, except a group of the believers.
34|21| He did not have any power over them, but for the reason that We should recognize the one who believes in the Hereafter as distinct from the one who is in doubt about it; and your Lord is Watchful over every thing.
34|22| Say. .Call upon those whom you claim (to be your gods) beside Allah. They do not possess (any thing) even to the measure of a particle, neither in the heavens nor in the earth. They have no contribution at all in either of the two, nor is any of them a helper for Him (Allah).
34|23| Intercession before Him is of no benefit, but for the one whom He has permitted. (And those who receive a command from Allah remain fearful) until when fear is removed from their hearts, they say (to each other), .What did your Lord say?. They say, .The Truth. He is the High, the Great.
34|24| Say, .Who gives you sustenance from the heavens and the earth?. Say, .Allah. And We or you are either on the right path or in open error.
34|25| Say, .You will not be asked about the sins we committed, and we will not be asked about what you do.
34|26| Say, .Our Lord will assemble us together, then will judge between us with truth. He is the best Judge, the All-Knowing.
34|27| Say, .Show me the ones whom you have associated with Him as partners. Never! (You can never produce such partners.) He is but Allah, the Mighty, the Wise.
34|28| Even if you do not find anyone in them, do not enter therein until permission is given to you. And if it is said to you, ‘Go back‘, just go back; it is more decent for you. Allah is All-Aware of what you do.
34|29| They say, . When will this promise (of the Day of Judgment) be fulfilled, if you are truthful?.
34|30| Say, .You hold an appointment for a day that you can neither put back for a while, nor can you put it forward.
34|31| Those who disbelieve say, .We will never believe in this Qur‘an, nor in that which was before it. But if only you could see when the wrongdoers will be made to stand before their Lord, repulsing words (of blame) to one another! Those who were held as weak will say to the overbearing, .Had you not been there, we would have been believers.
34|32| Those who were overbearing will say to those weak, .Had we stopped you from (accepting) guidance after it came to you? Rather, you yourselves were guilty.
34|33| And those weak will say to those overbearing, .But (it was your) intriguing day and night (that stopped us from accepting guidance), when you were directing us to disbelieve in Allah and to set up rivals to Him. And all of them will conceal (their) regrets when they will see the punishment. And We will place iron-collars around the necks of those who disbelieved. They will not be recompensed except for what they used to do.
34|34| We did not send a warner to a township, but said those who lived a luxurious life in it, .We reject what you have been sent with.
34|35| And they said, .We are superior in riches and children, and we are not going to be punished.
34|36| Say, .In fact, my Lord extends provision to whom He wills, and straitens (it for whom He wills), but most of the people do not know.
34|37| Your riches or your children are not the things that bring you near Us closely; however, the one who believes and acts righteously (is close to Us). Therefore, such people will have the double reward for what they did, and they will be at peace in the upper chambers (of Paradise).
34|38| As for those who strive against our signs trying to frustrate (them), they will be arraigned into the torment.
34|39| Say, . Surely, my Lord extends provision for whomsoever He wills, and straitens (it) for him. And whatever thing you spend, He replaces it, and He is the best of the sustainers.
34|40| (Remember) the Day when He will gather all of them together, then will say to the angels, .Is it you that these people used to worship?.
34|41| They will say, .Pure are You! You are our mentor, not these. Rather, they used to worship the Jinns. Most of these believed in them.
34|42| So, you have no power today to benefit or harm one another, and We will say to the wrongdoers, .Taste the punishment of the Fire that you used to deny.
34|43| When Our evident verses are recited to them, they say, .He is nothing but a man who wishes to divert you from what your fathers used to worship. And they say, .This is nothing but a forged lie. And the disbelievers say about the Truth, when it came to them, .This is nothing but an explicit magic.
34|44| We did not give them any books that they might study, nor did We send to them any warner before you.
34|45| And those before them had rejected (the prophets), while these (infidels of Makkah) have not reached even one tenth of what We gave to those (before them). So, they rejected my Messengers. Then (imagine) how was My censure!
34|46| Say, .I advise you for one thing only: that you stand up before Allah, in pairs and in singles, then reflect; (you will easily appreciate that) there is no madness in your fellow (the Holy Prophet). He is none but a warner to you in the face of a stern torment.
34|47| Say, .If I had ever claimed any reward from you, then it is yours. My reward is with none but Allah. And He is witness over every thing.
34|48| Say, .My Lord sends forth the Truth. He is the Best-Knower of the Unseen.
34|49| Say, .Truth has come, and falsehood (has vanished, and it) has no power to produce or reproduce (anything).
34|50| Say, .If I go astray, I shall go astray only to my own detriment. And if I follow the right path, it is because of what my Lord reveals to me. Surely He is All-Hearer, Ever-Near.
34|51| And if you could only see when they will be terrified! Then there will be no escape, and they will be seized from a place near at hand.
34|52| And they will say, .We believe in Him. And how can they grasp at it (the faith) from a place (so) far off,
34|53| while they had rejected it before, and used to make conjectures from a remote place?
34|54| And a barrier will be placed between them and that which they desire, as it will be done with the people of their kind who were before (them). They have been in a perplexing doubt.
35|1| All praise belongs to Allah, the Originator of the heavens and the earth, who appoints the angels as messengers having wings, in twos, threes and fours. He adds to the creation what He wills. Indeed, Allah is powerful to do every thing.
35|2| Whatever blessing Allah opens for the people, there is none to hold it back, and whatever He holds back, there is none to release it thereafter. He is the Mighty, the Wise.
35|3| O mankind, remember Allah‘s blessing upon you. Is there any creator other than Allah who gives you provision from the sky and the earth? There is no god but He. So, to where are you being turned around (by your desires)?
35|4| (O Prophet,) if they reject you, (it is not something new, because) many messengers have been rejected before you. It is to Allah that all matters are to be referred.
35|5| O mankind, Allah‘s promise is definitely true, therefore, the worldly life must not deceive you, nor should you be deceived about Allah by the big deceiver (Satan).
35|6| Surely ShaiTan (Satan) is an enemy for you. So, take him as an enemy. He only invites his group (to falsehood) so that they become inmates of the blazing fire.
35|7| Those who disbelieve will have a severe punishment; and those who believe and do righteous deeds will have forgiveness and a great reward.
35|8| Then, can the one whose evil deed is so much adorned for him that he deems it really good (be equal to the one who differentiates between good and evil)? The fact, therefore, is that Allah lets go astray whomsoever He wills, and leads to the right path whomsoever He wills. So, (O Prophet,) let not your soul collapse in grief for them. Surely Allah knows well what they are doing.
35|9| Allah is the One who sends the winds, then they raise up the clouds, then We drive them to a dead land and revive the land through them after its death. In similar way shall be the Resurrection.
35|10| Whoever desires honor, then all honor lies with Allah alone. Towards Him ascends the pure word, and the righteous deed uplifts it. As for those who plot evils, for them there is a severe punishment, and their plot itself will perish.
35|11| Allah has created you from dust, then from a drop of semen, then He made you couples. No female conceives (a baby) nor gives birth (to it) without His knowledge; and no aged person is made to advance in age, nor is a part curtailed from his age, but all this is (recorded) in a book. Surely all this is easy for Allah.
35|12| And two seas are not alike; this one is sweet, saturating, pleasant to drink, and that one is salt, bitter. But from each, you eat fresh meat, and derive ornaments that you wear. And you see the boats therein cleaving through water, so that you may search for His grace, and that you may be grateful.
35|13| He makes the night enter into the day and makes the day enter into the night, and He has subjugated the sun and the moon; each one of them is running towards an appointed time. That is Allah, your Lord. To Him belongs the kingdom. And those whom you invoke beside Him do not own even the membrane on a date-stone.
35|14| If you call them, they do not hear your call, and even if they were to hear, they would not respond to you. And on the Day of Judgment they will deny your having held them as Allah‘s partners. And none can inform you like Him who is Aware.
35|15| O men, you are the ones who need Allah, and Allah is Free-of-All-Needs, the Ever-Praised.
35|16| If He so wills, He can do away with you and bring a new creation.
35|17| For Allah, that is not something difficult.
35|18| No bearer will bear the burden of any other person. If a person carrying a heavy load calls (someone) to (share) his load, nothing from it shall be carried (by the latter), even though he be a near of kin. You can warn only those who fear their Lord, while He is unseen, and establish Salah. Whoever gets purified gets purified for his own benefit. And to Allah is the final return.
35|19| The blind and the sighted are not equal,
35|20| nor are darkness and light,
35|21| nor shade and heat of the sun.
35|22| And the living and the dead are not alike. Allah makes to hear whomsoever He wills. And you cannot make to hear those who are in the graves.
35|23| You are but a warner.
35|24| Surely We have sent you with truth as a bearer of good news and as a warner, and there was no community without a warner having passed among them.
35|25| If they reject you, (it is not something new, because) those before them have (also) rejected (messengers). Their messengers came to them with clear proofs and with scriptures and with the enlightening book.
35|26| Then I seized those who disbelieved. So, how was My censure !
35|27| Did you not see that Allah has sent down water from the sky? Then We brought forth with it fruits having different colours. And among the mountains there are tracks, white and red— of different colours, and ( others) utterly black.
35|28| And among humans and beasts and cattle, there are those having different colours as well. Only those of His slaves fear Allah who are knowledgeable. Surely Allah is Mighty, Forgiving.
35|29| Surely those who recite Allah‘s Book and have established Salah and have spent, secretly and openly, from what We have provided to them –— they hope for a trade that will never crash,
35|30| so that He pays them their rewards in full, and gives them more out of His grace. Surely He is Most-Forgiving, Very-Appreciative.
35|31| The Book We have revealed to you is the Truth, confirming what was (revealed) before it. Surely Allah, in respect of His slaves, is All-Aware, All-Seeing.
35|32| Then We conveyed the Book as an heritage to those of Our slaves whom We chose. Now, some of them are those who wrong their own selves, and some of them are mediocre, and some of them are those who outpace (others) in righteous deeds with Allah‘s permission. That is the great bounty,
35|33| gardens of eternity they enter. They will be ornamented with bracelets of gold and with pearls, and their dress therein will be (of) silk.
35|34| And they will say, .Praise be to Allah who has removed all sorrow from us. Surely our Lord is Most-Forgiving, Very-Appreciative,
35|35| who, out of His grace, has made us land at a home of eternal living where we are neither touched by weariness, nor are we touched by boredom.
35|36| As for those who disbelieve, for them shall be the fire of Jahannam; neither they will be sentenced to death, so that they could die, nor will its torment be lightened for them. It is in this way that We punish every infidel.
35|37| And they will be crying therein, .Our Lord, take us out (from here), and we will act righteously, not in the way we have been doing before. (Allah will say to them,) .Did We not give you an age in your life in which lesson could have been learnt by the one who wished to take lesson? And (furthermore) the warner had (also) come to you. So, have a taste, because the wrongdoers will have no supporter.
35|38| Surely Allah is the Knower of the unseen in the heavens and the earth. Indeed He fully knows what lies in the hearts.
35|39| He is the One who has made you successors (of the past generations) on the earth. So the one who becomes infidel, his infidelity will go against himself. Their infidelity adds nothing to the infidels but anger from their Lord, and their infidelity adds nothing to the infidels but loss.
35|40| Say, .Tell me about your (presumed) co-gods whom you invoke beside Allah. Show me that part of the earth that they have created. Or do they have a share in the (creation) of the heavens?. Or have We given them a book so that they are upon a clear proof from it? No, but the wrongdoers promise one another nothing but delusion.
35|41| Undoubtedly, Allah holds back the heavens and the earth from leaving their existing state, and if they were to leave, there is none who can hold them back, except Him. Surely He is Forbearing, Most-Forgiving.
35|42| They had sworn forceful oaths that if a warner would come to them, they would be more receptive to guidance than any other community. But when a warner came to them, it added nothing to them but aversion,
35|43| because of their showing arrogance in the land and plotting of evil. And the evil plot engulfs none but its own people (who make it). So, they are looking for nothing but the (divine) practice with the earlier people. So you will never find in Allah‘s practice any change, and you will never find in Allah‘s practice any diversion.
35|44| Did they not travel in the land and see how was the end of those before them? They were stronger than these in power. Allah is not such that something in the heavens or the earth can frustrate Him. Surely He is All-Knowing, All-Powerful.
35|45| If Allah were to take mankind to task for what they did, He would have not left a living creature on its back, but He delays them upto an appointed time. So when their time will come, then Allah is the One who will see His slaves.
36|1| Ya Sin
36|2| By the Qur‘an, that is full of wisdom,
36|3| You are truly one of the messengers of Allah,
36|4| (and you are) on a straight path,
36|5| (this Qur‘an being) a revelation from the All- Mighty, the Very-Merciful,
36|6| so that you may warn a people whose fathers were not warned, and hence, they are unaware.
36|7| The word has indeed come true about most of them, so they will not believe.
36|8| We have placed iron collars on their necks, so they are reaching up to their chins, and their heads are forced to remain upwards.
36|9| And We have placed a barrier in front of them and a barrier behind them, and (thus) they are encircled by Us; so they do not see.
36|10| It is all equal for them whether you warn them or do not warn them, they will not believe.
36|11| You can (usefully) warn only the one who follows the advice and fears the RaHman (the All-Merciful Allah) without seeing (Him). So give him the good news of forgiveness and of a noble reward.
36|12| Surely We will give new life to the dead, and We are recording whatever (deeds) they send before them and whatever effects they leave behind. Every thing is fully computed by Us in a manifest book of record.
36|13| Cite to them the example of the People of the Town, when the messengers came to it,
36|14| when We sent to them two (apostles), and they rejected both of them, so We confirmed them with a third one. So they said, .We are sent to you.
36|15| They (the people of the Town) said, .You are no more than human beings like us, and the RaHman (the All-Merciful Allah) has not sent down any thing. You are but telling a lie.
36|16| They (the messengers) said, .Our Lord knows that we are undoubtedly sent to you.
36|17| Our obligation is no more than to convey the message clearly.
36|18| They (the People of the Town) said, .We take you as a bad omen for us. If you do not desist, we will certainly stone you and you will be afflicted by a painful punishment from us.
36|19| They said, .Your bad omen is with yourselves. (Do you take it as bad omen) if you are given a good counsel? Rather, you are a people who cross all limits.
36|20| And there came a man rushing from the farthest part of the city. He said, .O my people, follow the messengers.
36|21| Follow those who do not claim any reward from you, and who are on the right path.
36|22| What excuse do I have if I do not worship the One who has created me and to whom you will be returned?
36|23| Shall I adopt those gods besides Him whose intercession, if RaHman (the All-Merciful Allah) intends to do harm to me, cannot help me in the least, nor can they come to my rescue?
36|24| In that case, I will be in open error indeed.
36|25| Undoubtedly I have believed in your Lord; so listen to me.
36|26| (Thereafter when his people killed him,) it was said to him, .Enter the Paradise. He said, .Would that my people knew
36|27| how my Lord has forgiven me and placed me among the honoured ones!.
36|28| And We did not send down to his people any army from the heavens after him, nor were We (in need) to send down.
36|29| It was no more than a single Cry, and in no time they were extinguished.
36|30| Alas for the slaves (of Allah)! No messenger came to them, but they have been mocking at him.
36|31| Did they not see how many generations We have destroyed before them who will not come back to them?
36|32| All of them are but to be assembled together (and) to be arraigned before Us.
36|33| And a sign for them is the dead land. We gave it life and brought forth grain from it; so from it they eat.
36|34| And We have placed gardens of date-palms and grapes, and caused springs to gush forth therein,
36|35| so that they may eat fruits thereof, while it was not made by their hands. Would they not then offer gratitude?
36|36| Pure (from every fault) is the One who has created all the pairs of whatever the earth grows and of the humans themselves and of that which they do not know.
36|37| And a sign for them is the night. We strip (the cover of) the day from it, and they are suddenly in darkness.
36|38| And the sun is quickly proceeding towards its destination. That is the designing of the All-Mighty, the All-Knowing.
36|39| And for the moon We have appointed measured phases, until it turned (pale, curved and fine) like an old branch of date palm.
36|40| Neither it is for the sun to overtake the moon, nor can the night outpace the day. Each one is floating in an orbit.
36|41| And it is a sign for them that We boarded their children in the loaded ship,
36|42| and created for them things similar to it on which they ride.
36|43| And if We so will, We can drown them; then no one will respond to their cry, nor will they be rescued,
36|44| unless there be mercy from Us, and (unless) We let them enjoy for a while.
36|45| And (they pay no heed) when it is said to them, .Save yourselves from that (punishment) which is before you (in this world) and that which will come after you (die), so that you may receive mercy.
36|46| There comes to them no sign from the signs of your Lord, but they turn averse to it.
36|47| And when it is said to them, .Spend (to the needy) from the provision Allah has given to you., the disbelievers say to the believers, .Shall we feed those whom Allah could have fed, if Allah so willed? You are but in open error.
36|48| And they say, .When will this promise come true, if you are truthful?.
36|49| They are looking for nothing but for a single Cry that will seize them when they will be quarrelling.
36|50| So they will not be able to make a bequest, nor will they return to their household.
36|51| And the Horn will be blown, and suddenly they will be rushing from their graves towards their Lord.
36|52| They will say, .Woe to us! Who has raised us from our sleeping place? .This is what RaHman (the All-Merciful Allah) had promised, and the messengers had told the truth.
36|53| It will be no more than a single Cry, and in no time they will all be arraigned before Us.
36|54| Then, nobody will be subjected to injustice in the least, and you will not be recompensed but for what you used to do.
36|55| The people of the Paradise are engaged today in (their) activities, happily enjoying (them).
36|56| They and their spouses are in pleasant shades, reclining on couches.
36|57| For them there are fruits, and for them there is whatever they ask for.
36|58| .Salam .(Peace upon you) is the word (they receive) from Merciful Lord.
36|59| And (it will be said to the infidels,) .Get apart (from the believers) today O the guilty ones.
36|60| Did I not direct you, O children of ‘Adam (Adam), that you must not worship the Satan, (because) he is an open enemy for you,
36|61| and that you must worship Me, (because) this is the straight path?
36|62| He had misguided lot many people from among you. So, did you not have sense?
36|63| (Now) this is the Jahannam of which you were consistently warned.
36|64| Enter it today, because you have been persistently denying (the truth).
36|65| Today We will set a seal on their mouths, and their hands will speak to Us, and their legs will bear witness about what they used to do.
36|66| If We so will, We would wipe out their eyes (right here in this world), and they would be racing towards the way, but how would they see?
36|67| And If We so will, We would disfigure them at their places, and they would not be able to move, nor would they return.
36|68| And whomsoever We give long life, we reverse him in creation. Then, do they have no sense?
36|69| We did not teach him (the Holy Prophet) poetry, and it is not proper for him. It is nothing (of that sort,) but (it is) an advice and a readable book that explains (the Truth),
36|70| so that it may warn him who is alive (to listen to the truth), and so that the word may prove true against the disbelievers.
36|71| Did they not see that We have created for them cattle, among things made (directly) by Our hands, and then they become their owners?
36|72| And We have brought them under their control, so as some of them are their means of transport, and some of them they eat.
36|73| And for them there are (other) benefits in them and things to drink. So, would they not be grateful?
36|74| They have adopted gods other than Allah, so that they may be helped (by them).
36|75| They cannot help them, rather they (the disbelievers themselves) are (like) an army brought forth for (protecting) them (the so-called co-gods)
36|76| So, their remarks must not grieve you. Surely We know what they conceal and what they disclose.
36|77| Did man not see that We have created him from a drop of semen? Then suddenly he stood as an open adversary (to Us).
36|78| He has set up an argument about Us and forgot his creation. He said, .Who will give life to the bones when they are decayed?.
36|79| Say, .These will be revived by the same One who had created them for the first time, and who is fully aware of every creation,
36|80| __ the One who created for you fire from the green tree, and in no time you kindle from it.
36|81| Is it that the One who has created the heavens and the earth has no power to create ones like them? Why not? He is the Supreme Creator, the All- Knowing.
36|82| His practice, when He intends to do something, is no more than He says, .Be., and it comes to be.
36|83| So, pure (from every fault) is the One in whose hand is the dominion of all things. And towards Him you are to be returned.
37|1| (I swear) by those who stand in rows,
37|2| then by those who prevent firmly,
37|3| then by those who recite the dhikr,
37|4| surely your God is but One,
37|5| the Lord of the heavens and the earth and what is between them, and Lord of the points of sunrise.
37|6| Verily, We have decorated the nearest sky with an adornment, the stars,
37|7| and (have made them) a security against every rebellious devil.
37|8| They cannot listen to the Upper Realm and are hit from every side
37|9| to be driven off, and for them there is a lasting punishment;
37|10| however, if one snatches a little bit, he is pursued by a bright flame.
37|11| Now ask them, .Are they stronger in the formation of their bodies, or those (other beings) that We have created?. Certainly, We did create them from sticky clay.
37|12| But you wonder (at their denial), and they mock (at the idea of an Hereafter).
37|13| And when any advice is given to them, they pay no heed to it.
37|14| And when they see a sign, they make fun of it,
37|15| and say, .This is nothing but an open magic.
37|16| Is it when we have died and become dust and bones, that we shall be raised again,
37|17| and even our fathers of aforetime?.
37|18| Say, .Yes, and you shall be disgraced (too)!.
37|19| So, it will be only a single castigating call, and all of a sudden they will begin to see.
37|20| And they will be saying, .Woe to us; this is the Day of Retribution.
37|21| (It will be said to them,) .This is the Day of Judgment that you used to deny.
37|22| (It will be said to the angels,) .Muster all those who were unjust, and their fellows, and whatever they used to worship
37|23| other than Allah, and show them the way to Jahannam ,
37|24| and stop them (for a while,) for they are to be asked some questions.
37|25| (Then they will be asked, .What is wrong with you that you do not help each other?.
37|26| On the contrary, that day all of them will have totally surrendered.
37|27| And some of them (the followers of their chiefs) will turn to others (the chiefs), asking questions from one another.
37|28| They (the followers) will say, .You were the ones who used to come to (mislead) us forcefully.
37|29| They (the chiefs) will say, .On the contrary, you yourselves were not believers.
37|30| We had no authority over you at all, but you yourselves were a transgressing people.
37|31| So, the word of our Lord has come true against us. Indeed, we have to taste (the punishment).
37|32| We did misguide you, (because) we were ourselves erroneous.
37|33| So, that day, they will share each other in punishment.
37|34| This is how We deal with the criminals.
37|35| They were those to whom when it was said: .There is no god but Allah., they waxed proud,
37|36| and used to say, .Are we really to leave our gods because of an insane poet?.
37|37| No, he has come with Truth and has confirmed all the messengers (of Allah).
37|38| Surely you have to taste the painful punishment,__
37|39| And you will be recompensed for nothing but for what you used to do___
37|40| unlike Allah‘s chosen servants.
37|41| Those are the people for whom there is a known provision,
37|42| the fruits; and they will be honored
37|43| in Gardens of Bliss
37|44| facing each other on couches.
37|45| They will be served with a cup from a flowing drink,
37|46| (that will be) white (and) delicious for those who drink.
37|47| There will be no headache therein, nor will they be intoxicated with it,
37|48| and by their side there will be females restricting their gazes (to their husbands), having pretty big eyes,
37|49| as if they were eggs hidden (under feathers, protected from pollution).
37|50| Then they will turn to each other asking questions mutually.
37|51| A speaker from them will say, .I had a companion (in the worldly life)
37|52| who used to say (to me), .Are you one of those who believe?
37|53| Is it when we have died and become dust and bones? Is it true that we are going to be recompensed (for our deeds)?.
37|54| He (the speaker) will say (to other people in Paradise) .Would you like to have a look (at Jahannam to find out what happened to that companion of mine)?.
37|55| So he will look and will see him in the middle of Jahannam.
37|56| He (the speaker) will say (to his companion seen in Jahannam ), .By Allah, you were going almost to ruin me.
37|57| But for the favor of my Lord, I would have been among those produced for punishment.
37|58| (Then the speaker will address other people of Paradise in delight and wonder, saying,) .Are we not then to die anymore
37|59| beyond our first death, nor are we going to be punished?.
37|60| This is, indeed, the great achievement.
37|61| For this kind (of achievement), all workers must work.
37|62| Is that (blissful Paradise) better for hospitality or the tree of zaqqum ?
37|63| We have made it a test for the unjust.
37|64| It is a tree that comes forth in the bottom of Jahannam.
37|65| Its fruits are like the heads of devils.
37|66| So, they have to eat from it and have to fill their bellies with it.
37|67| Then they will have, on top of it, a mixture made of boiling water.
37|68| Then, their final return is to the Fire.
37|69| They found their fathers on the wrong path.
37|70| So, they used to run in their footsteps.
37|71| Most of the earlier ones (too) had gone astray before them.
37|72| We did send warners among them.
37|73| So look, how was the end of those warned -
37|74| except Allah‘s chosen servants.
37|75| And NuH did call Us (for help after he was disappointed with his people), so (We accepted his prayer, as) We are the best to respond.
37|76| And We delivered him and his family from the great agony,
37|77| and made his progeny the sole survivors (from the Deluge).
37|78| And We left for him (a word of praise) among the later people, (that is):
37|79| Salam be on NuH among (the people of) all the worlds.
37|80| Certainly, this is how We reward those who are good in their deeds.
37|81| He was one of Our believing servants.
37|82| Then, we drowned others.
37|83| And certainly one of his adherents was Ibrahim.
37|84| (Remember) when he came to his Lord with a pure heart,
37|85| when he said to his father and his people, .What is that which you worship?
37|86| Do you wish (to have) fallacious gods other than Allah?
37|87| Then, what do you think about the Lord of the worlds?.
37|88| Then, he cast a look at the stars,
37|89| and then said, .I feel indisposed.
37|90| So they went away from him, turning their backs.
37|91| And he made his way to their ‘gods‘ and said to them, .Why would you not eat?
37|92| What is wrong with you that you do not speak?.
37|93| Then he attacked them striking with his right hand.
37|94| Then, they (the idolaters) came to him rushing.
37|95| He said, .Do you worship what is carved by yourselves,
37|96| while Allah has created you and what you make?.
37|97| They said, .Build for him a structure, and throw him into the blazing fire.
37|98| So, they intended to bring harm to him, but We made them the lowest (by frustrating their plan).
37|99| And he said, .I am going to my Lord. He will show me the way.
37|100| O my Lord, bless me with a righteous son.
37|101| So, We gave him the good news of a forbearing boy.
37|102| Thereafter, when he (the boy) reached an age in which he could work with him, he (Ibrahim) said, .O my little son, I have seen in a dream that I am slaughtering you, so consider, what is your opinion?. He said, .O my dear father, do what you have been ordered to do. You will find me, insha‘allah , (if Allah wills) one of those who endure patiently.
37|103| So, (it was a great episode) when both of them submitted themselves (to Allah‘s will), and he laid him on his forehead (to slaughter him),
37|104| and then We called out to him, .O Ibrahim,
37|105| you did make the dream come true. This is how We reward those who are good in their deeds.
37|106| This was indeed a trial that clearly demonstrated (their obedience).
37|107| And We ransomed him with a great sacrifice,
37|108| and We left for him (a word of praise) among the later people,
37|109| (that is,) .Salam be on Ibrahim!
37|110| This is how We reward those who are good in their deeds.
37|111| Surely, he is among Our believing servants.
37|112| And We gave him the good news of IsHaq (Isaac), a prophet from among the righteous.
37|113| And We did bless him, and IsHaq. And among the progeny of both of them, some are good and some are utterly unjust to their own selves.
37|114| Certainly We bestowed favors upon Musa and Harun,
37|115| and We delivered them and their people from the great agony,
37|116| and We helped them, so they became victors,
37|117| and We gave them the clear book,
37|118| and guided them to the straight path.
37|119| And We left for them (a word of praise) among the later people,
37|120| (that is,) Salam be on Musa and Harun!
37|121| This is how We reward those who are good in their deeds.
37|122| Surely, both of them were among Our believing servants.
37|123| And surely, Ilyas is one of the messengers.
37|124| (Remember) when he said to his people: .Do you not fear Allah?
37|125| Do you invoke Ba‘l, and ignore the Best of the creators,
37|126| that is, Allah who is your Lord and the Lord of your forefathers?.
37|127| Then they rejected him. Therefore, they will be arraigned -
37|128| except Allah‘s chosen servants.
37|129| And We left for him (a word of praise) among the later people,
37|130| (that is,) .Salam on Ilyasin (Ilyas).
37|131| This is how We reward those who are good in their deeds.
37|132| Surely, he was from among Our believing servants.
37|133| And surely, LuT is one of the messengers.
37|134| (Remember) when We saved him and his family, all of them,
37|135| except an old woman among those remaining behind.
37|136| After that, We destroyed others
37|137| and you do pass by them at daybreak
37|138| and by nightfall. Would you still not understand?
37|139| And surely, Yunus (Jonah) is from among the messengers.
37|140| (Remember) when he ran away towards the boat that was already loaded.
37|141| Then he participated in drawing lots (to offload one of the passengers) and was the one who was defeated.
37|142| Then the fish swallowed him while he was reproaching his own self.
37|143| Had he not been of those who proclaim Allah‘s purity,
37|144| he would have definitely lived in its belly till the day when the dead will be raised.
37|145| Then We cast him ashore in the open while he was ill,
37|146| and We caused a tree of ourds to grow over him.
37|147| And We had sent him (as messenger) to one hundred thousand, or more.
37|148| So, they believed, then, We let them enjoy for a time.
37|149| So ask them, .Does your Lord have daughters while they have sons?.
37|150| Or, had We created angels as females while they were witnessing?
37|151| Beware! They are the ones who, by way of a lie of theirs, (have the audacity to) say,
37|152| .Allah has children. - and they are absolute liars.
37|153| Is it that Allah has chosen daughters (for Himself) instead of sons?
37|154| What is the matter with you? How (arbitrarily) do you judge?
37|155| Then, is it that you do not think about it?
37|156| Or, is it that there is some open authority with you?
37|157| Then bring your book, if you are truthful.
37|158| And they have made up between Him (Allah) and the Jinns some kinship, while the Jinns already know that they are bound to be seized.__
37|159| __Pure is Allah from what they describe__
37|160| except Allah‘s chosen servants.
37|161| So, you and those whom you worship,
37|162| none of you can make anyone turn away from Him (Allah),
37|163| except him who is to burn in Jahannam.
37|164| And (the angels say,) .There is no one among us who does not have a known station,
37|165| and We, surely We, are those who stand in rows
37|166| and We, surely We, are those who proclaim Allah‘s purity.
37|167| And they (the pagans) used to say,
37|168| .Had there been a scripture with us like that of the former people,
37|169| we would have certainly been Allah‘s chosen servants.
37|170| Then (once the divine book came to them,) they disbelieved in it. So, very soon they will come to know.
37|171| And Our Word has already come to pass in favor of Our servants, the messengers
37|172| (that) they are the ones who will be supported,
37|173| and verily it is Our army (of chosen servants) that prevails.
37|174| So, withdraw your attention from them for some time.
37|175| But, watch them. They shall soon see (the reality).
37|176| Are they asking for Our punishment to come sooner?
37|177| So, when it will descend in their courtyard, then, evil will be the morning of those warned.
37|178| So, withdraw your attention from them for some time,
37|179| and watch. They shall soon see (the reality).
37|180| Pure is your Lord, the Lord of all might and honor, from what they describe
37|181| and Salam be on the messengers
37|182| and praised is Allah, the Lord of all the worlds.
38|1| Sad . I swear by the Qur‘an, (the book) containing advice, (this is true,)
38|2| but those who disbelieve are (involved) in false pride and opposition.
38|3| How many a generation have We destroyed before them, so they cried out (for mercy), while no time was left for having any refuge.
38|4| They (the pagans) wonder that a warner has come to them from among themselves. And the disbelievers say, .This is a magician, a sheer liar.
38|5| Has he (not) turned all the gods into a single God? It is a very strange thing indeed.
38|6| And the leaders among them walked out saying (to their followers), .Walk away (from the Prophet,) and stay firm on (adhering to) your gods. This (call of the Prophet) is surely something designed (for his personal benefit).
38|7| We never heard of it in the classical faith (of ours). This is nothing but a false invention.
38|8| Is it (believable) that the message of advice has been sent down to him (alone) from among all of us?. The fact is that they are in doubt about My message; rather, they have not yet tasted My punishment.
38|9| Do they have the treasures of the mercy of your Lord, the Mighty, the Bountiful?
38|10| Or do they have the ownership of the heavens and the earth and what lies between them? Then let them ascend (to the sky) by ropes.
38|11| What is there (in Makkah) is just a host of the (opposing) groups that has to be defeated.
38|12| Even before them, the people of NuH and ‘Ad and Fir‘aun (Pharaoh), the man of stakes,
38|13| and Thamud and the people of LuT and the people of Aaikah have rejected (the messengers). They were the (strong) groups.
38|14| All of them did nothing but declare the messengers as liars; hence, My punishment became due.
38|15| And these people are waiting for nothing but for a single Cry (the sound of the Trumpet to be blown on Doomsday) that will have no pause.
38|16| And they say, .O our Lord, give us our share (of the punishment) sooner, before the Day of Reckoning.
38|17| Bear patiently with what they say, and remember Our servant Dawud, the man of might. Surely he was ever-turning to Allah.
38|18| We had subjugated the mountains to join him (in) making tasbiH (i.e. pronouncing Allah‘s purity) at evening and sunrise,
38|19| and the birds as well, mustered together. All were turning to Allah with him.
38|20| And We made his kingdom strong, and gave him wisdom and decisive speech.
38|21| Has there come to you the story of the litigants, when they entered the sanctuary by climbing over the wall?
38|22| When they entered upon Dawud, and he was scared of them, they said, .Be not scared. We are two litigants; one of us has wronged the other, so decide between us with truth, and do not cross the limits, and guide us to the right path.
38|23| This is my brother; he has ninety nine ewes, and I have a single ewe; still he said, ‘Give it into my charge.‘ And he overpowered me in speech.
38|24| He (Dawud) said, .He has certainly wronged you by demanding your ewe to be added to his ewe. Many partners oppress one another, except those who believe and do righteous deeds, and very few they are. And Dawud realized that We had put him to a test, so he prayed to his Lord for forgiveness, and bowing down, he fell in prostration, and turned (to Allah).
38|25| So we forgave him that (lapse), and surely he has a place of nearness in Our presence, and an excellent resort.
38|26| O Dawud, We have made you a vicegerent on earth, so judge between people with truth, and do not follow the selfish desire, lest it should lead you astray from Allah‘s path. Surely those who go astray from Allah‘s path will have a severe punishment, because they had forgotten the Day of Reckoning.
38|27| We did not create the heavens and the earth and what is between them in vain. That is the thinking of those who disbelieve. So, woe to the disbelievers because of the Fire (they have to face).
38|28| Shall We make those who believe and do righteous deeds equal to those who commit mischief on the earth? Or shall We make the God-fearing equal to the sinners?
38|29| This is a blessed Book We have revealed to you, so that they deliberate in its verses, and so that the men of understanding may heed to advice.
38|30| And We blessed Dawud with Sulaiman. He was an excellent servant (of Allah). Surely, he was great in turning (to Us, in penitence and praise).
38|31| (Worth remembering is the incident) when the swift horses of high breeding were presented before him in the evening.
38|32| He said, .I held the love of the good things (i.e. these horses) because of the remembrance of my Lord. until it went behind the veil.
38|33| (Then he said,) .Bring them back to me. - and he started passing his hands over the shanks and the necks (of the horses).
38|34| And indeed We tested Sulaiman while We threw on his throne a body after which he turned (to Us).
38|35| He said, .O my Lord, forgive me, and bless me with a kingdom that will not be available to anyone after me. Surely, You are the Bountiful.
38|36| Then We subjugated the wind for him that blew smoothly on his command to wherever he wished,
38|37| and (We subjugated to him) the devils (among Jinns), all builders and divers,
38|38| and many others held in chains.
38|39| This is Our gift. So, do favor (to someone) or withhold (it), with no (requirement to give) account.
38|40| He has a place of nearness in Our presence, and an excellent end.
38|41| And remember Our servant, Ayyub – when he called his Lord saying, .The ShaiTan (Satan) has inflicted weariness and pain upon me.
38|42| (Allah said to him,) .Strike (the ground) with your foot: Here is a cool water to bathe, and a drink!.
38|43| And We let him have his family and the like of them besides, as a mercy from Us, and a reminder for the people of understanding.
38|44| And (We said to him,) .Take (a bundle of) thin twigs in your hand, and strike with it, and do not violate your oath. Surely, We found him very enduring. He was really an excellent servant. Surely, he was great in turning (to Us, in penitence and praise).
38|45| And remember Our servants - Ibrahim and IsHaq and Ya‘qub - the men of strength and the men of vision.
38|46| We chose them for a trait of remembering the (eternal) Home (in the Hereafter).
38|47| And surely they are, in Our sight, among the chosen, the best of the righteous.
38|48| And remember Isma‘il and Al-Yasa‘ and Dhul-Kifl. Each one of them was among the best of the righteous.
38|49| This is a reminder (of what has passed). And surely the God-fearing will have the best place to return:
38|50| #NAME?
38|51| They will be relaxing in it, calling there for plenteous fruits and drinks;
38|52| and in their company there will be females restricting their glances (to their husbands, and) of matching ages.
38|53| This is what you are being promised for the Day of Reckoning.
38|54| Surely, that is provision provided by Us, to which there is no end.
38|55| Having said this, the transgressors will surely have the most evil place to return:
38|56| the Jahannam , in which they will enter. So, how evil is that place to rest?
38|57| Let them taste this: hot water and pus,
38|58| and other things similar to it of various kinds.
38|59| (When the leaders of the infidels will see their followers entering the Hell after them, they will say to each other,) .This is a multitude rushing into (the Hell) with you - they are not welcome - they are to burn in the Fire.
38|60| They (the followers) will say (to their leaders) .No, it is you who are not welcome; you are the ones who brought this upon us. So, how evil is the place to stay (for ever)!.
38|61| They (the followers) will say, .Our Lord, whoever has brought this on us, do increase his punishment twofold in the Fire.
38|62| And they (the infidels) will say, .What is the matter with us that we do not see those men (here in Hell) whom we used to count amongst the worst? (i.e the Muslims whom the infidels used to treat as the worst people among them)
38|63| Had we taken them as a laughing-stock (unjustly), or have our eyes missed them?.
38|64| That is going to happen definitely, that is, the mutual quarrel of the people of the Fire.
38|65| Say, .I am only a warner, and there is no god but Allah, the One, the All-Dominant,
38|66| the Lord of the heavens and the earth and what is between them, the Mighty, the Very-Forgiving.
38|67| Say, .It is a great news
38|68| to which you are averse.
38|69| I had no knowledge of the Heavenly Beings when they were debating (about the creation of ‘Adam).
38|70| Revelation is sent to me only because I am a plain warner.
38|71| When your Lord said to the angels, .I am going to create man from clay.
38|72| So, once I make him perfectly and breath My spirit into him, you must fall down in prostration before him.
38|73| Then, the angels prostrated themselves, all of them together -
38|74| except Iblis (Satan). He waxed proud, and became one of the disbelievers.
38|75| He (Allah) said, .O Iblis, what did prevent you from prostrating yourself before what I created with My hands? Did you wax proud or were you among the lofty ones?.
38|76| He said, .I am better than him. You created me from fire, and created him from clay.
38|77| He said, .Then, get out from here, for you are accursed,
38|78| and on you shall remain My curse till the Day of Judgment.
38|79| He said, .O my Lord, then give me respite till the day they are raised again.
38|80| He said, .Then, you have been given respite,
38|81| until the Day of the Appointed Time.
38|82| He said, .Then, I swear by Your Might, that I will definitely lead them astray, all of them -
38|83| except Your chosen servants among them.
38|84| He (Allah) said, .Then, the truth is__and it is (always) the truth that I speak__
38|85| that I will definitely fill the Jahannam with you and with those who will follow you from among them, all together.
38|86| Say (O Prophet to the unbelievers,) .I do not demand from you any fee for it, nor am I from among those who make up things artificially.
38|87| It is nothing but an advice for all the worlds.
38|88| And you will come to know its reality after a while.
39|1| This is the revelation of the Book from Allah, the Mighty, the Wise.
39|2| Surely We have revealed the Book to you with truth; so worship Allah making your submission exclusive for Him.
39|3| Remember, Allah alone deserves the exclusive submission. As for those who have adopted guardians other than Him (saying), .We worship them for no other reason but because they would bring us near to Allah closely., Allah will judge between them in the matters in which they are differing. Surely, Allah does not guide anyone who is liar, highly infidel.
39|4| Had Allah opted to have a son of His own, He would have definitely chosen anyone, as He wished, out of what He had created. (But), Pure is He. He is Allah, the Only One, the All-Dominant.
39|5| He created the heavens and the earth for just purpose. He wraps the night over the day and He wraps the day over the night, and He has put the sun and the moon under His command, each one of them moving for an appointed term. Remember, He is the Mighty, the Most-Forgiving.
39|6| He created you from a single person, then (once this person was created,) He made his match from him, and sent down for you eight pairs of the cattle. He creates you in the wombs of your mothers, creation after creation, in three layers of darkness. That is your Allah, your Lord. To Him belongs the whole Kingdom. There is no god but He. Then, to where are you being diverted (by your whims)?
39|7| If you disbelieve, then, Allah does not need you at all, however He does not like for His servants to be disbelievers; and if you are grateful, He will like it for you. No one will bear the burden of someone else. Then, to your Lord is your return; so He will tell you about what you used to do. He is aware of whatever lies in the hearts.
39|8| And when man is afflicted by pain, he calls his Lord turning to Him passionately. Thereafter, when He blesses him with some favor from Him, he forgets that for which he was calling Him earlier, and sets up partners for Allah, so that he leads others astray from His way. Say, .Enjoy (the pleasure of) your disbelief for a while, (then) surely, you are from among the people of the Fire.
39|9| Can (such people be equal to) the one who worships during the hours of night, prostrating himself and standing, fearing the Hereafter and having hopes in his Lord‘s mercy? Say, .Can those who know and those who do not know become equal?. It is only the people of understanding who are receptive of the advice.
39|10| Say (on My behalf) .O My servants who believe, fear your Lord. Those who do good deeds in this world will have a good return, and the earth of Allah is wide. Certainly those who observe patience will be given their reward in full without measure.
39|11| Say, .I have been ordered to worship Allah, making my submission exclusive to Him.
39|12| And I have been ordered to be the first of those who submit.
39|13| Say, .If I were to disobey my Lord, I fear the punishment of a great day.
39|14| Say, .It is Allah whom I worship, making my submission exclusive to Him.
39|15| So, worship what you wish other than Him. Say, .Indeed, the losers are those who (will) lose their selves and their people on the Day of Judgment. Beware, that is really the obvious loss.
39|16| For them there are canopies of fire on top of them and canopies (of fire) underneath them. That is the thing against which Allah warns His servants. .So, O servants of Mine, fear Me.
39|17| And those who abstain from worshipping the Taghut and turn fervently to Allah, for them there is good news. So, give the good news to My servants
39|18| who listen to what is said, then, follow the best of it. Those are the ones whom Allah has guided, and those are the ones who possess understanding.
39|19| So tell Me about the one for whom the word of punishment is destined, - is it you, then, who would save someone who is already in the Fire?
39|20| But, for those who fear their Lord, there are chambers with chambers built on top of them, with rivers running from underneath them. This is Allah‘s promise. Allah does not go back on any promise.
39|21| Have you not seen that Allah sent down water from the sky, then made it penetrate into the earth (and gush forth) in the form of springs? Then He brings forth with it crops of different colors, and afterwards they wither, and you see them turned yellow, then He makes them chaff. Surely in that there is a lesson for the people of understanding.
39|22| So I ask about a person whose heart Allah has opened up for Islam, and consequently he proceeds in a light from his Lord. (Can he be equal to the one whose heart is hardened?) So, woe to those whose hearts are too hard to remember Allah. Those are wandering in open error.
39|23| Allah has sent down the best discourse, a book containing subjects resembling each other, mentioned again and again, shivered from which are the skins of those who have awe of their Lord. Then, their skins and their hearts become soft enough to tend to the remembrance of Allah. This is the Guidance of Allah with which He brings to the right path whomsoever He wills. As for the one whom Allah lets go astray, for him there is no one to guide.
39|24| Tell Me about the one who tries to save himself from the worst punishment with his face on the Day of Judgment, (whether he is equal to the one who is not liable to any punishment.) And it will be said to the wrongdoers, .Have a taste of what you used to earn.
39|25| Those before them had also rejected (the messengers) and consequently, the punishment came upon them in a way that they had never imagined.
39|26| Then Allah made them taste disgrace in the worldly life, and of course the punishment of the Hereafter is much greater. Only if they knew!
39|27| And We have cited for people all sorts of examples in this Qur‘an, so that they may receive the message
39|28| through an Arabic Qur‘an that has no digression (from the truth), so that they may be God-fearing.
39|29| Allah has given an example: There is a man (enslaved and) owned by some partners having rivalry with each other, and (on the other hand,) there is a man solely owned by a single man. Can they be equal in comparison? Praise be to Allah! (The truth stands established). But, most of them do not know.
39|30| Verily, you are to die and they are to die.
39|31| After that, on the Day of Doom, you will surely place your disputes before your Lord.
39|32| So, who is more unjust than him who forges a lie against Allah and rejects the truth when it reached him? Is it not that in Jahannam (Hell) there is an abode for the disbelievers?
39|33| As for the one who has come with the truth and believed it to be true, then such people are the ones who are God-fearing.
39|34| For them, with their Lord, there is what they wish. That is the reward of those who are good in their deeds,
39|35| so that Allah wipes out from them the worst deeds they did, and gives their reward to them for the best of what they used to do.
39|36| Is Allah not sufficient for (the protection of) His slave? They are frightening you of those (false gods whom they worship) other than Him. Whomsoever Allah would let go astray, for him there is no one to guide.
39|37| And whomsoever Allah gives guidance, for him there is no one to misguide. Is it not that Allah is Mighty, Powerful to avenge?
39|38| If you ask them as to who created the heavens and the earth, they will certainly say, .Allah. Say, .Then, tell me about those whom you invoke other than Allah, if Allah intends to cause some harm to me, are they (able) to remove the harm caused by Him? Or if He intends to bless me with mercy, are they (able) to hold back His mercy (from me)?. Say, .Allah is sufficient for me. In Him trust those who (rightly) trust (in someone).
39|39| Say, .O my people, do at your place (what you are doing). I am to do (what I have been ordered to). Very soon, you will come to know
39|40| as to who will be visited by a punishment that will disgrace him, and upon whom a lasting punishment will rest.
39|41| We have sent down to you the Book for the people with truth. So, whoever follows the guidance, it is for his own good, and whoever goes astray, he will go astray only to his own detriment - and you are not responsible for them.
39|42| Allah fully takes away the souls (of the people) at the time of their death, and (of) those who do not die, in their sleep. Then He withholds those on whom He had decreed death, and sends others back, up to an appointed term. Surely, in this, there are signs for a people who ponder.
39|43| Is it that they have adopted intercessors out of those (whom they invoke) other than Allah? Say, .(Do you take them as intercessors) even though they have no power at all, nor do they understand?.
39|44| Say, .Intercession belongs entirely to Allah.
39|45| When Allah is mentioned alone, the hearts of those who do not believe in the Hereafter are filled with disgust, and when those (whom they worship) other than Him are mentioned, they become happy forthwith.
39|46| Say, .O Allah, the Creator of the heavens and the earth, the Knower of the unseen and the seen, you will judge between Your servants in that about which they used to differ.
39|47| Were the wrongdoers to own all that is on earth, and even twice as much, they would surely seek to ransom themselves with it against the evil punishment on the Day of Judgment. There will appear to them from Allah what they have never imagined.
39|48| Unveiled to them will be the evils of what they used to earn; and encircled they will be by what they used to ridicule.
39|49| When man is visited by a trouble, he prays to Us, but when, after that, We favor him with some blessing from Us, he says, .This is given to me because of (my) knowledge. No, but this is a trial, yet most of them do not know.
39|50| The same was said by those before them, but what they used to earn was of no avail to them,
39|51| and they were overtaken by the evils of what they had earned; and the wrongdoers from these (infidels too) will be overtaken by the evils of what they have earned – and they will not be able to escape.
39|52| Do they not know that it is Allah who extends provision to whomsoever He wills, and straitens (it for whomsoever He wills). Surely in that, there are signs for a people who believe.
39|53| Say (on My behalf), .O servants of Mine who have acted recklessly against their own selves, do not despair of Allah‘s mercy. Surely, Allah will forgive all sins. Surely, He is the One who is the Most-Forgiving, the Very-Merciful.
39|54| Turn passionately towards your Lord, and submit to Him before the punishment comes to you, after which you will not be helped.
39|55| And follow the best of what has been sent down to you from your Lord before the punishment comes to you suddenly when you do not even expect,
39|56| lest someone should say, .Pity on me, because I fell short in respect of (observing the rights of) Allah and in fact, I was one of those who mocked.,
39|57| or, (lest) someone should say, .If Allah were to show me the way, I would have surely been among those who fear Allah.,
39|58| or, (lest) someone should say when he sees the punishment, .Would that I have a chance to return, so that I may become one of those who are good in their deeds.
39|59| No! My verses had reached you, but you called them untrue, and waxed proud, and became of those who disbelieved.
39|60| And on the Day of Judgment, you will see those who had forged lies against Allah (in a state) that their faces are turned black. Is it not that in Jahannam there is an abode for the arrogant?
39|61| And Allah will save the God-fearing (from Jahannam ), with utmost success granted to them, so as no evil will touch them, nor will they grieve.
39|62| Allah is Creator of everything, and He is the Guardian over everything.
39|63| To Him belong the keys to the heavens and the earth. As for those who have rejected the verses of Allah, it is they who are the losers.
39|64| Say, .Is it, then, someone other than Allah that you ask me to worship, O ignorant people?.
39|65| It has already been revealed to you and to those before you (that): If you associate (partners with Allah), your deeds shall be rendered useless, and you shall be among the losers.
39|66| On the contrary, it is Allah whom you should worship; and be among the grateful.
39|67| They did not hold Allah in His true esteem. The whole earth will be in a single grip of His hand on the Day of Doom, and the heavens (will be) rolled up on his right hand. Pure is He, far too higher than what they associate with Him.
39|68| And Horn (Sur ) will be blown, and all those in the heavens and all those in the earth will faint, except the one whom Allah wills (otherwise). Thereafter, it will be blown once again, and suddenly they will stand up, looking around.
39|69| And the earth will shine with the light of its Lord, and the book (of everyone‘s deeds) will be placed, and the prophets and the witnesses will be brought, and matters will be decided between them with justice, and they will not be wronged.
39|70| And everyone will be paid in full for what he did - and He knows best what they do.
39|71| Those who disbelieved will be driven towards Jahannam in groups, until when they reach it, its gates will be opened, and its keepers will say to them, .Did messengers from among you not come to you reciting to you the verses of your Lord, and warning you about the meeting of this day of yours?. They will say, .Yes (they did),but the word of punishment had become certain against those who disbelieved.
39|72| It will be said, .Enter the gates of Jahannam to live in it forever. So, how evil is the dwelling-place of the arrogant!
39|73| And those who used to fear their Lord will be led towards Jannah (Paradise) in groups, until when they reach it, while its gates will be (already) opened (for them), and its keepers will say to them, .Salamun-‘alaikum (peace be on you). How good are you! So, enter it to live here forever.
39|74| And they will say, .AlHamdulillah : Praise belongs to Allah who made His promise come true for us, and made us inherit the territory, so as we can dwell anywhere we wish in Jannah (Paradise) . So, excellent is the reward of those who did (good) deeds.
39|75| And you will see the angels ringed around the Throne proclaiming the purity of their Lord, along with His praise, and matters will stand settled between them rightfully, and it will be said: .AlHamdulillahi-rabbil‘alamin : Praise belongs to Allah, the Lord of the worlds.
40|1| Ha Mim .
40|2| This is revelation of the Book from Allah, the Mighty, the All-Knowing,
40|3| the One who forgives sins and accepts repentance, the One who is severe in punishment, the One who is the source of all power. There is no god but He. To Him is the ultimate return (of all).
40|4| No one quarrels about the verses of Allah, except those who disbelieve. So, their (prosperous) movements in the cities should not deceive you.
40|5| Before these, the people of NuH and the groups after them had rejected (the messengers). Every group intended to seize their messenger, and raised disputes on the basis of falsehood, so that they might refute the truth with it, hence I seized them. So, how was My punishment?
40|6| And similarly, the word of your Lord has become due against those who disbelieve__that they are the people of the Fire.
40|7| Those who are bearing the Throne and those who are around it pronounce the purity of your Lord along with His praise, and believe in Him, and pray for the forgiveness of those who believe, (saying): .Our Lord, Your mercy and knowledge comprehends everything; so forgive those who repent and follow Your way, and save them from the punishment of the Fire.
40|8| And, our Lord, admit them to the eternal gardens of Jannah (Paradise) that You have promised for them, and (admit) those as well who did good from among their fathers and wives and children. You, only You, are the Mighty, the Wise,
40|9| and save them from evils (of punishment). And whomsoever you save from evils that day, it is surely because you bless him with mercy. And that is the great achievement indeed.
40|10| Those who disbelieve will be addressed (by a voice saying): .Allah‘s hatred (for you), when you were invited to the true faith and you refused, was greater than your hatred for yourselves (today when you are hating your own selves out of remorse).
40|11| They will say, .Our Lord, You gave us death twice and You gave us life twice. Now we confess our sins. So, is there any way to come out of here?.
40|12| (The reply will be, .No.) This is because whenever Allah alone was invoked, you used to disbelieve, and if partners were associated with Him, you used to believe. Now the decision lies with Allah, the High, the Great.
40|13| It is He who shows you His signs and sends down provision for you from the sky; and no one takes lesson but the one who turns to Him.
40|14| So, worship Allah, making your submission exclusive for Him, even though the disbelievers dislike (it).
40|15| He is High in stations, the Lord of the Throne. He sends the spirit down, under His command, on whomever He wills from among His servants, so that he warns of the Day of Encounter –
40|16| the day they will come in open view. Nothing about them will remain hidden from Allah. To whom belongs the kingdom today? To Allah alone, the One, the All-Dominant.
40|17| Today, everyone will be recompensed for what one earned. There is no injustice today. Surely, Allah is swift in reckoning.
40|18| And warn them of the Day of approaching horror, when hearts will jump up into the throats, (and they will be) choked. There will be neither a friend for the unjust, nor an intercessor to be listened to.
40|19| He knows the treachery of the eyes and whatever is concealed by hearts.
40|20| He will give His judgment with truth. And those whom they invoke beside Him cannot judge anything. Surely, it is Allah who is Hearing, Seeing.
40|21| Have they not traveled through the earth and seen how was the fate of those who used to be before them? They were stronger than these in power and in traces left on the earth, but Allah seized them because of their sins. There was no one to save them from Allah.
40|22| That was because messengers used to come to them with clear signs, but they disbelieved. Then, Allah seized them. Surely, He is Strong, severe in punishment.
40|23| Indeed We sent Musa with Our signs and a manifest proof
40|24| to Pharaoh and Haman and Qarun, but they said, .He is a sorcerer, a liar.
40|25| And when he brought them the truth from Us, they said, .Kill the sons of those who have accepted faith with him, and spare the lives of their women. But the plot of the disbelievers is nothing but a failure.
40|26| And Pharaoh said, .Let me kill Musa, and let him call his Lord. I am afraid that he will change your religion or he will cause havoc to appear in the land.
40|27| And Musa said, .I have sought protection of my Lord and your Lord from every arrogant man who does not believe in the Day of Reckoning.
40|28| And said a believing man from the House of Pharaoh who had kept his faith secret, .Would you kill a man because he says – ‘Allah is my Lord‘ – while he has come to you with clear signs from your Lord? If he is a liar, his lie will fall back on himself, and if he is truthful, some of that (punishment) of which he warns you will afflict you. Indeed, Allah does not give guidance to anyone who is transgressor, a liar.
40|29| O my people, the kingdom is yours today, while you are dominant on the land. But, who is going to help us against Allah‘s punishment, if it comes upon us?. Pharaoh said, .I do not give you an opinion unless I myself believe it to be correct, and I do not direct you to anything but to the right way.
40|30| Said he who had believed, .I fear for you something like a day of the (disbelieving) groups (of the past),
40|31| like the fate of the people of NuH and ‘Ad and Thamud and those who were after them – and Allah does not intend to do any injustice to His servants.
40|32| And O my people, I fear for you a day in which people will call one another,
40|33| a day when you will turn back on your heels, having no one to save you from Allah – but, whomever Allah lets go astray, for him there is no one to guide.
40|34| And Yusuf had already come to you earlier with clear signs, but you remained in suspicion about what he brought to you – until when he died, you said, ‘Allah will never send a messenger after him.‘ That is how Allah lets go astray anyone who crosses limits and lives in doubt, –
40|35| those who quarrel in Allah‘s verses without any authority having reached them. It is terribly hateful with Allah and with those who believe. That is how Allah stamps a seal on the entire heart of an arrogant tyrant.
40|36| And Fir‘aun (Pharaoh) said, .O Haman, make a tower for me, perhaps I could reach the ways –
40|37| the ways to the heavens, and peek towards the God of Musa. And indeed I deem him a liar. That is how his evil deeds were made attractive to Fir‘aun, and (how) he was held back from the way. The evil design of Fir‘aun was (to end) in nothing but ruin.
40|38| And said he who had believed, .O my people, follow me, I will show you the path of guidance.
40|39| O my people, this life of the world is only a (momentary) benefit, while the Hereafter is, indeed, the place of permanent living.
40|40| The one who does something evil will not be punished but in its equal proportion, but the one who does a righteous deed, be he male or female, while he is a believer, then, such people will enter the Jannah (Paradise) where they will be provided with bounties beyond reckoning.
40|41| And O my people, what is wrong with me that I call you to salvation and you call me to the Fire?
40|42| You invite me to reject my belief in Allah and ascribe to Him partners about whom I have no knowledge, while I invite you to (Him who is) the Mighty, the Most-Forgiving.
40|43| It is obvious that those (gods) to whom you are inviting me are not worth calling, neither in this world nor in the world to come, and that we have to return back to Allah, and that the transgressors are indeed the people of the Fire.
40|44| Soon you will remember what I am saying to you. And I entrust my matter with Allah. Surely, Allah has all (His) servants in sight.
40|45| Then Allah saved him from the evils of what they designed, and the House of Pharaoh was encircled by an evil punishment.
40|46| It is the Fire before which they are presented morning and evening. And on the day when the Hour (of final judgment) will take place, (the order will be released,): .Admit the family of Pharaoh into the most severe punishment.
40|47| And (worth remembering is the time) when they (the infidels) will argue with each other in the Fire. So, the weak will say to those who were arrogant, .Surely, we used to be your followers, would you, then, stand for us in (suffering at least a) part of the (punishment of) Fire?.
40|48| Those who were arrogant will say, .We all are in it. Allah has already passed the judgment between (His) servants.
40|49| And those in the Fire will say to the keepers of Jahannam (Hell), .Pray to your Lord to lighten the punishment for us some day.
40|50| They will say, .Had your messengers not been coming to you with open signs?. They will say, .Of course, (they had come). They (the keepers) will say, .Then, keep praying. – but praying of disbelievers (in the Hereafter) is only in vain.
40|51| Surely, We do help Our messengers and the believers, in the worldly life, as well as (we will help them) on the day in which witnesses will stand (to give their testimony)–
40|52| a day when apology of the unjust will bring them no benefit, and on them shall be the curse, and for them will be the evil abode.
40|53| We gave Guidance to Musa, while We made the children of Isra‘il inherit the Book –
40|54| as a guide and advice for people of understanding.
40|55| So, be patient — surely the promise of Allah is true - and seek forgiveness for your sins, and proclaim the purity and praise of your Lord in the afternoon and at dawn.
40|56| Surely, those who quarrel in Allah‘s verses without any authority having reached them, there is nothing in their hearts but pride of greatness that they are not (able) to reach. So, seek refuge with Allah. Surely, He is the All-Hearing, the All-Seeing.
40|57| Certainly, the creation of the heavens and the earth is greater than the creation of human beings, but most human beings do not know.
40|58| The blind one and the sighted one are not equal, and those who believed and did good deeds and the evil ones are not (equal) either. Little you heed to the advice!
40|59| Certainly, the Hour is bound to come. There is no doubt in it, but most of the people do not believe.
40|60| Your Lord has said, .Call Me, I will respond to you. Definitely those who show arrogance against worshipping Me shall enter Jahannam (Hell) with disgrace.
40|61| Allah is the One who made for you the night, so that you may have rest in it, and the day to let you see. Surely, Allah is most kind to people, but most of the people do not offer gratitude.
40|62| This is Allah, your Lord, the Creator of everything. There is no god but He. Then, from where are you being reversed (by your selfish desires)?
40|63| Similarly reversed were those who used to deny Our verses.
40|64| Allah is the One who made for you the earth a place to live, and the sky a roof, and shaped you, and made your shapes so good – and provided you with a lot of good things. That is Allah, your Lord. So, Glorious is Allah, the Lord of the worlds.
40|65| He is Ever-living. There is no god but He. So worship Him making your submission exclusive for Him. All praise belongs to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds.
40|66| Say, .I have been ordered not to worship those whom you invoke beside Allah when clear signs from my Lord have (already) come to me, and I have been ordered that I should submit to the Lord of the worlds.
40|67| He is the One who created you from dust, then from a drop of semen, then from a clot. After that, He takes you out as an infant. Then, (He makes you grow) so that you reach your full maturity, and, thereafter, become old – and some of you die earlier – and so that you reach the appointed term, and so that you understand.
40|68| He is the One who gives life and brings death, and when He decides to do something, He only says to it: .Be. and it comes to be.
40|69| Have you not seen those who quarrel in Allah‘s verses? From where are they being turned away (by their selfish desires?)
40|70| – those who rejected the Book and what We sent with Our messengers. So, they will soon come to know,
40|71| when shackles will be round their necks, and chains. They will be dragged
40|72| into the hot water after which they will be thrown into the Fire as a fuel.
40|73| Then, it will be said to them, .Where are those whom you used to associate (in worship)
40|74| beside Allah?. They will say, .They are lost to us, rather, we used to invoke nothing at all. This is how Allah makes disbelievers get lost.
40|75| (It will be said to them,) .This is because you used to rejoice on the earth wrongfully, and because you used to show arrogance.
40|76| Enter the gates of Jahannam to live in it forever. So, how evil is the abode of the arrogant.
40|77| Therefore, be patient. Surely, Allah‘s promise is true. Then, (O Prophet,) whether We show you (in your life) a part of the promise We are making to them, or make you die (before they are punished), in any case they have to be returned to Us.
40|78| We had sent messengers before you. Among them there are those whose history We have narrated to you, and of them there are those whose history We did not narrate to you. And it is not up to a messenger that he could come up with a sign without permission from Allah. So, when the command of Allah will come, matters will stand decided justly, and on that occasion all adherents of falsehood will turn into losers.
40|79| Allah is the One who made for you the cattle, so that you may ride some of them,__ and of them you eat;
40|80| and for you there are (other) benefits in them__ and so that, (by riding) on them, you meet any need you have in your hearts; and on them and on boats you are carried.
40|81| He shows you His signs. Then, which of the signs of Allah would you (still) deny?
40|82| Have they not traveled through the earth and seen how was the fate of those before them? Most of them were more in numbers than these, and superior in vigor and vestiges left on the earth. So then, whatever they used to earn did not work for them at all.
40|83| When their messengers came to them with manifest signs, they exulted because of whatever knowledge they had, and they were encircled by what they used to ridicule.
40|84| When they saw Our punishment, they said, .We have (now) come to believe in Allah alone, and We have rejected everything we used to ascribe (to Him) as partners.
40|85| But, their profession of faith was not (competent) to benefit them, once they had seen Our punishment – a customary practice of Allah that has been there all along in the matter of His servants – and hence, the disbelievers became the losers.
41|1| Ha Mim
41|2| This is a revelation from the All-Merciful, the Very-Merciful-
41|3| - a book whose verses are elaborated in the form of an Arabic Qur‘an for a people who understand,
41|4| as a bearer of good news and warning. Yet most of them turned away, so they do not listen.
41|5| And they say, .Our hearts are (wrapped) in covers against that (faith) to which you invite us, and there is deafness in our ears, and there is a barrier between you and us. So, do (in your way). We too are doing (in our own way).
41|6| Say, .I am but a human being like you; it is revealed to me that your god is only One God. So, turn straight towards Him, and seek forgiveness from Him, and woe to the Mushriks (those who ascribe partners to Allah)
41|7| who do not pay Zakah ; and of the life of the Hereafter, they are deniers.
41|8| As for those who believe and do righteous deeds, for them there is a reward that will never be interrupted.
41|9| Say, .Do you really disbelieve in the One who has created the earth in two days, and ascribe to Him partners? That is the Lord of the worlds.
41|10| He has placed firm mountains in it (the earth) towering above it, and put blessings in it, and proportioned its foods therein, in four days, equal for those who ask.
41|11| Then He turned straight to the sky, while it was a smoke, and said to it and to the earth, .Come (to My obedience), both of you, willingly or unwillingly. Both said, .We come willingly.
41|12| So He accomplished them as seven skies in two days, and settled in every sky its (due) thing. And We have decorated the closest sky with lamps, and protected it properly. All this is the determination of the All-Mighty, the All-Knowing.
41|13| So, if they turn away, then say, .I have warned you of a calamity like the calamity of ‘Ad and Thamud,
41|14| when the messengers came to them from their front and from their rear, saying, .Do not worship anyone but Allah. They said, .Had our Lord (really) willed (to send someone as messenger), He would have sent down angels. So, we are deniers of what you have been sent with.
41|15| As for ‘Ad, they showed arrogance in the land with no right (to do so), and said, .Who is stronger than us in power?. Did they not see that Allah, who created them, is stronger than them in power? And they used to reject Our signs.
41|16| So, We let loose a wild wind on them in unlucky days to make them taste the humiliating punishment in the present life. And of course, the punishment of the Hereafter will be much more humiliating, and they will not be helped.
41|17| As for Thamud, We showed them the way, but they preferred blindness to the guidance. Therefore, they were seized by the bang of the abasing punishment because of what they used to earn.
41|18| And We saved those who believed and used to be God-fearing.
41|19| (Remind them of) the day when Allah‘s enemies will be mustered towards the Fire. So they will be kept under control,
41|20| until when they will come to it, their ears and their eyes and their skins will testify against them about what they used to do.
41|21| And they will say to their skins, .Why did you testify against us?. They (the skins) will say, .We were made to speak by Allah, the One who has made every thing to speak. And He had created you the first time, and to Him you are going to be returned.
41|22| And you had not been hiding your selves (when committing sins) from your ears and your eyes and your skins that would bear witness against you, but you thought that Allah did not know much of what you did.
41|23| This thought of yours that you conceived about your Lord brought you to ruin, and you became among the losers.
41|24| Now, if they endure patiently, even then the Fire is their abode, and if they seek forgiveness, they are not among those (who could be) forgiven.
41|25| And We had assigned for them fellows (in the worldly life) who beautified for them what was before them and what was behind them. And (thus) the word (of punishment) became due against them along with the communities that passed before them from Jinns and human beings. Surely they were the losers.
41|26| And said those who disbelieved, .Do not listen to this Qur‘an, and make noise during its recitation, so that you may overcome.
41|27| So, We will certainly make them taste a severe punishment, and will certainly recompense them for the worst of what they used to do.
41|28| That is the recompense of the enemies of Allah_ the Fire. For them there is the eternal home, as a recompense for their persistent denial of Our verses.
41|29| And those who disbelieve will say, .Our Lord, show us the two, out of the Jinns and the humans, who led us astray and we will put both of them under our feet, so that they become among the lowest.
41|30| Surely, those who have declared: .Our Lord is Allah., then remained steadfast, on them the angels will descend, saying, .Do not fear, and do not grieve; and be happy with the good news of the Jannah (Paradise) that you had been promised.
41|31| We have been your friends in the worldly life, and (will remain as such) in the Hereafter. And for you here is whatever your souls desire, and for you here is whatever you call for
41|32| _ a gift of welcome from the Most-forgiving, the Very-Merciful.
41|33| Who can be better in words than the one who calls towards Allah, and acts righteously and says, .I am one of those who submit themselves (to Allah).?
41|34| Good and evil are not equal. Repel (evil) with what is best, and you will see that the one you had mutual enmity with him will turn as if he were a close friend.
41|35| And no one is blessed with this (attitude) but those who observe patience, and no one is blessed with this (attitude) but a man of great luck.
41|36| And should a stroke from ShaiTan (Satan) strike you, seek refuge with Allah. Surely, He is the All-Hearing, the All-Knowing.
41|37| Among His signs are the night and the day, and the sun and the moon. Do not prostrate yourselves to the sun, or to the moon. And prostrate yourselves to Allah who has created them, if it is Him whom you worship.
41|38| Still, if they show arrogance, then those who are with your Lord proclaim His purity night and day, and they do not get weary.
41|39| And among His signs is that you see the land inactive; then, once We send down water thereto, it gets excited and swells. Surely, the One who has given life to it is the One who gives life to the dead. No doubt, He is powerful to do everything.
41|40| Surely those who adopt perversity about Our verses are not hidden from Us. So, tell me which one is better: the one who is thrown into the Fire, or the one who will come safely on the Day of Judgment? Do whatever you wish. He is watchful of whatever you do.
41|41| Surely those who have rejected the advice (the Qur‘an) when it came to them (are the ones who adopted perversity, and are not hidden from Us). And surely, it is an unassailable book
41|42| that cannot be approached by falsehood, neither from its front, nor from its behind __a revelation from the All-Wise, the Ever-Praised.
41|43| Nothing is being said to you but what has been said to the messengers before you. Your Lord is certainly the Lord of forgiveness and the Lord of painful punishment.
41|44| Had We made it a non-Arabic Qur‘an, they would have said, .Why are its verses not clearly explained? Is it a non-Arabic (book) and an Arab (messenger)?. Say, .For those who believe, it is guidance and cure. As for those who do not believe, there is deafness in their ears, and for them it is blindness. Such people are being called from a distant place.
41|45| And We gave Musa the book, then it was disputed (as well). But for a word that had already come from your Lord, the matter would have been decided between them. They are in confounding doubt about it.
41|46| If someone acts righteously, he does so for the benefit of his own soul, and if someone commits evil, he does so against it. Your Lord is not unjust to His servants.
41|47| To Him alone the knowledge of the Hour (the exact time of Doomsday) is to be referred. No fruits come out of their sheaths, nor does a female conceive a baby, nor does she deliver it, but with His knowledge. And (remember) the Day when He will call them: .Where are My partners?. They will say, .We declare to you that no one of us is to testify (that you have partners).
41|48| And whatever they used to invoke earlier will vanish from them, and they will realize that they have no way to escape.
41|49| Man does not get weary of craving for (all sorts of ) good things; and if he is touched by some evil, he is disappointed, devoid of any hope.
41|50| And if We give him a taste of some mercy from Us after some hardship that has touched him, he will surely say, .This is my right. And I do not think the Hour (the Day of Judgment) is going to occur. And even if I am brought back to my Lord, I will surely have the best (life) with Him (too). So, We will let the disbelievers know what they did, and let them taste a stern punishment.
41|51| When We bestow Our favor upon man, he avoids (to appreciate it) and keeps himself far aside (from obedience), and when some evil touches him, he is full of lengthy prayers.
41|52| Say (to the disbelievers), .Tell me, if it (the Qur‘an) is from Allah, and still you reject it, then who can be more erroneous than him who is (involved) in far reaching schism?.
41|53| We will show them Our signs in the universe and within their own beings until it will become manifest to them that it is the truth. Is it not enough about your Lord that He is witness to everything?
41|54| Beware, they are in doubt about meeting their Lord. Beware, He is the One who encompasses everything.
42|1| Ha Mim
42|2| 'Ain. Sin. Qaf.
42|3| This is how Allah, the Mighty, the Wise, sends revelation to you and to those who were before you.
42|4| To him belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth, and He is the High, the Supreme.
42|5| The heavens almost burst apart from their above side, and angels proclaim the purity and praise of their Lord, and pray for forgiveness of those on the earth. Be aware that Allah is the Most-Forgiving, the Very-Merciful.
42|6| And those who have adopted patrons instead of Him, Allah is on watch against them, and you are not responsible for them.
42|7| And thus We have revealed to you an Arabic Qur‘an, so that you may warn the mother town, and those around it, and warn (them) of the Day of Gathering, about which there is no doubt__(when) one group of people will be in Paradise, and another group in blazing Fire.
42|8| Had Allah willed, He would have made all of them a single group; but He admits whomsoever He wills into His mercy. As for the wrongdoers, they have neither a patron nor a helper.
42|9| Is it that they have adopted patrons instead of Him? So, it is Allah who is the Patron, and He gives life to the dead, and He is Powerful to do every thing.
42|10| And (Say O prophet to your opponents,) .Whatever dispute you have in any matter, its judgment lies with Allah. That One is Allah, the Lord of mine; in Him alone I have placed my trust, and to Him alone I turn (in every matter).
42|11| He is the Creator of the heavens and the earth. He has made for you pairs from among yourselves, and pairs from the cattle. He makes you expand in this way. Nothing is like Him. And He is the All-Hearing, the All-Seeing.
42|12| To Him belong the keys of the heavens and the earth. He extends provision for whomsoever He wills, and straitens (it for whomsoever He wills). Surely He is All-Knowing in respect of every thing.
42|13| He has ordained for you people the same religion as He had enjoined upon NuH, and that which We have revealed to you (O prophet,) and that which We had enjoined upon Ibrahim and Musa and ‘Isa by saying, .Establish the religion, and be not divided therein. Arduous for the mushriks (polytheists) is that to which you are inviting them. Allah chooses (and pulls) toward Himself anyone He wills, and guides to Himself anyone who turns to Him (to seek guidance).
42|14| And they were not divided, in jealousy with each other, but after the knowledge had come to them. Had it not been for a word that had come forth earlier from your Lord (and was effective) until a specified time, the matter would have been decided between them. And those who were made to inherit the Book after them are in confounding doubt about it.
42|15| So, (O prophet,) towards that (faith) invite (people), and be steadfast as you are commanded, and do not follow their desires, and say, .I believe in whatever book Allah has sent down. And I have been ordered to do justice among you. Allah is our Lord and your Lord. For us are our deeds, and for you, your deeds. There is no argumentation between us and you. Allah will bring us together, and to Him is the final return.
42|16| Those who argue about Allah after He has been responded to, their argument is void in the sight of their Lord, and upon them is wrath, and for them is a severe punishment.
42|17| Allah is the One who has sent down the Book with truth, and the Balance as well. And what can let you know? May be, the Hour (the Day of Judgment) is near.
42|18| Those who do not believe in it demand that it should come soon, and those who believe are fearful of it, and they know for sure that it is the truth. Be aware that those who dispute concerning the Hour are wandering afar from the right path.
42|19| Allah is kind to His servants. He gives provision to whom He wills, and He is the Strong, the Mighty.
42|20| Whoever intends (to have) the harvest of the Hereafter, We will increase in his harvest; and whoever intends (to have) the harvest of the world (only), We will give him thereof, while in the Hereafter he will have no share.
42|21| Is it that they have associate-gods who have prescribed for them a religion that is not sanctioned by Allah? Had it not been for a decisive word, the matter would have been decided between them (here in this world). And of course, for the wrongdoers there is a painful punishment (in the Hereafter).
42|22| You will see the wrongdoers fearful of what they earned, and it is sure to befall them. As for those who believed and did righteous deeds, they will be in meadows of the Gardens. For them there is, with their Lord, whatever they wish. That is the great bounty.
42|23| That is the good news that Allah gives to His servants who believed and did righteous deeds. Say, .I do not ask you any fee for it, except the love of kinship. And whoever performs a good act, We will increase for him goodness therein. Surely Allah is Most-Forgiving, Very-Appreciative.
42|24| Is it that they say, .He has forged a lie against Allah.? So, if Allah wills, He may put a seal on your heart. And Allah blots out falsehood and establishes truth with His words. Surely, He is fully aware of what lies in the hearts.
42|25| And He is the One who accepts repentance from His servants and forgives evil deeds and knows whatever you do.
42|26| And He responds to (the prayer of) those who believe and do righteous deeds, and gives them more out of His grace. As for the disbelievers, for them there is a severe punishment.
42|27| Should Allah expand the provision for His servants (to its full extent), they would spread mischief on earth; but He sends down what He wills in (due) measure. Surely, with regard to His slaves, He is All-Aware, Ever-Watchful.
42|28| And He is the One who sends down rain after they have lost hope, and He extends His mercy. And He is the Guardian, Worthy of all praise.
42|29| Among His signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth and the creatures He has spread in them. He is Powerful to assemble them whenever He so wills.
42|30| Whatever hardship befalls you is because of what your own hands have committed, while He overlooks many (of your faults).
42|31| You are not able to frustrate (Him) in the earth. And, besides Allah, you have neither someone to protect, nor someone to help.
42|32| And among His signs are ships in the sea, like mountains.
42|33| If He so wills, He may stop the wind, and they stand still on its surface. Surely in this, there are signs for everyone who is ever patient, fully grateful.
42|34| Or He may destroy them because of what they earned, and may overlook many (whom He may save at least in this world),
42|35| and (in such an event) those who raise disputes in Our verses will come to know that there is no way for them to escape.
42|36| So, whatever thing has been given to you is an enjoyment of the worldly life. And that which is with Allah is much better, and much more durable for those who believe and place their trust in Allah,
42|37| and (for) those who abstain from the major sins and from shameful acts; and (for those who) when they get angry, they forgive,
42|38| and those who have responded to their Lord (in submission to Him), and have established Salah, and whose affairs are (settled) with mutual consultation between them, and who spend out of what We have given to them,
42|39| and those who, when they are subjected to aggression, defend themselves.
42|40| The recompense of evil is evil like it. Then the one who forgives and opts for compromise has his reward undertaken by Allah. Surely, He does not like the unjust.
42|41| The one who defends himself after having been wronged, there is no blame on such people.
42|42| Blame, in fact, is upon those who wrong people and make mischief on earth unjustly. For such people there is a painful punishment.
42|43| And if one observes patience and forgives, it is, of course, one of the courageous conducts.
42|44| The one whom Allah lets go astray, there is no one for him to protect thereafter. And you will see the wrongdoers, when they will see the punishment, that they will say, .Is there any way to be sent back (to the world)? .
42|45| And you will see them that they will be presented to it (the Fire), downcast because of humiliation, looking with stealthy glance. And those who believe will say, .The real losers are those who have lost their own selves and their families on the Day of Judgment. Be aware that the wrongdoers are in lasting punishment.
42|46| And for them there will not be any friends who may help them besides Allah. And the one whom Allah lets go astray, for him there is no way (to save himself).
42|47| Respond to your Lord before there comes a day for which there will be no reversal from Allah‘s side. For you there will be neither a refuge that day, nor an opportunity to question (Allah about your fate).
42|48| So, if they turn away, then We did not send you (O Prophet,) as a supervisor over them. You are not responsible but for conveying the message. And when We make man taste mercy from Us, he rejoices with it, and if an evil befalls him because of what their hands sent ahead, then man becomes ungrateful.
42|49| To Allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. He creates what He wills. He grants females to whom He wills, and grants males to whom He wills.
42|50| Or He combines for them couples, both males and females, and makes whom He wills barren. Surely, He is All-Knowing, Very-Powerful.
42|51| It is not (possible) for a human being that Allah speaks to him, except by way of revelation, or from behind a curtain, or that He sends a messenger, and he reveals, with His permission, what He wills. Surely, He is All-High, All-Wise.
42|52| In similar way, We have revealed to you a Spirit from Our command. You did not know earlier what was the Book or what was Iman (true faith), but We have made it (the Qur‘an) a light with which We guide whomsoever We will from among Our servants. And indeed you are guiding (people) to a straight path,
42|53| the path of Allah, the One to whom belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth. Be aware that towards Allah all matters shall finally return.
43|1| Ha Mim.
43|2| By the manifest Book,
43|3| We have made it an Arabic Qur‘an, so that you may understand.
43|4| And it is, in the Mother of the Book (the Preserved Tablet) with us, surely sublime, full of wisdom.
43|5| Shall We then take the advice away from you because you are a transgressing people?
43|6| How many a messenger We have sent to the earlier people!
43|7| No messenger came to them, but they used to mock at him.
43|8| So We have destroyed those who were stronger than these (people of Makkah) in power, and the example of the earlier people has already passed.
43|9| Should you ask them as to who has created the heavens and the earth, they will certainly say, .They are created by the All-Mighty, the All- Knowing,.
43|10| the One who has made the earth a cradle for you, and has made for you pathways therein, so that you may be guided,
43|11| and the One who has sent down water from the sky in due measure. Then We have revived with it a dead town. In the same way, you will be brought forth (alive from the graves),
43|12| and the One who has created all the pairs, and has made for you the boats and the cattle that you ride,
43|13| so that you may mount upon their back, then recall the favour of your Lord after having mounted upon it and say, .Pure is the One who has subjugated this for us, and We were not able to have control over it,
43|14| and of course, towards our Lord we have to return.
43|15| They have attributed to Him (that He is composed of) parts, (and that too) out of His servants. Surely, man is clearly ungrateful.
43|16| Is it that He has adopted daughters from those whom He has created, and chosen you for (having) sons?
43|17| When one of them is given the good news of (the birth of) that which he has attributed to RaHman (i.e. the daughters), his face turns black, and he becomes choked with sorrow.
43|18| Is it that (Allah has chosen) those (as His offspring) who are grown up in ornaments and who cannot express themselves in debate clearly?
43|19| They have held angels, who are the servants of RaHman, as females. Have they witnessed their creation? Their testimony will be recorded, and they will be questioned.
43|20| They say, .Had the RaHman so willed, we would not have worshipped them. They have no knowledge of that. They do nothing but make conjectures.
43|21| Or have We given to them a book before this, and they are adhering to it?
43|22| Instead, they say, .We have found our fathers on a certain way, and we are on their footprints, fully guided.
43|23| Similarly, We did not send a warner to a town before you, but its affluent people said, .We have found our fathers on a certain way, and we are following their footprints.
43|24| He said, .Even if I bring to you something better in guidance than that on which you have found your fathers?. They said, .We totally disbelieve in what you are sent with.
43|25| So, We took revenge from them. Now look, how was the end of those who rejected (Our messengers).
43|26| (Recall) when Ibrahim said to his father and to his people, .I disown that which you worship,
43|27| except the One who has originated me; so He will guide me.
43|28| He made it a word lasting among his posterity, so that they may return.
43|29| But, I gave these and their fathers enjoyment, until the truth came to them, and a messenger as well who explains (it).
43|30| But when the truth came to them, they said, .This is magic, and we totally disbelieve in it.
43|31| They say, .Why was this Qur‘an not revealed on a great man from (either of) the two towns?.
43|32| Is it they who allocate the mercy of your Lord? We have allocated among them their livelihood in the worldly life, and have raised some of them over others in ranks, so that some of them may put some others to work. And the mercy of your Lord is much better than what they accumulate.
43|33| Were it not that all people would become of a single creed (i.e. disbelief), We would have caused, for those who disbelieve in RaHman, roofs of their houses to be made of silver, and the stairs as well, on which they would climb,
43|34| and doors of their homes, and the coaches on which they would recline,
43|35| and (would have made some of these things) of gold-ornaments. And all this is nothing but an enjoyment of the worldly life. And the Hereafter, with your Lord, is (destined) for the God-fearing.
43|36| Whoever makes himself blind against the advice of RaHman, We assign for him a devil who accompanies him all the time.
43|37| And they (the devils) prevent such people from the (right) way, while they deem themselves to be on the right path,
43|38| until when such a person will come to us, he will say (to the devil), .Would that there were the distance of East and West between me and you, because you were the worst companion.
43|39| And (it will be said to such people,) .Since you were wrongdoers, it will never benefit you today that you are sharing the punishment with each other.
43|40| So, can you (O prophet) make the deaf to hear, or can you show the way to the blind and the one who is in open error?
43|41| So, even if We take you away, We will surely take vengeance on them.
43|42| Or (if) We show you (in your life) that (punishment) with which We have threatened them, then We have full control over them.
43|43| So, hold fast to that which has been revealed to you. Surely, you are on the straight path.
43|44| And certainly this (Qur‘an) is a word of honour for you and your people, and you will be questioned.
43|45| Ask Our messengers whom We sent before you whether We had appointed gods to be worshipped besides RaHman.
43|46| We sent Musa with Our signs to Fir‘aun (Pharaoh) and his chiefs; so he said, .I am the messenger of the Lord of the worlds.
43|47| So, when he came to them with Our signs, they at once started laughing at them.
43|48| And We did not show them a sign, but it used to be greater than the one that preceded it. And We seized them with punishment, so that they may return.
43|49| And they said, .O magician, pray for us to your Lord by the covenant He has made with you; we will certainly come to guidance.
43|50| Then, once We removed the punishment from them, in no time they broke their promise.
43|51| And Fir‘aun (Pharaoh) proclaimed among his people, saying, .Does not the kingdom of Egypt belong to me, and these rivers are flowing right underneath me? Do you, then, not discern?
43|52| Or (do you not see that) I am much better than this one (Musa) who is worthless and can hardly express himself?
43|53| So why were the bracelets of gold not sent down to him, or (why) did the angels not come along with him as companions?.
43|54| Thus he made fool of his people, and they obeyed him. Surely they were a sinful people.
43|55| So, when they provoked Our anger, We took vengeance on them, and drowned them all together,
43|56| and made them a people of the past, and an example for the later generations.
43|57| When the example of the son of Maryam was cited, your people started at once shouting at it (in joy),
43|58| and said, .Are Our gods better or is he?. They did not cite it (the example) but for the sake of disputation. Rather, they are a quarrelsome people.
43|59| He (‘Isa) is no more than a servant (of Allah) whom We favoured and made an example for the children of Isra‘il.
43|60| And if We will, We may create angels from you who succeed you on the earth.
43|61| And he (‘Isa) is a source of knowledge of the Hour (the Day of Judgment); so do not be in doubt about it, and follow me. This is the straight way.
43|62| And let not the ShaiTan (Satan) prevent you (from following this way). He is surely an open enemy for you.
43|63| When ‘Isa came with clear proofs, he said, .I have come to you with wisdom, and to explain to you some of those matters in which you differ. So, fear Allah, and obey me.
43|64| Surely, it is Allah who is my Lord and your Lord; so worship Him. This is the straight way.
43|65| Then different groups, out of them, fell into disagreement. Woe to the wrongdoers because of the punishment of a painful day!
43|66| They are waiting for nothing but for the Hour to come upon them suddenly, while they would not even imagine (it).
43|67| Friends, on that day, will become enemies to one another, except the God-fearing,
43|68| (to whom it will be said) .O my servants, there is no fear for you today, nor will you grieve_
43|69| _O those (servants) who believed in Our signs, and remained obedient.
43|70| __ Enter the Paradise, you and your spouses, showered with bliss.
43|71| Circulated among them will be the bowls of gold, and glasses. And there will be whatever souls desire and that which eyes enjoy. .And you will be living in it for ever.
43|72| That is the Paradise you are made to inherit because of what you used to do.
43|73| For you there are fruits in abundance from which you will eat.
43|74| The sinners (on the other hand) will be in the punishment of Jahannam (Hell), living there forever.
43|75| It will not be lightened for them, and they will be there, devoid of all hopes.
43|76| We did not do injustice to them, rather, they themselves were the unjust.
43|77| And they will call (Malik, the keeper of the Hell,) .O Malik, let your Lord do away with us. He will say, .You have to stay on.
43|78| (O disbelievers,) indeed We have brought to you the truth, but it is the truth that most of you detest.
43|79| Is it that they have firmly resolved to do something (harmful to Our messenger)? Then, We have firmly resolved (to frustrate their plan.)
43|80| Do they think that We do not hear their secrets and their whispers? Yes of course, Our messengers (angels) are with them who record (whatever they plan).
43|81| Say, .Had there been a son for the RaHman, I would have been the first to worship.
43|82| Pure is the Lord of the heavens and the earth, the Lord of the Throne, from what they attribute (to Him).
43|83| So, let them indulge (in their fallacy) and play, until they face their Day that they are promised.
43|84| He is the One who is God to be worshipped in the sky, and God to be worshipped on the earth. And He is the Wise, the All-Knowing.
43|85| Glorious is the One to whom belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and whatever lies between them. With Him is the knowledge of the Hour; and towards Him you are to be returned.
43|86| And those whom they invoke besides Him have no power to intercede; but those who bear witness to the truth, while they have knowledge (may intercede for the believers with Allah‘s permission).
43|87| And if you ask them as to who has created them, they will certainly say, .Allah. Then, to where are they driven back (by their false desires)?
43|88| And (Allah has the knowledge) of his (prophet‘s) saying, .O my Lord, these are a people who do not believe.
43|89| So, turn away from them, and say, .Salam !. (good-bye!). Then, soon they will come to know (the end of their attitude).
44|1| Ha Mim .
44|2| By the manifest Book,
44|3| We have sent it down in a blessed night, (because) We had to warn (people).
44|4| In that (night), every wise matter is allocated
44|5| through a command from Us. We were to send the Messenger
44|6| as a mercy from your Lord, __Surely, He is the All-Hearing, the All-Knowing___
44|7| the Lord of the heavens and the earth and of whatever there is between them, if you are to believe.
44|8| There is no god, but He. He gives life and brings death. He is your Lord and the Lord of your forefathers.
44|9| But they, being in doubt, are playing around.
44|10| So, wait for a day when the sky will come up with a visible smoke
44|11| that will envelop people. This is a painful punishment.
44|12| (Then they will say,) .O our Lord, remove from us the punishment; we will truly believe.
44|13| How will they take lesson, while there has already come to them a messenger making things clear?
44|14| Then they turned away from him, and said, .(He is) tutored, crazy.
44|15| (Well,) We are going to remove the punishment for a while, (but) you will certainly go back (to your original position).
44|16| (Then,) the day We will seize (you) with the greatest seizure, We will take vengeance.
44|17| And We tested the people of Fir‘aun (Pharaoh) prior to them, and a noble messenger came to them
44|18| saying, .Deliver to me the servants of Allah. I am an honest messenger to you,.
44|19| and saying, .Do not be haughty against Allah. I bring to you a clear proof.
44|20| And I have sought refuge with my Lord and your Lord, lest you stone me to death.
44|21| And if you do not believe in me, then keep away from me.
44|22| Then he prayed to his Lord saying, .These are a guilty people.
44|23| (So, Allah answered his prayer saying,) .Now, take away my servants at night. You will certainly be chased,
44|24| and leave the sea in the state of stillness; they are an army that is sure to be drowned.
44|25| How many gardens and fountains have they left behind_
44|26| _ and how many fields and noble sites,
44|27| and how many a luxury they used to rejoice in!
44|28| This is how it happened. And We made other people inherit all this.
44|29| So, neither the sky and earth wept over them, nor were they given a respite.
44|30| And We delivered the children of Isra‘il from the humiliating punishment,
44|31| from Fir‘aun. Indeed, he was haughty, one of the transgressors.
44|32| And We chose them, with knowledge, above all the worlds.
44|33| And We gave them the clear signs in which there was a manifest blessing.
44|34| These people say,
44|35| .There is nothing more than our first death, and we are not going to be resurrected.
44|36| So, (O believers,) bring our fathers, if you are true (in your belief in resurrection.).
44|37| Are they better or the people of Tubba‘ and those who were before them? We have destroyed them. They were guilty indeed.
44|38| And We did not create the heavens and the earth and what is between them just as players.
44|39| We did not create them but with true purpose, but most of them do not know.
44|40| The Day of Decision is the appointed time for all of them__
44|41| the day when no close relation will be of any use to any close relation, nor will they be helped,
44|42| except the One on whom Allah has mercy. Of course, He is the All-Mighty, the Very-Merciful.
44|43| Indeed the tree of zaqqum
44|44| is the food of the sinful,
44|45| like dregs of oil. It will boil in the bellies
44|46| like the boiling of hot water.
44|47| (It will be said to angels,) .Seize him, and drag him into the midst of the Hell.
44|48| Then pour on his head some torment of boiling water.
44|49| .Have a taste! You are the ‘man of might‘, the ‘man of honour‘.
44|50| This is the thing about which you used to be skeptic.
44|51| Indeed the God-fearing will be in a place free from fear,
44|52| in gardens and fountains.
44|53| They will be dressed in fine silk and thick silk, facing each other.
44|54| Thus (it will happen,) and We will marry them with houris having big dark eyes.
44|55| They will call therein for every fruit peacefully.
44|56| They will not taste death therein beyond the first death (they faced in the world). And He (Allah) will save them from the torment of Hell,
44|57| as a favour from your Lord. That is the great achievement.
44|58| So, We had made it (the Qur‘an) easy in your tongue, so that they may take lesson.
44|59| Now wait. They too are waiting.
45|1| Ha Mim .
45|2| This is revelation of the Book from Allah, the All-Mighty, the All-Wise.
45|3| Surely in the heavens and the earth, there are signs for those who have faith.
45|4| And in your creation and in the living beings that He scatters on the earth, there are signs for a people who believe.
45|5| And in the alternation of the day and the night, and in the provision He has sent down from the sky, then has revived the earth after its death, and in changing of the winds, there are signs for a people who understand.
45|6| These are Allah‘s verses that We recite to you rightly. Then, in which discourse, after Allah and His verses, will they believe?
45|7| Woe to every sinful liar,
45|8| who hears Allah‘s verses being recited to him, then he remains adamant out of arrogance, as if he never heard them. So give him the ‘good news‘ of a painful punishment.
45|9| When he learns about something of Our verses, he takes it as a laughing stock. For such people, there is a humiliating punishment.
45|10| In front of them, there is Jahannam (Hell). And whatever they have earned will not be of any use to them, nor the patrons they have adopted instead of Allah. And for them, there is a horrible punishment.
45|11| This is guidance, and those who reject the verses of their Lord, for them there is a painful punishment of the divine scourge.
45|12| Allah is the One who has subjugated for you the sea, so that the ships may sail in it with His command, and so that you may seek His grace, and so that you offer gratitude.
45|13| He has subjugated for you whatever there is in the heavens and whatever there is in the earth, all on His own. Surely in this there are signs for a people who reflect.
45|14| Tell those who believe that they should forgive those who do not believe in Allah‘s days, so that He may recompense a people for what they used to earn.
45|15| Whoever acts righteously, it is for his own benefit, and who does evil, it is against his own soul. Then towards your Lord, you will be returned.
45|16| We gave the children of Isra‘il the book and the wisdom and the prophet-hood, and provided them with good things, and preferred them above all (people of) the world,
45|17| and We gave them clear proofs of the Matter (i.e. the religion). So they did not fall into disagreement out of mutual jealousy, but after the knowledge had come to them. Surely your Lord will judge between them, on the Day of Judgment, in the matters in which they used to differ.
45|18| Then We have put you on a certain way of the Matter (i.e. the religion); so follow it, and do not follow the desires of those who do not know.
45|19| They will never help you against Allah in the least. The wrongdoers are friends to one another, and Allah is the friend of the God-fearing.
45|20| These are insights for the people, and guidance and mercy for a people who believe.
45|21| Do those who have committed evils assume that We will make them like those who believe and do righteous deeds, so as their life and death becomes equal? Evil is what they judge.
45|22| Allah has created the heavens and the earth with just purpose, and so that everybody is recompensed for what he (or she) earned, and they will not be wronged.
45|23| So, have you seen him who has taken his desires as his god, and Allah has let him go astray, despite having knowledge, and has sealed his ear and his heart, and put a cover on his eye? Now who will guide him after Allah? Still, do you not take lesson?
45|24| And they say, .There is no life but our worldly life. We die and live, and nothing destroys us except time. They have no knowledge about that; they do nothing but make conjectures.
45|25| When Our verses are recited to them in all their clarity, their argument is none but that they say, .Bring our fathers, if you are truthful.
45|26| Say, .Allah gives you life, then makes you die, then He will assemble you on the Day of Judgement in which there is no doubt, but most of the people do not know.
45|27| To Allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. The day the Hour will take place, it will be the day in which the adherents of falsehood shall lose,
45|28| and you will see every community kneeling down. Every community will be called to its book (of record). Today you will be recompensed for what you used to do.
45|29| This is Our book that speaks against you with truth. We used to get recorded all that you used to do.
45|30| Then, as for those who believed and did righteous deeds, their Lord will admit them to His mercy. That is indeed the achievement, visible to all.
45|31| And as to those who disbelieved, (it will be said to them,) .Had My verses not been recited to you? But you showed arrogance, and you were a guilty people;
45|32| and when it was said to you that Allah‘s promise is true and there is no doubt in the (arrival of the) Hour, you used to say, ‘We do not know what the Hour is. We do not think (about it) but as an assumption, and we are not sure.‘.
45|33| And revealed to them will be the evils of what they did, and encircled they will be by what they used to ridicule.
45|34| It will be said, .Today We will forget you, as you forgot facing this your day, and your abode is the Fire, and for you there are no helpers at all.
45|35| That is because you took Allah‘s verses as a laughing stock, and the worldly life deceived you. So today they will neither be brought out of it, nor will they be asked to repent.
45|36| So, to Allah belongs all praise, who is the Lord of the heavens and the earth, the Lord of the worlds.
45|37| And to Him belongs majesty in the heavens and the earth. And He is the Mighty, the Wise.
46|1| Ha Mim .
46|2| This is revelation of the book from Allah, the All-Mighty, the All-Wise.
46|3| We did not create the heavens and the earth but with true purpose and for a specified term. But those who disbelieve are averse to what they are warned of.
46|4| Say, .Tell me about those whom you invoke instead of Allah, (and) show me what they have created from the earth; Or have they a share in (the creation of) the heavens? Bring to me a book (revealed) before this one, or a trace of knowledge, if you are truthful.
46|5| Who is more astray than him who invokes, instead of Allah, those who will not respond to him up to the Day of Judgement; and they are totally unaware of their prayers,
46|6| and when people will be assembled (on the Day of Judgment), they will be enemies to them, and will refuse even their having worshipped them.
46|7| When Our verses are recited to them in all their clarity, the disbelievers say about the truth when it comes to them, .This is an open magic.
46|8| Is it that they say, .He has forged it (the Qur‘an).? Say, .If I have forged it, then you do not have any power to help me against Allah. He is well aware of what you are engaged in. He is enough as a witness between me and you, and He is the Most-Forgiving, the Very-Merciful.
46|9| Say, .I am not something unprecedented among the messengers, and I do not know what will be done to me or to you. I do not follow anything but what is revealed to me, and I am only a clear warner.
46|10| Say, .Tell me, If it (the Qur‘an) is from Allah and you reject it, and a witness from the children of Isra‘il testifies about something similar to it and comes to believe (in it), while you persist in your arrogance, (then, how unjust you are!) Surely, Allah does not give guidance to the unjust people.
46|11| The disbelievers say about the believers, .Had it (Islamic faith) been a good thing, these (weak and poor) people would not have preceded us (in proceeding) towards it. Since they did not accept guidance through it (the Qur‘an), they will say, .This is a classical lie.
46|12| And before this there was the Book of Musa, a guide and a mercy. And this is a Book confirming (it) in Arabic tongue, so that it may warn the wrongdoers and give good news to those who are good in their deeds.
46|13| Surely, those who say, .Our Lord is Allah. and then stay firm, they will have no fear, nor shall they grieve.
46|14| Those are the people of Paradise, who will live there for ever as a reward for what they used to do.
46|15| And We have enjoined upon man to do good to his parents. His mother carried him with difficulty and delivered him with difficulty. And his carrying and his weaning is (in) thirty months, until when he attains his maturity and reaches forty years, he says, .My Lord, grant me that I offer gratitude for the favour You have bestowed upon me and upon my parents, and that I do righteous deeds that You like. And set righteousness, for my sake, in my progeny. Of course, I repent to you, and truly I am one of those who submit to You.
46|16| Such are the people from whom We accept the best of what they did, and overlook their evil deeds, (so as they will be) among the people of Paradise according to the true promise that was made to them.
46|17| And (Contrary to this is the case of) the one who said to his parents, .Fie upon you both! Do you promise to me that I shall be brought out (from the grave), while generations have passed before me?. And they (the parents) were crying for Allah‘s help, (and saying to their son,) .Woe to you. Accept the true faith. Allah‘s promise is certainly true. Then he says, .This is nothing but the tales of the ancients.
46|18| Such are the people on whom the word (of punishment) has come true along with the communities of the Jinn and the humans that have passed before them. Surely they were losers.
46|19| For each (of these two groups) there are (different) ranks because of what they did, and so that He may repay them in full for their deeds; and they will not be wronged.
46|20| And the day the disbelievers will be presented before the Fire, (it will be said to them,) .You have consumed your good things in your worldly life, and have enjoyed them. So, you will be punished today with the torment of humiliation for the arrogance you used to show on earth with no right (to do so), and for the sins you used to commit.
46|21| And recall the brother of (the nation of) ‘Ad, when he warned his people at the long, curved sand dunes__ while many warners have passed before him and after him (with the same message)__saying, .Do not worship anyone except Allah. Surely I fear for you the punishment of a terrible day.
46|22| They said, .Have you come to make us deviate from our gods? So bring us that with which you are threatening us, if you are truthful.
46|23| He said, .The knowledge is with Allah alone, and I am conveying to you what I am sent with, but I see you are a people who act ignorantly.
46|24| So, when they saw it as a cloud proceeding towards their valleys, they said, .This is a cloud that will bring us rain. No, it is the very thing you asked to hasten up __ a wind in which there is a painful punishment,
46|25| that will destroy every thing with the command of its Lord! So they became such that nothing remained to be seen except their dwelling places. This is how We punish the guilty people.
46|26| And indeed We had established them in a powerful position in which We did not establish you (O people of Makkah), and had given to them ears and eyes and hearts, but neither their ears benefited them in the least, nor their eyes, nor their hearts, as they used to reject Allah‘s signs; and they were encircled by what they used to ridicule.
46|27| And We have (also) destroyed (other) towns around you, while We had given to them a variety of signs, so that they might return (from disbelief).
46|28| So, why is it that they were not helped by those whom they had taken as gods beside Allah in order to attain closeness (to Him)? Instead, they vanished from them. That was, in fact, their falsity and a thing they used to fabricate.
46|29| And (recall) when We directed a group of Jinns towards you, listening to the Qur‘an. So, when they attended it, they said (to each other), .Keep quiet. Then once it was over, they went back to their people as warners.
46|30| They said, .O our people, we have heard a book sent down after Musa, confirming what was before it, which guides to the truth and to a straight path.
46|31| O our people, respond to Allah‘s herald, and believe in him, and (once you do that,) Allah will forgive your sins for you, and will save you from a painful punishment.
46|32| The one who does not respond to Allah‘s herald is not (able) to frustrate (Allah by escaping) in the land, and for him there are no supporters besides Him. Such people are in open error.
46|33| Have they not seen that Allah who has created the heavens and the earth, and was not wearied by their creation, does have power to give life to the dead? Yes of course, He is powerful to do every thing.
46|34| The day the disbelievers will be presented to the Fire, (it will be said to them,) .Is this not true?. They will say, .Yes of course, Our Lord!. He will say, .Then taste the punishment, for you used to disbelieve.
46|35| So, (O prophet,) observe patience, as the resolute messengers observed patience, and be not in haste about them. The Day they will see what they are promised, (it will be) as if they did not stay (in the world) more than an hour in a single day. This is a message. So, none will be destroyed except the sinners.
47|1| Those who disbelieved, and prevented (others) from Allah‘s way, He (Allah) has rendered their deeds vain.
47|2| And those who believed and did righteous deeds and believed in that which is revealed to MuHammad,_and it is the truth (that has come) from their Lord__He will write off their evil deeds, and will set aright their state of affairs.
47|3| That is because the disbelievers have followed falsehood, while the believers have followed the truth (that has come) from their Lord. This is how Allah explains their (respective) situations to the people.
47|4| So, when you encounter those who disbelieve, then (aim at) smiting the necks, until when you have broken their strength thoroughly, then tie fast the bond, (by making them captives). Then choose (to release them) either (as) a favour (shown to them,), or (after receiving) ransom, until the war throws down its load of arms. That (is Our command.) If Allah willed, He would have (Himself) subjected them to retribution, but (Allah ordered you to fight,) so that He may test some of you through some others. And those who are killed in Allah‘s way, He will never let their deeds go to waste.
47|5| (Instead,) He will guide them, and will set aright their state of affairs,
47|6| and will admit them to the Paradise He has identified for them.
47|7| O you who believe, if you will help (the religion prescribed by) Allah, He will help you, and will stabilize your footings.
47|8| As for those who disbelieve, (destined) for them is destruction, and He has rendered their deeds vain.
47|9| That is because they hate what Allah has sent down; therefore Allah has nullified their deeds.
47|10| Have they not travelled in the land so that they might see how was the end of those before them? Allah brought utter destruction to them. And (ready) for (these) disbelievers are the likes thereof.
47|11| That is because Allah is the supporter of those who believe. As for the disbelievers, there is no supporter for them.
47|12| Surely, Allah will admit those who believe and do good deeds to the gardens beneath which rivers flow. As for those who disbelieve, they enjoy (the worldly life), and eat as cattle eat, and the Fire is the final abode for them.
47|13| How many a town, stronger in might than your town that has expelled you, have We destroyed! Then, there was none to help them.
47|14| Then, can one who holds on to a clear proof from his Lord be like those for whom their evil deeds are beautified, and who followed their desires?
47|15| (Here is) a description of the Paradise that is promised for the God-fearing! In it there are rivers of water, never spoiling, and rivers of milk the taste of which would not go bad, and rivers of wine, delicious to the drinkers, and rivers of honey, fully purified. And for them there are all sorts of fruits, and forgiveness from their Lord. Are they like those who will live in Fire forever, and will be given boiling water to drink, and it will tear their bowels into pieces?
47|16| Among them there are ones who (pretend to) give ear to you, until when they go out from your presence, they say to those who have been given knowledge, .What did he say just now?. Those are the ones on whose hearts Allah has put a seal, and they have followed their desires.
47|17| As for those who have adopted right path, Allah improves them in guidance, and gives them their piety.
47|18| They are waiting for nothing but for the Hour (of Doom) that it should come upon them suddenly. So, its signs have already come. Then, once it will come upon them, how would they have an opportunity to accept the advice (already) given to them?
47|19| So, be assured that there is no god but Allah, and seek forgiveness for your fault, and for (the faults of) the believing men and believing women. And Allah knows your moving from place to place and your permanent abode.
47|20| And the believers say, .Why has a (new) Surah not been revealed?. Then, once an operative Surah is sent down, and fighting (in Allah‘s way) is mentioned in it, you notice those who have disease in their hearts, looking to you like one who is faint because of death. So, destruction is very close to them.
47|21| The (reality of their) obedience and (truthfulness of their) speech is fully known (as being mere deception). So, had they been truthful to Allah when the matter had become serious, it would have been much better for them.
47|22| So, (O hypocrites,) do you not apprehend that, in case you turn away (from Jihad ), you will spread disorder in the land and will sever your ties of kinship?
47|23| Those are the ones whom Allah has cursed; so He has made them deaf, and made their eyes blind.
47|24| Then, do they not give serious thought to the Qur‘an, or do they have locks on their hearts?
47|25| Surely those who turn back after the guidance has appeared to them clearly, it is Satan who has tempted them and involved them in far-fetched fancies.
47|26| That is because they say to those who hate that which Allah has revealed, .We will obey you in some respects. And Allah knows their secret talk.
47|27| So, how (miserable) will they be when the angels will exact their souls, smiting their faces and their backs?
47|28| That is because they followed that which has angered Allah, and they disliked His pleasure; therefore He has nullified their deeds.
47|29| Do those having malady in their hearts think that Allah will never expose their grudges (against Islam)?
47|30| Had We willed, We would have shown them to you (by identifying each one of them,) so as you would definitely recognize them by their features. However, you will recognize them by the tone of (their) speech. And Allah knows (all) your deeds.
47|31| And We will certainly test you until We know those of you who carry out Jihad (struggle in Allah‘s way) and observe patience, and until We check your episodes.
47|32| Those who disbelieve and prevent (others) from Allah‘s way, and oppose the Messenger, after the Guidance has appeared to them clearly, shall never bring harm to Allah in the least, and He will render their deeds vain.
47|33| O you who believe, obey Allah and obey the Messenger, and do not nullify your deeds.
47|34| Those who disbelieved and prevented (others) from Allah‘s way, then died as disbelievers, Allah will never forgive them.
47|35| So, do not lose heart, and do not appeal for peace; you will be the uppermost, and Allah is with you; and He will never deprive you of your deeds.
47|36| The worldly life is but play and pastime. If you believe and be God-fearing, He will give you your rewards, and will not ask you your riches.
47|37| If He were to ask you of it, and press you (to spend all your wealth), you would show miserliness, and He would expose your disgusts.
47|38| Yes, you are such that you are called upon to spend in Allah‘s way, but some of you withhold in miserliness_ and he who withholds in miserliness withholds against himself_ and Allah is the Need-Free, and you are the needy. And if you turn away, He will replace you by some other people, then they will not be like you.
48|1| Surely, We have granted you an open victory,
48|2| so that Allah may forgive you of your previous and subsequent faults, and may complete His favour upon you, and may guide you to a straight path,
48|3| and so that Allah may support you with a mighty support.
48|4| He (Allah) is such that He sent down tranquility into the hearts of the believers, so that they grow more in faith in addition to their (existing) faith__ And to Allah belong the forces of the heavens and the earth, and Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise__
48|5| so that He admits believing men and believing women to the gardens beneath which rivers flow, to live therein for ever, and so that He may write off their evil deeds, which is a great achievement in Allah‘s sight,
48|6| and so that He may punish the hypocrites, men and women, and the mushriks (polytheists), men and women, who think evil thoughts about Allah. Bound for them there is a vicious circle, and Allah has become angry with them, and He has prepared Jahannam (Hell) for them, and it is an evil destination.
48|7| To Allah belong the forces of the heavens and the earth, and Allah is All-Mighty, All-Wise.
48|8| Indeed, We have sent you (O prophet,) as a witness and as a bearer of good news and as a warner,
48|9| so that you (O people,) believe in Allah and His Messenger, and support him and revere him, and pronounce His (Allah‘s) purity morning and evening.
48|10| Those who pledge allegiance with you (by placing their hands in your hand)__ they, in fact, pledge allegiance with Allah. Allah‘s hand is over their hands. Then, whoever breaks his pledge breaks it to his own detriment, and whoever fulfils the covenant he has made with Allah, He will give him a great reward.
48|11| Those of the Bedouins who remained behind will say to you, .Our possessions and our families kept us busy, (hence we could not accompany you in your journey to Hudaibiyah). So, pray to Allah for our forgiveness. They say with their tongues what is not in their hearts. Say, .Then, who has power to help you in any thing against Allah, if He intends to do you harm, or intends to do you good? Rather, Allah is fully aware of what you do.
48|12| But you thought that the Messenger and the believers would never ever return to their families, and it seemed good to your hearts, and you thought an evil thought and became a people who are ruined (by their selfishness).
48|13| If one does not believe in Allah and His Messenger, then We have prepared a blazing fire for the disbelievers.
48|14| To Allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. He forgives whomsoever He wills, and punishes whomsoever He wills. And Allah is Most-Forgiving, Very-Merciful.
48|15| Those who remained behind will say, when you will proceed to the spoils (of war) to receive them, .Let us follow you. They wish to change the words of Allah. Say, .You shall not follow us. Allah had said like this beforehand. Then they will say, .No, but you are jealous of us. On the contrary, they do not understand (the reality) but a little.
48|16| Say to those of the Bedouins who remained behind, .You will be called against a people possessed of strong fighting power; you will have to fight them until they submit. So if you obey, Allah will give you a good reward, and if you turn away, as you had turned away earlier, He will punish you with a painful punishment.
48|17| There is no blame on the blind, nor is there any blame on the lame, nor is there any blame on the sick. Whoever obeys Allah and His Messenger, He will admit him to the gardens beneath which rivers flow. But whoever turns away, He will punish him with a painful punishment.
48|18| Allah was pleased with the believers when they were pledging allegiance with you (by placing their hands in your hands) under the tree, and He knew what was in their hearts, so He sent down tranquility upon them, and rewarded them with a victory, near at hand,
48|19| and many spoils that they would receive. And Allah is Mighty, Wise.
48|20| Allah had promised you many spoils that you would receive, so He gave these to you sooner, and stopped the hands of the people from (harming) you. And (He did this) so that it becomes a sign for believers, and so that He guides you to the right path.
48|21| And (there is) another (victory) that has not come within your power as yet, (but) Allah has encompassed it. And Allah is Powerful over every thing.
48|22| Had the disbelievers fought you, they would have certainly turned their backs, then they would have found neither a supporter nor a helper_
48|23| _ according to the consistent practice of Allah that went on since before, and you will never find a change in Allah‘s consistent practice.
48|24| And He is the One who restrained their hands from you and your hands from them in the valley of Makkah after He had let you prevail over them, and Allah is watchful over what you do.
48|25| They are those who disbelieved and prevented you from the Sacred Mosque (Al-Masjid-ul-Haram ), and (prevented) the sacrificial animals that were detained from reaching their due place. And (Allah would have allowed you to fight,) had there not been believing men and believing women whom you did not know that you might have trampled them, and thus a painful situation might have arisen for you because of them unknowingly; (This situation was avoided) so that Allah may admit to His mercy whom He wills. And if they (the believing men and women) had moved (from Makkah), We would surely have punished those of them who disbelieved with a painful punishment.
48|26| When the disbelievers developed in their hearts indignation, the indignation of ignorance; then Allah sent down tranquility from Himself upon His Messenger and upon the believers, and made them stick to the word of piety, and they were very much entitled to it and competent for it. And Allah is All-Knowing about every thing.
48|27| Indeed, Allah has made true to His Messenger the dream (shown) with truth: You will definitely enter the Sacred Mosque insha‘allah (if Allah wills,) peacefully, with your heads shaved, and your hairs cut short, having no fear. So He knew what you did not know, and He assigned before that a victory, near at hand.
48|28| He is the One who has sent His Messenger with Guidance and the religion of truth, so that He makes it prevail over all religions. And enough is Allah for being a witness (to His promise).
48|29| MuaHmmad is the messenger of Allah, and those who are with him are hard on the disbelievers, compassionate among themselves; you will see them bowing down in Ruku‘, prostrating themselves in Sajdah, seeking grace from Allah, and (His) good pleasure; their distinguishing feature is on their faces from the effect of Sajdah (prostration). This is their description in Torah; and their description in Injil is: like a sown crop that brings forth its shoot, then makes it strong, then it grows thick and stands straight on its stem, looking good to the farmers, so that He may enrage the disbelievers through them. Allah has promised forgiveness and a huge reward to those of them who believe and do good deeds.
49|1| O you who believe, do not proceed ahead of Allah and His Messenger, and fear Allah. Surely Allah is All-Hearing, All-Knowing.
49|2| O you who believe, do not raise your voices above the voice of the Prophet, and be not loud when speaking to him, as you are loud when speaking to one another, lest your good deeds should become void while you are not aware.
49|3| Surely, those who lower their voices before Allah‘s Messenger are the ones whose hearts Allah has tested for piety; for them there is forgiveness, and a great reward.
49|4| As for those who call you from behind the chambers, most of them have no sense.
49|5| Had they remained patient until you come out to them, it would have been much better for them. And Allah is Most-Forgiving, Very-Merciful.
49|6| O you who believe, if a sinful person brings you a report, verify its correctness, lest you should harm a people out of ignorance, and then become remorseful on what you did.
49|7| And know that among you there is the Messenger of Allah. If he obeys you in many a matter, you will certainly fall into hardship. But Allah has endeared to you the Faith, and made it beautiful in your hearts, and made detestable to you the disbelief and sins and disobedience. Such people are rightly guided,
49|8| as a grace from Allah, and as a blessing. And Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise.
49|9| If two groups of the believers fight each other, seek reconciliation between them. And if one of them commits aggression against the other, fight the one that commits aggression until it comes back to Allah‘s command. So if it comes back, seek reconciliation between them with fairness, and maintain justice. Surely Allah loves those who maintain justice.
49|10| All believers are but brothers, therefore seek reconciliation between your two brothers, and fear Allah, so that you may be blessed with mercy.
49|11| O you who believe, no men should ever scoff at other men. May be, the latter are better than the former. Nor should women (ever scoff) at other women. May be, the latter women are better than the former ones. And do not find fault with one another, nor call one another with bad nicknames. Bad is the name of sinfulness after embracing Faith. If anyone does not repent, then such people are the wrongdoers.
49|12| O you who believe, abstain from many of the suspicions. Some suspicions are sins. And do not be curious (to find out faults of others), and do not backbite one another. Does one of you like that he eats the flesh of his dead brother? You would abhor it. And fear Allah. Surely Allah is Most-Relenting, Very-Merciful.
49|13| O mankind, We have created you from a male and a female, and made you into races and tribes, so that you may identify one another. Surely the noblest of you, in Allah‘s sight, is the one who is most pious of you. Surely Allah is All-Knowing, All-Aware.
49|14| The Bedouins say, .We have come to believe. Say, .You have not come to believe; instead, you (should) say, ‘We have surrendered‘ and the belief has not entered your hearts so far. If you obey Allah and His Messenger, He will not curtail (the reward of) any of your deeds in the least. Surely Allah is Most-Forgiving, Very-Merciful.
49|15| Believers, in fact, are those who believe in Allah and His Messenger, then have no doubt, and struggle, with their riches and their lives, in the way of Allah. Those are the truthful.
49|16| Say, .Would you apprise Allah of your religion, while Allah knows all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth, and Allah is All-Knowing about every thing?.
49|17| They oblige you that they have accepted Islam, (as if it was a favour shown to you). Say, .Do not oblige me for your accepting Islam. Rather, Allah makes you obliged for His having guided you to the Faith, if you are truthful.
49|18| Surely Allah knows the Unseen of the heavens and the earth, and Allah keeps in sight whatever you do.
50|1| Qaf . (I swear) by the glorious Qur‘an, (you are sent as a messenger.)
50|2| But they wonder that a warner has come to them from among themselves; so the disbelievers said, .This is something strange.
50|3| Is it when we die and become dust (that we will be brought to life again?) That is a return, far (from understanding).
50|4| We know very well how much of them is diminished by the earth, and We have a Book that Preserves every thing.
50|5| Rather, they rejected the truth when it came to them; so they are in a confused state.
50|6| Did they not, then, look to the sky above them, how We have built it and beautified it, and it has no cracks?
50|7| As for the earth, We have spread it out, and cast on it firm hills, and caused to grow therein every kind of delightful things,
50|8| as a source of vision and as a lesson to every servant (of Allah) who turns (to Him for guidance).
50|9| And We sent down blessed water from the sky, and caused to grow therewith gardens and grain of harvest,
50|10| and towering date palms that have spadices, put one upon another,
50|11| as a provision to the servants (of Allah). And We gave life with it to a dead land. Similar will be the exit (of the dead from their graves).
50|12| It (resurrection) was rejected before them by the people of NuH, and the people of Rass and Thamud,
50|13| and ‘Ad, and Fir‘aun (Pharaoh), and the brothers of LuT,
50|14| and dwellers of Aaikah, and the people of Tubba‘. Each one of them rejected the messengers; so My threat came true.
50|15| Is it, then, that We were worn out by the first creation? No, but they are still in confusion about the new creation.
50|16| Indeed We have created man, and We know whatever thoughts his inner self develops, and We are closer to him than (his) jugular vein,
50|17| when the two receiving angels receive (every human act to record it), seated (one) on the right and (one) on the left.
50|18| Not a single word is uttered by one but there is a watcher near him, ready (to record).
50|19| The daze of death has (to) come with truth. That is what you tried to escape.
50|20| And the Horn will be blown. That will be the day of (which) threat (was given).
50|21| And everybody will come, along with one (angel) to drive (him to the field of reckoning) and one (angel) to testify (about his deeds).
50|22| .You were heedless of this. Now We have removed your veil from you; so your sight today is sharp.
50|23| And his companion (i.e. the angel who recorded his deeds) will say, .This is what I have with me, ready (to be presented as his record of deeds).
50|24| (Then it will be said,) .Cast, (O two angels,) into Jahannam (Hell) every obstinate disbeliever
50|25| who used to prevent (others) from good (behavior), who transgressed all bounds, who cast doubts (in true faith),
50|26| who set up another god along with Allah. So cast him (O angels) in the painful punishment.
50|27| His (evil) companion (i.e. the Satan) will say, .O our Lord, I did not cause him to rebel, but he was himself (involved) in straying far from the track.
50|28| He (Allah) will say, .Do not quarrel before Me, while I had sent to you My threat well in advance.
50|29| The Word is not changed with Me, and I Am not so unjust to My servants.
50|30| (Remind them of) the Day when We will say to Jahannam (Hell), .Are you filled up?. and it will say, .Are there some more?.
50|31| And the Jannah (Paradise) will be brought close for the God-fearing, no longer distant.
50|32| (And it will be said,) .This is what you were promised for everyone who was oft-returning to Allah, vigilant (against sins),
50|33| the one who feared the RaHman (The All-Merciful Allah), without seeing Him, and came up with a heart oriented towards Him.
50|34| Enter it in peace. That is the Day of Eternity.
50|35| They will have in it whatever they wish, and with Us there are things even more than that.
50|36| And how many a generation We have destroyed before them who were stronger than these in their grip on power, and they searched out the cities. Was there any place (for them) to escape?
50|37| Indeed, there is a lesson in all this for him who has a heart and gives ear (to the truth) attentively.
50|38| We created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days, and no weariness even touched Us.
50|39| So, (O Prophet,) endure with patience what they say, and proclaim His purity, along with your Lord‘s praise, before sunrise and before sunset.
50|40| And in hours of night, proclaim His purity, and at the ends of prostration.
50|41| And listen: The Day when the caller will call out from a near place,
50|42| the Day they will hear the Cry in reality_ that will be the Day of Resurrection.
50|43| Surely We alone give life and bring death, and to Us is the final return
50|44| on the Day when the earth will burst apart exposing them, while they will be hurrying up (to come out). That is an assembly, so easy for Us (to muster).
50|45| We know well what they say, and you are not (sent) as one who compels them. So exhort, through the Qur‘an, the one who fears My warning.
51|1| By those (winds) that scatter dust,
51|2| then those that bear load (of clouds),
51|3| then those that float with ease,
51|4| then those who distribute things,
51|5| whatever you are being promised is surely true,
51|6| and Recompense (of deeds) is sure to happen.
51|7| By the sky, having paths,
51|8| you are (involved) in a contradictory discussion.
51|9| Turned away from this (Qur‘an) is the one who is turned away (totally from the truth.)
51|10| Death upon those who make conjectures (against the true faith),
51|11| __ those who are drowned in ignorance, forgetful!
51|12| They ask, .When shall be the Day of Recompense?.
51|13| (It will be) the Day when they will be heated on the Fire,
51|14| (and it will be said to them,) .Taste (the punishment of) your mischief. This is what you have been asking to be brought sooner.
51|15| The God-fearing (on the other hand) will be in gardens and springs,
51|16| receiving what their Lord will have given to them. Indeed, prior to this, they were good in their deeds.
51|17| They used to sleep little in the night;
51|18| and in the hours before dawn they used to pray for forgiveness,
51|19| and in their wealth, there was a right for one who asks and for one who is deprived.
51|20| In the earth, there are signs for those who (seek truth to) believe,
51|21| and in your own selves! So, do you not perceive?
51|22| And in the heavens, there is your sustenance and all that you have been promised.
51|23| So, by the Lord of the heavens and the earth, it (the Day of Recompense) is a reality, as sure as the fact that you (can) speak.
51|24| Has there come to you the story of the honoured guests of Ibrahim?
51|25| When they (the angels in human form) entered unto him and said, .We greet you with Salam . He said, .Salam on you. (And he said to himself,) .(They are) unknown people.
51|26| Then he slipped off to his home and fetched a fattened calf.
51|27| So he presented it before them (to eat, but being angels, they refrained.) He said, .Would you not eat?.
51|28| So he felt some fear in his heart. They said, .Be not scared. And they gave him the good news of (the birth of) a knowledgeable boy.
51|29| So his wife came forward with a clamor, and slapped her own face and said, .(How can I have a child when I am) a barren old woman?.
51|30| They said, .This is how your Lord has said. Surely, He is All-Wise, All-Knowing.
51|31| He (Ibrahim) said (to the angels), .Then, what is your mission O messengers?.
51|32| They said, .We are sent to a guilty people, (i.e. the people of Sodom)
51|33| so that we may send down upon them stones of clay,
51|34| marked by your Lord for the transgressors.
51|35| So, We let the believers who were there to come out (from danger),
51|36| but We did not find in it any Muslims, except one house.
51|37| And We left in this (event) a sign (of deterrence) for those who fear the painful punishment.
51|38| And (We left a similar sign) in (the story of) Musa, when We sent him to Fir‘aun (Pharaoh) with a clear proof.
51|39| So he turned away along with his chiefs and said, . (Musa is) a magician or a madman!.
51|40| So We seized him and his army, and cast them into the sea, as he was of culpable behaviour.
51|41| And (a similar sign was left) in (the story of) ‘Ad, when We sent upon them the wind that was barren (from any benefit);
51|42| it spared nothing it came upon, but rendered it like a stuff smashed by decay.
51|43| And (a similar sign was left) in (the story of) Thamud, when it was said to them, .Enjoy yourselves for a while.
51|44| Then they rebelled against the command of your Lord; so the thunderbolt (of divine punishment) seized them, while they were looking on.
51|45| Then they were neither able to stand (before the punishment), nor could they defend themselves.
51|46| And (We have destroyed) the people of NuH even before; indeed they were a sinful people.
51|47| And the sky was built by Us with might; and indeed We are the expanders.
51|48| And the earth was spread out by Us as a floor; so how well have We spread it out!
51|49| And from every thing We have created pairs of twos, so that you may heed.
51|50| So, flee to Allah. Indeed I am a plain warner sent by Him for you.
51|51| And do not make up any other god along with Allah. Indeed I am a plain warner sent by Him for you.
51|52| In similar way, no messenger came to those before them, but they said, .(He is) a magician or a madman.
51|53| Have they handed down (this saying) to each other as a legacy? Rather they are a rebellious people.
51|54| So, turn away from them, for you are not blamed.
51|55| And keep reminding, because reminding benefits the believers.
51|56| I did not create the Jinns and the human beings except for the purpose that they should worship Me.
51|57| I do not want any sustenance from them, nor do I want them to feed Me.
51|58| In fact, Allah is the All-Sustainer, Possessor of power, the Strong.
51|59| So, those who did wrong will have their turn like the turn of their counterparts. So, they should not ask Me to hasten on.
51|60| Woe, then, to those who disbelieve because of the Day of theirs that they are promised (for punishment).
52|1| By the mount of Tur,
52|2| and by a book, written
52|3| on an unrolled scroll,
52|4| and by the Populated House (Al-Bait-ul-Ma‘mur) ,
52|5| and by the roof, raised high,
52|6| and by the sea, flared up (with fire),
52|7| the punishment of your Lord is sure to fall.
52|8| There is nothing to push it back,
52|9| the Day when the sky will tremble, a horrible trembling,
52|10| and the mountains will move about, a terrible movement.
52|11| So, woe to those who reject (the true faith),
52|12| who are indulged in vain talk, playing (with truth),
52|13| the Day they will be pushed to the Fire forcefully,
52|14| (and it will be said to them,) .This is the Fire you used to deny.
52|15| Is it then magic, or do you not see?
52|16| Enter it. Now, whether you endure (it) patiently or impatiently, it is all the same for you; you are merely rewarded for what you used to do.
52|17| Of course, the God-fearing will be in gardens and bliss,
52|18| enjoying what their Lord will have given to them, and their Lord will have saved them from the punishment of Hell.
52|19| (It will be said to them,) .Eat and drink pleasantly because of what you used to do,
52|20| relaxing on lined up couches. And We will marry them with big-eyed houris.
52|21| And those who believed and their children followed them in belief, We will join their children with them, and will not curtail (the reward of) any of their deeds at all. Every person will be pledged for what he earned.
52|22| And We will go on giving them whatever they desire of fruits and meat.
52|23| They will snatch from one another (in a friendly manner) a glass (of wine) carrying neither absurd talk, nor something leading to sin.
52|24| And their own serving boys will rotate around them, (who will be as neat and clean) as if they were hidden pearls.
52|25| And they will advance to one another, asking (about each other‘s welfare).
52|26| They will say, .Indeed we were afraid (of Allah‘s punishment) when we were amidst our family,
52|27| but Allah did favour to us and saved us from the torment of Fire‘s scorching breath.
52|28| We used to pray to Him before. He is surely the Most-Kind, the Very-Merciful.
52|29| So keep reminding (them), because by the grace of your Lord, you are neither a soothsayer, nor a mad man.
52|30| Do they rather say, .He is a poet for whom we are awaiting the accident of death?.
52|31| Say, .Wait! I am waiting with you, too.
52|32| Is it their intellects that direct them to (say) this, or are they a rebellious people?
52|33| Do they rather say, .He has forged it (the Qur‘an.).? No, but they do not believe.
52|34| So, let them bring a discourse like this, if they are truthful.
52|35| Is it that they are created by none, or are they themselves the creators?
52|36| Or have they created the heavens and the earth? No, but they are sure of nothing.
52|37| Or do they have the treasures of your Lord, or have they acquired control (over them)?
52|38| Or have they a stairway (to the heavens) by means of which they listen (to the divine decrees)? If so, their listener must bring a clear proof.
52|39| Is it that He has daughters and you have sons?
52|40| Or is it that you (O prophet) ask them for a fee, and therefore they are burdened with a liability?
52|41| Or have they the knowledge of the Unseen, and they are recording it?
52|42| Or do they intend to plan to do harm (to the prophet)? Then the disbelievers themselves shall be harmed by the plan.
52|43| Or do they have a god other than Allah? Pure is Allah from what they associate with Him.
52|44| Even if they see a piece falling down from the sky, they would say, .It is a cumulated cloud.
52|45| So, leave them alone until they face their Day, in which they will be turned unconscious,
52|46| the Day their planning will not benefit them in the least, nor will they be helped.
52|47| And for those who did wrong there is another punishment before that, but most of them do not know.
52|48| And (O Prophet) be patient about the decision of your Lord, because you are in front of Our Eyes. And proclaim the purity of your Lord along with His praise when you stand (in Prayer),
52|49| And, in parts of night too, proclaim His purity, and at the time of setting of the stars.
53|1| By the star when it goes down to set,
53|2| your fellow (the Holy Prophet) has neither missed the way, nor did he deviate.
53|3| He does not speak out of (his own) desire.
53|4| It is but revelation revealed (to him).
53|5| It is taught to him by one (angel) of strong faculties,
53|6| the one of vigour. So he stood poised,
53|7| while he was on the upper horizon.
53|8| Then he drew near, and came down,
53|9| so as he was at a distance like that of two bows (joined together), rather even nearer.
53|10| Thus He (Allah) revealed to His slave what He revealed.
53|11| The heart did not err in what he saw.
53|12| Do you quarrel with him in what he sees?
53|13| Indeed he saw him another time
53|14| by Sidrat-ul-Muntaha (the lote-tree in the upper realm),
53|15| near which there is Jannat-ul-Ma‘wa (the Paradise of Abode),
53|16| when the lote-tree was covered by that which covered it.
53|17| The eye neither went wrong, nor did exceed the limit.
53|18| He has indeed seen a part of the biggest signs of your Lord.
53|19| Have you ever considered about the (idols of) Lat and ‘Uzza,
53|20| and about the other, the third (idol), namely, Manat,?
53|21| Is it that you have males and He (Allah) has females?
53|22| If so, it is a bizarre division.
53|23| These are nothing but names you and your fathers have invented; Allah has sent down no authority attached to them. They are following nothing but conjecture and what their own souls desire, while guidance from their Lord has surely reached them.
53|24| Is it that man can get whatever he wishes?
53|25| (No,) because to Allah alone belongs the (good of) the Hereafter and the former life (of this world).
53|26| How many angels there are in the heavens whose intercession cannot benefit (any one) at all, but after Allah allows (it) for whomsoever He wills and pleases.
53|27| Those who do not believe in the Hereafter call the angels by names of females.
53|28| They do not have knowledge about it. They follow nothing but conjecture, and conjecture is of no avail in (the matter of) Truth.
53|29| So, turn away from him who turns away from Our advice, and seeks nothing but (pleasure of) the worldly life.
53|30| That is the limit of their access to knowledge. Indeed only your Lord knows well about the one who has gone astray from his way, and He knows well about the one who has adopted the right path.
53|31| To Allah belongs whatever there is in the heavens and whatever there is in the earth, so that He gives punishment to evildoers for what they did, and gives good reward to those who did good
53|32| __those who abstain from the major sins and from shameful acts, except minor involvements. Indeed your Lord is extensive in forgiveness. He knows you more than anyone else (from a time) when He created you from the earth and when you were embryos in the wombs of your mothers. So, do not claim purity (from faults) for your selves. He knows best who is God-fearing.
53|33| Did you see the one who turned away,
53|34| and gave a little, and stopped?
53|35| Does he have knowledge of the Unseen whereby he sees (what he believes)?
53|36| Has he not been told of what was (revealed) in the scriptures of Musa
53|37| and of Ibrahim who fulfilled (his duties)?
53|38| (It was) that no bearer of burden shall bear the burden of the other,
53|39| and that a man shall not deserve but (the reward of) his own effort,
53|40| and that his effort will soon be seen,
53|41| then he will be recompensed for it in full,
53|42| and that to your Lord is the end (of every one),
53|43| and that He is the One who makes (one) laugh and makes (him) weep,
53|44| and that He is the One who gives death and gives life,
53|45| and that He creates the pairs, male and female,
53|46| from a sperm-drop when it is poured (into a womb),
53|47| and that the second creation is undertaken by Him,
53|48| and that He is the One who gives wealth and preserves (it),
53|49| and that He is the One who is the Lord of Sirius (the star worshipped by pagans),
53|50| and that He has destroyed the earlier ‘Ad,
53|51| and Thamud, so spared none,
53|52| and (destroyed) the people of NuH even earlier. Surely they were more unjust and more rebellious.
53|53| And He destroyed the overturned towns (of the people of LuT) also,
53|54| so enveloped they were by that which enveloped.
53|55| Then concerning which of your Lord‘s bounties would you remain in doubt?
53|56| This (Prophet) is a warner from the (genus of the) previous warners.
53|57| The Imminent (Hour of Judgment) has approached.
53|58| There is no one, beside Allah, to remove it.
53|59| Do you then wonder at this discourse,
53|60| and laugh (at it), and not weep,
53|61| while you are engaged in vain play?
53|62| Now, fall down in prostration and worship (Allah).
54|1| The Hour (of doom) has drawn near, and the moon has split asunder.
54|2| When these people see a sign, they turn away and say, .(This is) a transient magic.
54|3| They have rejected (the Truth) and followed their desires, while every matter has to settle (at some time).
54|4| And there has come to them as much news (of the earlier communities) as it is enough to deter,
54|5| (containing) a perfect wisdom. But the warnings are of no avail (to them).
54|6| Therefore, turn aside (O Prophet,) from them. (They will see the reality) on the day in which the caller will call (them) to a gruesome object.
54|7| With their eyes humbled, they will come out of the graves like locusts spread all over,
54|8| rushing quickly towards the caller. (On that Day) the disbelievers will say, .This is a hard day.
54|9| The people of NuH denied (the truth) before them. So they rejected Our servant, and said, .(He is) a madman., and he was (also) threatened (by them).
54|10| So he prayed to his Lord saying, .I am overpowered, so defend (me).
54|11| So We opened the gates of the sky with water pouring forth profusely,
54|12| and We caused the earth to gush forth as springs; so the water (of both kinds) met together for a destined event.
54|13| And We caused him (NuH) to board that (ship) which had planks and nails,
54|14| which sailed under Our Eyes, as a reward for the one who was rejected (by the infidels).
54|15| And We left it (the ship) as a sign. So, is there one to take lesson?
54|16| Then how was My torment and My warnings?
54|17| Indeed We have made the Qur‘an easy for seeking advice. So, is there one to heed to the advice?
54|18| (The people of) ‘Ad rejected (their prophet). So how was My torment and My warnings?
54|19| We did send to them a furious wind in a day of continuous misfortune,
54|20| plucking people away, as if they were trunks of uprooted palm-trees.
54|21| So how was My torment and My warnings?
54|22| Indeed We have made the Qur‘an easy for seeking advice. So, is there one to heed to the advice?
54|23| (The people of) Thamud rejected the warners.
54|24| So they said, .Shall we follow a single human being from among us? Then we will be in error and insanity.
54|25| Is it that the advice has been cast upon him alone out of all of us? No, but he is a bragging liar.
54|26| Tomorrow they will know who the bragging liar is!
54|27| We are going to send the she-camel as a trial for them; so watch them (O SaliH,) and keep patience,
54|28| and tell them that water (of the well) is to be shared between them (and the she-camel), so as the right of having water shall be attended by each (alternatively).
54|29| Then they called their man (to kill the she-camel,) so he undertook (the task) and killed (the she-camel).
54|30| So how was My torment and My warnings?
54|31| We sent upon them a single Cry, and they were like crushed leafs of a hedge-builder.
54|32| Indeed We have made the Qur‘an easy for seeking advice. So, is there one to heed to the advice?
54|33| The people of LuT rejected the warners.
54|34| We sent upon them a rain of stones, except the family of LuT whom We saved in the last hours of night,
54|35| as a grace from Us. This is how We reward the one who offers gratitude.
54|36| And he (LuT) had certainly warned them of Our grasp, but they disputed the warnings.
54|37| And they had even tried to tempt him against his guests (so that they may snatch them away for bad purpose,) but We blinded their eyes: .Now taste My torment and My warnings!.
54|38| And on the next morning, a lasting torment overtook them:
54|39| .Now taste My torment and My warnings.
54|40| Indeed We have made the Qur‘an easy for seeking advice. So, is there one to heed to the advice?
54|41| And the warners came to the family of Fir‘aun (Pharaoh).
54|42| (But) they rejected all Our signs; so We seized them_ a seizure by One Mighty, Powerful.
54|43| Are the disbelievers among you in a better position than all of the aforesaid (punished people), or do you have immunity (recorded) in the sacred books?
54|44| Or do they say, .We are a large group, well-defended.?
54|45| Soon this ‘large group‘ shall be defeated, and all of them will turn their backs.
54|46| Rather the Hour (of judgment) is their appointed time (for their full recompense), and the Hour is more calamitous and much more bitter.
54|47| Surely the guilty ones are in error and madness.
54|48| On the Day when they will be dragged into the Fire on their faces, (it will be said to them,) .Taste the touch of Hell.
54|49| Verily, We have created every thing according to (Our) predestination.
54|50| And (implementation of) Our command is no more than a single act like the twinkling of an eye.
54|51| We have destroyed people like you; so, is there one to take lesson?
54|52| And every thing they have done is recorded in the books (of deeds).
54|53| And every thing, small and big, is written down.
54|54| Of course, the God-fearing will be in gardens and rivers,
54|55| in a seat of Truth, near to the Omnipotent Sovereign.
55|1| The RaHman (The All-Merciful Allah)
55|2| has taught the Qur‘an.
55|3| He has created man.
55|4| He has taught him (how) to express himself.
55|5| The sun and the moon are (bound) by a (fixed) calculation.
55|6| And the vine and the tree both prostrate (to Allah).
55|7| He raised the sky high, and has placed the scale,
55|8| so that you should not be wrongful in weighing.
55|9| Observe the correct weight with fairness, and do not make weighing deficient.
55|10| As for the earth, He has placed it for creatures,
55|11| in which there are fruits and date palms having sheaths,
55|12| and the grain having chaff, and fragrant flowers.
55|13| So, (O mankind and Jinn,) which of the bounties of your Lord will you deny?
55|14| He has created man from dry clay, ringing like pottery,
55|15| and created Jann (father of the Jinn) from a smokeless flame of fire.
55|16| So, (O mankind and Jinn,) which of the bounties of your Lord will you deny?
55|17| He is the Lord of both points of sunrise and both points of sunset.
55|18| So, which of the bounties of your Lord will you deny?
55|19| He let forth the two seas to meet together,
55|20| while there is a barrier between them; they do not encroach (upon one another).
55|21| So, which of the bounties of your Lord will you deny?
55|22| From both of them come forth the pearl and the coral.
55|23| So, which of the bounties of your Lord will you deny?
55|24| And His are the sailing ships raised up in the sea like mountains.
55|25| So, which of the bounties of your Lord will you deny?
55|26| Every one who is on it (the earth) has to perish.
55|27| And your Lord‘s Countenance will remain, full of majesty, full of honour.
55|28| So, which of the bounties of your Lord will you deny?
55|29| All those in the heavens and the earth beseech Him (for their needs.) Every day He is in a state of action.
55|30| So, which of the bounties of your Lord will you deny?
55|31| Soon We are going to spare Ourselves for you (to reckon your deeds), O two heavy species (of Jinn and mankind)!
55|32| So, which of the bounties of your Lord will you deny?
55|33| O genera of Jinn and mankind, If you are able to penetrate beyond the realms of the heavens and the earth, then penetrate. You cannot penetrate without power.
55|34| So, which of the bounties of your Lord will you deny?
55|35| A flame of fire and a smoke will be loosed against you, and you will not (be able) to defend.
55|36| So, which of the bounties of your Lord will you deny?
55|37| So, (it will be a terrible event) when the sky will be split apart and will become rosy, like (red) hides.
55|38| So, which of the bounties of your Lord will you deny?
55|39| On that day, neither a man will be questioned about his sin, nor a Jinn.
55|40| So, which of the bounties of your Lord will you deny?
55|41| The guilty ones will be recognized (by angels) through their marks and will be seized by foreheads and feet.
55|42| So, which of the bounties of your Lord will you deny?
55|43| This is Jahannam (Hell) that the guilty people deny.
55|44| They will circle around between it and between hot, boiling water.
55|45| So, which of the bounties of your Lord will you deny?
55|46| And for the one who is fearful of having to stand before his Lord, there are two gardens, __
55|47| So, which of the bounties of your Lord will you deny?
55|48| __ both having branches.
55|49| So, which of the bounties of your Lord will you deny?
55|50| In both there are two flowing springs.
55|51| So, which of the bounties of your Lord will you deny?
55|52| In both there are two kinds of every fruit.
55|53| So, which of the bounties of your Lord will you deny?
55|54| (The people of these gardens will be) reclining on floorings whose (even) linings will be of thick silk, and the fruits plucked from the two gardens will be at hand.
55|55| So, which of the bounties of your Lord will you deny?
55|56| In them there will be maidens restraining (their) glances, whom neither a man might have touched before them, nor a Jinn.
55|57| So, which of the bounties of your Lord will you deny?
55|58| They will look like rubies and corals.
55|59| So, which of the bounties of your Lord will you deny?
55|60| Is there any reward for goodness other than goodness?
55|61| So, which of the bounties of your Lord will you deny?
55|62| And besides these two, there are two other gardens (for the second category of the God-fearing),__
55|63| So, which of the bounties of your Lord will you deny?
55|64| __ both (gardens are) dark green!
55|65| So, which of the bounties of your Lord will you deny?
55|66| In both there are two springs gushing forth profusely.
55|67| So, which of the bounties of your Lord will you deny?
55|68| In both there are fruits and date-palms and pomegranates.
55|69| So, which of the bounties of your Lord will you deny?
55|70| In them there will be women, good and gorgeous,__
55|71| So, which of the bounties of your Lord will you deny?
55|72| __ the houris, kept guarded in pavilions__
55|73| So, which of the bounties of your Lord will you deny?
55|74| __ whom neither a man might have touched before them, nor a Jinn.
55|75| So, which of the bounties of your Lord will you deny?
55|76| (The people of these gardens will be) reclining on green cushions and marvelously beautiful mattresses.
55|77| So, which of the bounties of your Lord will you deny?
55|78| Glorious is the name of your Lord, the Lord of Majesty, the Lord of Honour.
56|1| When the Imminent Event (of Doom) will occur,
56|2| there will be no one to deny its occurrence.
56|3| It will be abasing (some), exalting (others)
56|4| when the earth will be jolted with a terrible jolt,
56|5| and the mountains will be crumbled a thorough crumbling,
56|6| until they will become dust, scattered in the air,
56|7| and you will be (divided into) three categories.
56|8| As for the People of the Right, how (lucky) are the People of the Right!
56|9| And the People of the Left ? How (wretched) are the People of the Left!
56|10| And the Foremost are the foremost.
56|11| Those are the ones blessed with nearness (to Allah)
56|12| in gardens of bliss,
56|13| many from the first generations,
56|14| and a few from the later ones.
56|15| (They will be sitting) on thrones woven with gold,
56|16| reclining on them, facing each other.
56|17| Immortal boys will rotate around them
56|18| with bowls and jugs and a goblet of pure wine,
56|19| from which they will neither suffer headache, nor will they be intoxicated,
56|20| _and with fruits that they choose,
56|21| and the flesh of birds that they desire.
56|22| And (for them there will be) houris, having lovely big eyes,
56|23| all (neat and clean) like a hidden pearl,
56|24| as a reward for what they used to do.
56|25| They will hear neither an absurd talk in it, nor something leading to sin,
56|26| but (they will hear) the words of Salam , Salam (as greetings).
56|27| And the People of the right? How (lucky) are the People of the Right!
56|28| (They will be) amid lote-trees with no thorns,
56|29| and the trees of TalH , (banana, or a fragrant tree) having layers one upon the other,
56|30| and a shade, spread all over,
56|31| and water, poured forth,
56|32| and a lot of fruits,
56|33| neither interrupted (in any season), nor prohibited,
56|34| and mattresses of high quality.
56|35| Surely We have made up those females in a special creation,
56|36| and have made them virgins,
56|37| amorous to their husbands, matching them in age,
56|38| for the People of the Right,
56|39| (comprising) many from the first generations,
56|40| and many from the later ones.
56|41| And the People of the Left? How (wretched) are the People of the Left!
56|42| (They will be) in scorching wind and boiling water,
56|43| and in a shade of black smoke,
56|44| neither cool nor graceful.
56|45| They were earlier in luxuries,
56|46| and used to persist in major sins,
56|47| and used to say, .Is it that when we die and become dust__is it that we will be raised again,
56|48| and our ancient fathers as well?.
56|49| Say, .All the earlier and the later ones
56|50| will be gathered together for a fixed time of a specified Day.
56|51| Then O you, the erring, the denying people,
56|52| you will have to eat from the tree of zaqqum,
56|53| and to fill with it the bellies,
56|54| then on top of it you will have to drink boiling water,
56|55| and to drink like camels suffering from the disease of over-thirst.
56|56| This will be their welcome entertainment on the Day of Requital.
56|57| We have created you; then why do you not believe in it?
56|58| So, tell Me about the semen you drop (in the wombs):
56|59| Is it you who create it, or are We the Creator?
56|60| We have appointed (the times of) death among you, and We cannot be frustrated
56|61| from replacing you with others like you, and creating you (afresh) in that (form) which you do not know.
56|62| And you certainly know the first creation; then why do you not take lesson?
56|63| Well, tell Me about that (seed) which you sow:
56|64| Is it you who grow it, or are We the One who grows?
56|65| If We so will, We can certainly make it crumbled, and you will remain wondering,
56|66| (and saying,) .We are laden with debt,
56|67| rather we are totally deprived.
56|68| Again, tell Me about the water you drink:
56|69| Is it you who have brought it down from the clouds, or are We the One who sends (it) down?
56|70| If We so will, We can make it bitter in taste. So why do you not offer gratitude?
56|71| Now tell Me about the fire you kindle:
56|72| Is it you who have originated its tree, or are We the Originator?
56|73| We have made it a reminder (of Our infinite power, and of the fire of Hell) and a benefit for travelers in deserts.
56|74| So, proclaim purity of the name of your Lord, the Magnificent.
56|75| So, I swear by the setting places of the stars,
56|76| __and indeed it is a great oath, if you are to appreciate__
56|77| it is surely the Noble Qur‘an,
56|78| (recorded already) in a protected book (i.e. the Preserved Tablet)
56|79| that is not touched except by the purified ones (the angels).
56|80| __ a revelation from the Lord of the worlds.
56|81| Is it this discourse that you take lightly,
56|82| and take your denial as your livelihood?
56|83| So why (do you) not (intervene) when the soul (of a dying person) reaches the throat,
56|84| and you are watching?
56|85| And We are closer to him than you, but you do not perceive.
56|86| So, if you are not going to be recompensed (in the Hereafter for your deeds), then why do you not
56|87| bring the soul back, if you are truthful?
56|88| So, in case he (the dying person) is from among those blessed with nearness,
56|89| then (for him) there is comfort and fragrance and garden of bliss.
56|90| And in case he is from among the People of the Right,
56|91| then, (it will be said to him,) .Peace is for you, as you are one of the People of the Right.
56|92| But if he is one of the deniers, the astray,
56|93| then (for him) there is entertainment from boiling water,
56|94| and burning in the Hell.
56|95| Indeed this is certainty in its true sense.
56|96| So, proclaim purity of the name of your Lord, the Magnificent.
57|1| All that is in the heavens and the earth proclaims Allah‘s purity, and He is the Mighty, the Wise.
57|2| To Him belongs the Kingdom of the heavens and the earth. He gives life and brings death, and He is Powerful to do any thing.
57|3| He is the First and the Last, and the Manifest and the Hidden, and He is All-Knowing about every thing.
57|4| He is the One who created the heavens and the earth in six days, then He positioned Himself on the Throne. He knows whatever goes into the earth and whatever comes out from it, and whatever descends from the sky, and whatever ascends thereto. He is with you wherever you are, and Allah is watchful of whatever you do.
57|5| To Him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth, and to Allah all matters are returned.
57|6| He makes the night enter into the day, and makes the day enter into the night, and He is All-Knowing about whatever lies in the hearts.
57|7| Believe in Allah and His Messenger, and spend out of that (wealth) in which He has appointed you as deputies. So, for those of you who have believed and spent (in Allah‘s way), there is a big reward.
57|8| What is wrong with you that you do not believe in Allah, while the Messenger invites you to believe in your Lord, and He has taken your covenant, if you are to believe?
57|9| He is the One who reveals clear verses to His servant, so that He brings you out from layers of darkness into the light. And to you, Allah is Very- Kind indeed, Very-Merciful.
57|10| And what is wrong with you that you should not spend in the way of Allah, while to Allah belongs the inheritance of the heavens and the earth? Those who spent before the Conquest (of Makkah) and fought are not at par (with others). Those are much greater in rank than those who spent later and fought, though Allah has promised the good (reward) for each. Allah is well aware of what you do.
57|11| Who is there to advance a loan, a good loan, to Allah so that He multiplies it for him, and he may have a noble reward?
57|12| On the Day when you will see the believing men and the believing women, their light proceeding in front of them and to their right hands, (it will be said to them,) .Good news for you today! Gardens beneath which rivers flow, to live therein forever! That is the great achievement,
57|13| __ the Day when the hypocrite men and hypocrite women will say to those who believe, .Wait for us, so that we may have a share from your light. It will be said (to them), .Go back to your rear, and search for light. Then a wall will be placed between them, which will have a gate. In its inner side, there will be the divine mercy, while towards its outer side, there will be the divine punishment.
57|14| They (the hypocrites) will call out to them (the believers), .Were we not with you?. They will say, .Yes, (you were,) but you led your souls to a wrong way, and kept waiting (for an evil end to the Muslims), and remained in doubt, and were deluded by fancies, until Allah‘s command came to pass, and you were deceived about Allah by the Big Deceiver (Iblis).
57|15| So, no ransom will be accepted from you today, nor from those who disbelieved (openly). Your abode is the Fire, and it is an evil end.
57|16| Has the time not yet come for those who believe that their hearts should be humble for the remembrance of Allah and for the truth that has descended (through revelation)? They must not be like those to whom the Book was given before, but a long period passed on them (in which they did not repent), therefore their hearts became hard, and (thus) many of them are sinners.
57|17| Know well that Allah revives the land after its death. We have made the signs clear for you, so that you may understand.
57|18| Surely those men who give Sadaqah (alms) and those women who give Sadaqah and have advanced a good loan to Allah, for them it will be multiplied, and for them there is a noble reward.
57|19| And those who believed in Allah and His messengers, — those are the Siddiqs (the most righteous after prophets) and the Shuhada‘ (martyrs) in the sight of your Lord. For them shall be their reward and their light. As for those who disbelieved and rejected Our verses, they are the inmates of Hell.
57|20| Know well that the worldly life is but a play and an amusement, and a show of beauty, and exchange of boastful claims between you, and a competition of increase in riches and children. (All this is) like a rain, the growth of which attracts the farmers, then it withers, and you see it turning yellow, then it becomes straw. And in the Hereafter there is a severe punishment (for the disbelievers), and forgiveness from Allah and (Allah‘s) pleasure (for the believers and the righteous). The worldly life is nothing but a material of delusion.
57|21| Compete each other in proceeding towards forgiveness from your Lord and to Paradise the width of which is like the width of the sky and the earth. It has been prepared for those who believe in Allah and His messengers. That is the bounty of Allah; He gives it to whomsoever He Wills and Allah is the Lord of the great bounty.
57|22| No calamity befalls the earth or your own selves, but it is (pre-destined) in a Book before We bring it into being, __Indeed it is easy for Allah.
57|23| __ so that you may neither grieve on what has escaped you, nor over-exult on what He has given to you. And Allah does not love any self- admirer, over-proud,
57|24| _those who are miserly and bid others to be miserly. And whoever turns away, then Allah is the All-Independent, the Ever-Praised.
57|25| We have indeed sent Our messengers with clear proofs, and sent down with them the Book and the Balance, so that people may uphold equity. And We sent down iron in which there is strong power, and benefits for the people; and (We did it) so that Allah knows the one who helps Him and His messengers without seeing (Him). Surely Allah is Strong, Mighty.
57|26| Indeed We sent NuH and Ibrahim, and kept the Book and prophet-hood (continuing) in their progeny. So, some of those (to whom they were sent) were on the right path, and many of them were sinners.
57|27| Then We made Our messengers follow them one after the other, then We sent after them ‘Isa, the son of Maryam (Jesus, son of Mary), and gave him the Injil, and placed compassion and mercy in the hearts of his followers. As for monasticism, it was invented by them; We did not ordain it for them, but (they adopted it) to seek Allah‘s pleasure, then could not observe it as was due. So We gave the believers from among them their reward. And many of them are sinners.
57|28| O you who believe, fear Allah, and believe in His Messenger, and He will give you two shares (of reward) out of His mercy, and will make for you a light whereby you will walk, and will forgive you,__ And Allah is Most-Forgiving, Very-Merciful.
57|29| __ so that the People of the Book may know that they have no control over any thing from Allah‘s bounty, and that bounty is in Allah‘s hand; He gives it to whom He wills, and Allah is the Lord of the great bounty.
58|1| Allah has heard the talk of the woman who was debating with you about her husband, and was complaining to Allah. Allah was hearing the conversation between both of you. Indeed, Allah is All-Hearing, All-Knowing.
58|2| Those of you who declare Zihar against their wives, they are not their mothers. Their mothers are none else but those who gave birth to them. Undoubtedly they utter an evil word and a lie; and Allah is surely Most-Forgiving, Very-Merciful.
58|3| Those who declare Zihar against their wives, then retract what they said, obligated on them is to free the neck (of a slave) before the two (spouses) touch one another. This is what you are advised, and Allah is well aware of what you do.
58|4| But whoever does not find (a slave) has to fast for two consecutive months before the two (spouses) touch one another. Then the one who is not able to do so has to feed sixty indigent persons. This is (laid down) so that you believe in Allah and His Messenger. These are the limits set by Allah; and for the disbelievers there is a painful punishment.
58|5| Surely those who oppose Allah and His Messenger shall be disgraced, just as those before them were disgraced. We have sent down clear verses, and for the disbelievers there is a humiliating punishment
58|6| on the Day when Allah will resurrect them all together, and will tell them what they did; Allah has its full account, while they have forgotten it. Allah is witness to every thing.
58|7| Have you not observed that Allah knows everything in the heavens and everything in the earth? No secret consulta-tion takes place between three, but He is fourth of them, nor between five, but He is sixth of them, nor between fewer than that or more, but He is with them wherever they may be. Then He will tell them on the Day of Judgment what they did. Surely Allah is All-Knowing about every thing.
58|8| Did you not see those who were forbidden from holding secret talks; then they do again what they were forbidden to do? They whisper for sinful act and wrongdoing and disobedience of the prophet, and when they come to you, they greet you the way Allah does not greet you, and say to themselves, .Why does Allah not punish us for what we say?. Enough for them is Jahannam (Hell); they will enter it, and it is an evil end.
58|9| O you who believe, when you hold secret counsel, do not whisper for sinful act and wrongdoing and disobedience of the prophet, and do whisper for righteousness and taqwa (piety). And fear Allah, before whom you will be gathered together.
58|10| Whispering (for sinful acts) comes from the ShaiTan (Satan), so that he may grieve those who believe, while it is not harmful to them in the least, except with Allah‘s permission. And in Allah the believers must place their trust.
58|11| O you who believe, when it is said to you, .Make room (for others) in the sittings., then make room, and Allah will make room for you (in the Hereafter). And when it is said, .Rise up., then rise up, and Allah will raise those, in ranks, who have believed and are given knowledge. Allah is well-aware of what you do.
58|12| O you who believe, when you consult the Messenger in private, then offer something in charity before your consultation. That is better for you and purer. But if you find nothing (to offer), then Allah is Most-Forgiving, Very-Merciful.
58|13| Have you become afraid of offering charities before your consultation? So when you did not do so, and Allah has forgiven you, then establish Salah, and pay Zakah, and obey Allah and His Messenger. And Allah is well aware of what you do.
58|14| Have you not seen those who have friendship with a people with whom Allah is angry. They are neither of you nor of them. They swear false oaths while they know.
58|15| Allah has prepared a severe punishment for them. Indeed, evil is what they have been doing.
58|16| They have taken their oaths as a shield, and then have prevented (people) from the way of Allah. Therefore, for them there is a humiliating punishment.
58|17| Their riches and their children will never benefit them against Allah. They are the inmates of the Fire. They will live there forever,
58|18| the Day Allah will raise all of them, and they will swear before Him as they swear before you, and will think that they have something to stand upon. Be assured that they are sheer liars.
58|19| The ShaiTan (Satan) has prevailed upon them; so he has made them neglect to remember Allah. They are the party of ShaiTan . Be assured that it is (the members of the) party of ShaiTan that are the losers.
58|20| Indeed, those who oppose Allah and His Messenger, they are among the lowest.
58|21| Allah has written (in His pre-destined decree), .I will certainly prevail, both I and My messengers. Surely Allah is All-Strong, All-Mighty.
58|22| You will not find those who believe in Allah and in the Hereafter having friendship with those who oppose Allah and His Messenger, even though they may be their fathers or their sons or their brothers or their clan. They are such that Allah has inscribed faith on their hearts, and has supported them with a spirit from Him. He will admit them to gardens beneath which rivers flow, in which they will live forever. Allah is pleased with them, and they are pleased with Allah. Those are the party of Allah. Be assured that it is (the members of) the party of Allah that are the successful.
59|1| Allah‘s purity has been proclaimed by all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth. And He is the All-Mighty, the All-Wise.
59|2| He is the One who expelled the disbelievers of the People of the Book from their homes at the time of the first gathering. You did not expect that they would leave, and they deemed that their fortresses would protect them from Allah. But Allah came to them from where they did not expect, and cast fear in their hearts when they were spoiling their homes with their own hands and with the hands of the believers. So, learn a lesson, O you who have eyes to see.
59|3| If Allah had not destined exile for them, He would have punished them in the world. And for them in the Hereafter is the torment of the Fire.
59|4| That is because they were hostile to Allah and His Messenger. And whoever has hostility with Allah (must know that) Allah is severe in punishment.
59|5| Whatever palm-trees you have cut down, or have left them standing on their roots, it was with Allah‘s permission, and so that He might disgrace the transgressors.
59|6| And whatever fai‘ (left over property) Allah has passed on to His Messenger from them, you had not urged on your horses or camels for it, but Allah gives predominance to His messengers over whomsoever He wills, and Allah is Powerful over every thing.
59|7| Whatever fai‘ Allah has passed on to His Messenger from the people of the towns is for Allah and for the Messenger, and for the kinsmen and the orphans and the needy and the wayfarer, so that it may not circulate only between the rich among you. And whatever the Messenger gives you, take it, and whatever he forbids you from, abstain (from it). And fear Allah. Indeed Allah is severe in punishment.
59|8| (And fai‘ is especially) for the poor emigrants who were expelled from their homes and properties, while they were seeking Allah‘s grace and pleasure, and were helping (the religion of) Allah and His Messenger. They are the truthful.
59|9| And (fai‘ is also) for those who established themselves in the homeland (of Madinah) and in faith before the former ones (arrived in Madinah), who have love for those who emigrated to them, and do not feel in their hearts any ambition for what is given to the former ones (from fai‘), and give preference (to them) over themselves, even though they are in poverty. __And those who are saved from the greed of their hearts are the successful.__
59|10| And (fai‘ is also) for those who came after them saying, .Our Lord, forgive us and those of our brothers who preceded us in faith, and do not place in our hearts any rancor against those who believe; Surely, Our Lord, you are Very-Kind, Very-Merciful.
59|11| Did you not see the hypocrites saying to their brothers from those of the people of the Book who are unbelievers, .If you are expelled, we will certainly go out with you, and we will never obey anyone about you. And if you are fought against, we will definitely help you. Allah bears witness that they are pure liars.
59|12| If they are expelled, they will not go out with them, and if they are fought against, they will not help them. And even if they help them, they will surely turn their backs, then they will not be helped.
59|13| In fact, your fear in their hearts is greater than (that of) Allah. That is because they are a people who do not understand.
59|14| They do not fight you, even assembled together, but in fortified towns, or from behind the walls. Their quarrelling between themselves is severe. You think that they are united, while their hearts are divided. That is because they are a people who have no sense.
59|15| The example (of Banu NaDir) is like those who were before them in near past, who tasted the evil consequence of their conduct, and for them (in the Hereafter) there is a painful punishment.
59|16| The example (of the hypocrites) is like the ShaiTan when he says to a human being, .Become disbeliever. then once he disbelieves, he says, .I disown you; I fear Allah, the Lord of the worlds.
59|17| So the end of both of them is that they will be in the Fire, living there forever. That is the punishment of the wrongdoers.
59|18| O you who believe, fear Allah, and everybody must consider what he (or she) has sent ahead for tomorrow. And fear Allah. Surely Allah is fully aware of what you do.
59|19| Do not be like those who forgot Allah, so He made them forget their own selves. Those are the sinners.
59|20| The people of Hell and the people of Paradise are not equal. The people of Paradise are the successful.
59|21| Had We sent down this Qur‘an to a mountain, you would have seen it humbled, burst apart out of awe for Allah. We cite such examples for people, so that they may ponder.
59|22| He is Allah, besides whom there is no god, the Knower of the unseen and the seen. He is All-Merciful, Very-Merciful.
59|23| He is Allah, besides whom there is no god, the Sovereign, the Supreme-In-Holiness, the Safe (from all defects), the Giver-Of-Peace, the Guardian, the All-Mighty, the All-Repairer, the Sublime. Pure is Allah from what they associate with Him.
59|24| He is Allah, the Creator, the Inventor, the Shaper. His are the Most Beautiful Names. His purity is proclaimed by all that is in the heavens and the earth, and He is the All-Mighty, the All-Wise.
60|1| O you who believe, do not take My enemies and your enemies for friends, expressing love with them, while they have rejected the Truth that has come to you, expelling the Messenger and your selves (from Makkah) merely because you have faith in Allah who is your Lord, if you have set out to do Jihad (struggle) in My way, and to seek My pleasure. You express love with them secretly, while I know what you have concealed and what you have revealed. Any of you who does this has missed the straight path.
60|2| Should they have access to you, they will become your enemies, and will stretch their hands and tongues towards you with evil; and they desire that you should reject the (true) faith.
60|3| Neither your womb-relations nor your children will benefit you on the Day of Judgment. He will decide between you, and Allah is watchful of what you do.
60|4| Indeed, there is an excellent example for you in Ibrahim and those with him, when they said to their people, .We disown you and what you worship instead of Allah. We disbelieve in you. Enmity and hatred has arisen between us and you forever, unless you believe in Allah alone.,__ but (his example is) not (to be followed) in what Ibrahim said to his father, .I will pray to my Lord for your forgiveness, and I have no power from Allah (to do any thing) for you. __ .O our Lord, in You alone we trust, and to You alone we turn for help, and to You is the final return.
60|5| Our Lord, do not make us persecuted by those who disbelieve, and forgive us, our Lord! You, only You, are the All-Mighty, the All-Wise.
60|6| Indeed, for you there is an excellent example in them, for anyone who hopes (to meet) Allah and the Last Day. And if one turns away, Allah is Free of all needs, Worthy of all Praise.
60|7| It is hoped that Allah will bring about love between you and those of them with whom you have enmity. Allah is Powerful, and Allah is Most- forgiving, Very-Merciful.
60|8| Allah does not forbid you as regards those who did not fight you on account of faith, and did not expel you from your homes, that you do good to them, and deal justly with them. Surely Allah loves those who maintain justice.
60|9| Allah forbids you only about those who fought you on account of faith, and expelled you from your homes, and helped (others) in expelling you, that you have friendship with them. Those who develop friendship with them are the wrongdoers.
60|10| O you who believe, when the believing women come to you as emigrants, put them to a test. Allah knows best about their faith. So, if you find them faithful, do not send them back to the disbelievers. Neither these (women) are lawful for them, nor are those (disbelievers) lawful for these (women). And give them (the disbelievers) that (dower) which they had paid (to these women). And there is no sin for you if you marry them, when you give them their dowers. And do not hold on to the ties of marriage with the disbelieving women, and ask (their new Non-Muslim husbands to pay to you) that (dower) which you had paid (to your previous wives), and they (the previous Non- Muslim husbands of the Muslim women) should ask (their new Muslim husbands) to pay that (dower) which they had paid (to their previous wives). That is the decision of Allah. He decides between you. And Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise.
60|11| And if some of your (Non-Muslim) wives have slipped from you, (and their present Non-Muslim husbands do not pay to you the dower as aforesaid,) and you have your turn (of paying dower to the previous Non-Muslim husbands of your present wives), then (instead of paying dower to them,) give those whose wives have slipped the like amount of what they had paid (to them). And fear Allah, the One in whom you believe.
60|12| O you who believe, when the believing women come to you, seeking bai‘ah (a pledge of allegiance) with you that they will not ascribe any partner to Allah, and will not commit theft, and will not commit fornication, and will not kill their children, and will not come up with a false claim (about the parentage of a child) that they falsely attribute (to the sperm of their husbands being dropped) between their hands and their feet (i.e. their private parts), and will not disobey you in what is recognized (in Shari‘ah), then take them in your bai‘ah, and pray Allah for their forgiveness. Surely Allah is Most-Forgiving, Very-Merciful.
60|13| O you who believe, do not have friendship with a people with whom Allah is angry. They have despaired from the Hereafter as the infidels have despaired from those (buried) in the graves.
61|1| All that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth proclaim Allah‘s purity, and He is the All-Mighty, the All-Wise.
61|2| O you who believe, why do you say what you do not do?
61|3| It is severely hateful in Allah‘s sight that you say what you do not do.
61|4| Surely Allah loves those who fight in His way in firm rows, as if they were solid edifice.
61|5| And (remember) when Musa said to his people, .O my people, why do you hurt me, while you know that I am a messenger of Allah sent towards you. So, when they adopted deviation, Allah let their hearts become deviate. And Allah does not guide the sinful people.
61|6| (Remember) when ‘Isa, son of Maryam, said, .O children of Isra‘il, I am a messenger of Allah sent towards you, confirming the Torah that is (sent down) before me, and giving you the good news of a messenger who will come after me, whose name will be AHmad. But when he came to them with manifest signs, they said, .This is a clear magic.
61|7| And who is more unjust than the one who forges a lie against Allah, while he is invited to Islam? And Allah does not guide the unjust people.
61|8| They wish to extinguish the light of Allah with their mouths, but Allah is to perfect His light, even though the disbelievers dislike (it).
61|9| He is the One who has sent His Messenger with guidance and the religion of truth, so that He makes it prevail over all religions, even though the mushriks (those who ascribe partners to Allah) dislike (it).
61|10| O you who believe, shall I tell you about a trade that saves you from a painful punishment?
61|11| That you believe in Allah and His Messenger, and carry out Jihad in His way with your riches and your lives. That is much better for you, if you but know.
61|12| (If you do this,) He will forgive your sins, and will admit you to gardens beneath which rivers flow, and to pleasant dwellings in gardens of eternity. That is the great achievement.
61|13| And (He will give you) another thing, which you love: Help from Allah, and victory, near at hand.
61|14| O you who believe, be supporters of (the religion of) Allah, just as ‘Isa, son of Maryam, said to the Disciples, .Who are my supporters towards Allah?. The Disciples said, .We are the supporters of (the religion of) Allah. So a group from the children of Isra‘il believed, and another group disbelieved. Then We supported those who believed against their enemy, and they became victors.
62|1| All that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth proclaim the purity of Allah, the Sovereign, the Supreme in Holiness, the All-Mighty, the All- Wise.
62|2| He is the One who raised amidst the unlettered people a messenger from among themselves who recites to them His verses, and purifies them, and teaches them the Book and the wisdom, while they were earlier in open error.
62|3| And (this Messenger is sent also) to others from them who did not join them so far, and He is the All-Mighty, the All-Wise.
62|4| It is Allah‘s bounty that He gives to whomsoever He wills, and Allah is the Lord of the great bounty.
62|5| The example of those who were ordered to bear (the responsibility of acting upon) the Torah, then they did not bear it, is like a donkey that carries a load of books. Evil is the example of those who have rejected Allah‘s verses. And Allah does not guide the wrongdoing people.
62|6| Say, .O you who are Jews, if you claim that you are the friends of Allah to the exclusion of all other people, then express your desire for death, if you are true.
62|7| And they will never express this desire, because of what their hands have sent ahead. And Allah is fully aware of the wrongdoers.
62|8| Say, .Indeed, the death from which you (try to) run away has to visit you, then you will be sent back to the Knower of the Unseen and the seen, and He will tell you what you used to do.
62|9| O you who believe, when the call for Salah (prayer) is proclaimed on Friday, hasten for the remembrance of Allah, and leave off business. That is much better for you, if you but know.
62|10| Then once the Salah is over, disperse in the land, and seek the grace of Allah, and remember Allah abundantly, so that you may be successful.
62|11| And when they see some merchandise or amusement, they break away to it, and leave you (O prophet,) standing. Say, .What is with Allah is much better than the amusement and the merchandise, and Allah is the best giver of sustenance.
63|1| When the hypocrites come to you, they say, .We bear witness that you are indeed the messenger of Allah.__Allah knows that you are really His messenger__But Allah testifies that the hypocrites are actually liars.
63|2| They have made their oaths a shield, and thus they have prevented (others) from the way of Allah. Surely evil is what they have been doing.
63|3| That is because they declared faith (in Islam apparently), then disbelieved (secretly). Therefore a seal has been set on their hearts, and thus they do not understand.
63|4| And if you see them, their physiques would attract you, and if they speak, you would (like to) listen to their speech (because of their eloquence). (Yet, being devoid of substance,) it is as if they were propped up beams of timber. They deem every shout (they hear) to be against them (out of cowardice). They are the enemy; so beware of them. May Allah destroy them. How perverted are they!
63|5| And when it is said to them, .Come on, so that Allah‘s Messenger may pray for your forgiveness., they twist their heads (in aversion), and you see them turning away in arrogance.
63|6| It is equal in their case, whether you (O prophet,) pray for their forgiveness or do not pray, Allah will never forgive them. Indeed Allah does not guide the sinning people.
63|7| They are those who say, .Do not spend on those who are with Allah‘s Messenger until they disperse. And to Allah belong the treasures of the heavens and the earth, but the hypocrites do not understand.
63|8| They say, .If we return to Madinah, the more honorable ones will drive out the meaner ones from there. And to Allah belongs the honour, and to His Messenger, and to the believers, but the hypocrites do not know.
63|9| O you who believe, your riches and your children must not divert you from the remembrance of Allah. And those who do that are the losers.
63|10| And spend out of what We have given to you before death overtakes one of you and he says, .My Lord, would you not give me respite to a near term, so that I should pay Sadaqah (alms) and become one of the righteous?.
63|11| But Allah will never give respite to anyone, once his appointed time will come. And Allah is All-Aware of what you do.
64|1| All that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth proclaim Allah‘s purity. To Him belongs the kingdom, and for Him is all praise, and He is powerful over every thing.
64|2| He is the One who created you, then some of you are disbelievers, and some of you are believers. And Allah is Watchful of what you do.
64|3| He has created the heavens and the earth rightly, and shaped your figures, and made your figures good, and to Him is the final return.
64|4| He knows all that is in the heavens and the earth, and He knows whatever you conceal and whatever you reveal. Allah is fully aware of what lies in the hearts.
64|5| Did the news of those people not come to you who disbelieved earlier, and tasted (in this world) the evil consequence of their conduct, and for them (in the Hereafter) there is a painful punishment?
64|6| That is because their messengers used to bring them clear proofs, but they said, .Shall some mortals give us guidance?. Thus they disbelieved and turned away, and Allah did not care. Allah is All-Independent, Ever-Praised.
64|7| The disbelievers claim that they will never be raised again (after death). Say, .Why not? By my Lord, you will be raised again, and then you will be told about what you did. That is so easy for Allah.
64|8| So, believe in Allah and His Messenger, and in the light We have sent down. And Allah is fully aware of what you do.
64|9| (Be mindful of) the day when He will gather you for the Day of Gathering. That will be the Day of loss and gain. Whoever believes in Allah, and does righteously, He will write off his evil deeds, and will admit him to gardens beneath which rivers flow, where they will live forever. That is the great achievement.
64|10| As for those who disbelieve and reject Our signs, they are the people of the Fire. And it is an evil place to return.
64|11| No calamity befalls (one), but with the leave of Allah. And whoever believes in Allah, He guides his heart. Allah is All-Knowing about every thing.
64|12| Obey Allah, and obey the Messenger. But if you turn away, then Our Messenger has only to convey the message clearly.
64|13| Allah is such that there is no god but He. And in Allah alone the believers must place their trust.
64|14| O you who believe, among your wives and your children there are some enemies for you, so beware of them. And if you forgive and overlook and pardon, then Allah is Most-Forgiving, Very-Merciful.
64|15| Your riches and your children are but a trial. As for Allah, with Him is a great reward.
64|16| So, observe taqwa (total obedience to Allah in awe of Him) as far as you can, and listen and obey, and spend (in Allah‘s way), it being good for you. And those who are saved from the greed of their hearts are the successful.
64|17| If you advance a good loan to Allah, He will multiply it for you, and will forgive you. And Allah is Appreciative, Forbearing,
64|18| the Knower of the Unseen and the seen, the All-Mighty, the All-Wise.
65|1| O prophet, when you people divorce women, divorce them at a time when the period of ‘Iddah may start. And count the period of ‘Iddah, and fear Allah, your Lord. Do not expel them from their houses, nor should they go out, unless they come up with a clearly shameless act. These are the limits prescribed by Allah. And whoever exceeds the limits prescribed by Allah wrongs his own self. You do not know (what will happen in future); it may be that Allah brings about a new situation thereafter.
65|2| So, when they (the divorced women) have (almost) reached their term, then either retain them with fairness, or part with them with fairness. And make two just men from among you witnesses (of your either decision). And (O witnesses,) keep your testimony upright for the sake of Allah. That is what anyone who believes in Allah and the Last Day is exhorted to do. Whoever fears Allah, He brings forth a way out for him,
65|3| and provides him (with what he needs) from where he does not even imagine. And whoever places his trust in Allah, He is sufficient for him. Surely Allah is to accomplish His purpose. Allah has set a measure for every thing.
65|4| And those women from among you who have despaired of (further) menstruation, if you are in doubt, their ‘Iddah is three months, as well as of those who have not yet menstruated. As for those having pregnancy, their term (of ‘Iddah ) is that they give birth to their child. And whoever fears Allah, He brings about ease for him in his affair.
65|5| This is the command of Allah that He has sent down to you. And whoever fears Allah, He will write off his evil deeds, and will give him a huge reward.
65|6| Provide to them (the divorced women) residence where you reside according to your means, and do not hurt them to straiten (life) for them. And if they are pregnant, spend on them till they give birth to their child. Then if they suckle the child for you, give them their fees, and consult each other (for determining the fee) with fairness, and if you create a deadlock between you, then another woman will suckle him.
65|7| A man of vast means should spend according to his vast means. And anyone whose sustenance is limited should spend from whatever Allah has given to him. Allah makes no one liable beyond what He has given to him. Allah will soon bring ease after a difficulty.
65|8| And how many a township rebelled against the command of its Lord, and against His messengers, so We called them to a severe account, and punished them with a punishment that was unimagined by them.
65|9| Thus they tasted the evil consequence of their acts, and the end of their conduct was loss.
65|10| Allah has prepared for them a severe punishment; so fear Allah O men of understanding who have believed! Allah has sent down to you a Reminder,
65|11| a messenger who recites to you the verses of Allah, making (the truth) clear, so that He may bring forth those who believe and do righteous deeds from the layers of darkness into the light. And whoever believes in Allah, and acts righteously, He will admit him to the gardens beneath which rivers flow, wherein such people will live forever. Allah has made for him a good provision.
65|12| Allah is the One who has created seven skies, and their like from earth. The Command descends among them, so that you may know that Allah is powerful over every thing, and that Allah has encompassed every thing in knowledge.
66|1| O Prophet, why do you ban (on your self) something that Allah has made lawful for you, seeking to please your wives? And Allah is Most- Forgiving, Very-Merciful.
66|2| Allah has prescribed (the way of) absolution from your oaths. And Allah is your protector, and He is the All- Knowing, the All-Wise.
66|3| And (remember) when the Prophet told one of his wives something in secret. So, when she disclosed it (to another wife), and Allah made it known to him, he told (the disclosing wife) part of it, and avoided another part. So when he informed her about it, she said, .Who told you about this?. He said, .I was told of it by the All-Knowing, the All-Aware.
66|4| (O two wives of the Prophet,) If both of you repent to Allah, then (your conduct calls for it, because) your hearts have departed from the correct way. And if you back each other against him (the Prophet), then Allah is his supporter, and Jibra‘il (Gabriel) and righteous believers, and after all that, angels are his helpers.
66|5| It is hoped that, if he divorces you, Allah will give him in your place wives better than you, submissive to Allah, believing, devout, penitent, steadfast in worship, fasting, previously married and virgins.
66|6| O you who believe, save yourselves and your families from a fire, the fuel of which is human beings and stones, appointed on which are angels, stern and severe, who do not disobey Allah in what He orders them, and do whatever they are ordered to do.
66|7| O you who disbelieve, do not make excuses today. You will only be recompensed for what you have been doing.
66|8| O you who believe, turn to Allah with a faithful repentance. It is hoped from your Lord that he will write off your faults, and will admit you to the gardens beneath which rivers flow, on the Day when Allah will not disgrace the Prophet and those who believed with him. Their light will run before them and to their right hands. They will say, .Our Lord, perfect for us our light, and forgive us. Indeed you are powerful over every thing.
66|9| O Prophet, carry out Jihad (struggle) against the disbelievers and the hypocrites, and be harsh with them. Their final abode is Jahannam (Hell), and it is an evil end.
66|10| Allah has cited for the disbelievers the example of the wife of NuH and the wife of LuT. Both were married with two of Our righteous servants, but betrayed them. So they could not benefit them against Allah at all, and it was said, .Enter the Fire along with those who enter.
66|11| And Allah has cited for the believers the example of the wife of Fir‘aun (Pharaoh), when she said, .My Lord, build for me, near You, a house in the Paradise, and deliver me from Fir‘aun and his deeds, and deliver me from the unjust people.
66|12| And (Allah has also cited the example of) Maryam, daughter of ‘Imran who guarded her chastity, so We breathed into her Our spirit, and she testified to the truth of the words of her Lord and His books, and she was one of the devout.
67|1| Glorious is the One in whose hand is the Kingdom (of the whole universe), and He is powerful over every thing,
67|2| the One who created death and life, so that He may test you as to which of you is better in his deeds. And He is the All-Mighty, the Most- Forgiving,
67|3| who has created seven skies, one over the other. You will see nothing out of proportion in the creation of the RaHman (the All-Merciful Allah). So, cast your eye again. Do you see any rifts?
67|4| Then cast your eye again and again, and the eye will come back to you abased, in a state of weariness.
67|5| And We have decorated the nearest sky with lamps, and have made them devices to stone the devils, and We have prepared for them the punishment of Hell.
67|6| And for those who disbelieved in their Lord, there is the punishment of Jahannam , and it is an evil end.
67|7| When they will be thrown in it, they will hear a terrible sound from it, and it will be boiling,
67|8| seeming as if it will burst out of fury. Whenever a group is thrown into it, its keepers will say to them, .Had no warner come to you?.
67|9| They will say, .Yes, a warner had come to us, but We had rejected, and said, ‘Allah has not revealed anything. You are only in great error.‘.
67|10| And they will say, .Had we been listening or understanding, we would not have been among the people of the Hell.
67|11| Thus they will confess their sin. So, away with the people of the Hell!
67|12| Surely, for those who have awe of their Lord without seeing (Him), there is forgiveness and a big reward.
67|13| Whether you keep your talk secret or make it aloud, He knows well what lies in the hearts.
67|14| Is it (imaginable) that He who has created (them) will not have (such a) knowledge, while He is the Knower of the finest things, the All-Aware?
67|15| He is the One who has made the earth subjugated for you, so walk on its shoulders, and eat out of His provision, and to Him is the Resurrection.
67|16| Have you become fearless of Him who is in the sky if He makes you sink into the earth, and it starts trembling at once?
67|17| Or, have you become fearless of Him who is in the sky if He looses a violent wind with stones against you? So, you will soon come to know how was My warning!
67|18| And of course, those before them (also) rejected (the truth). So, how was My censure?
67|19| Have they not looked to the birds above them spreading their wings, and (at times) they fold (them) in? No one holds them up except the RaHman (the All-Merciful Allah). Surely He is watchful of every thing.
67|20| Now, who is there to act as a force for you to help you, except the RaHman ? The disbelievers are in nothing but delusion.
67|21| Or, who is there to give you sustenance, if He withholds His sustenance? Still, they persist in rebellion and aversion.
67|22| Then, is the one who walks falling down (frequently) on his face more right or the one who walks properly on a straight path?
67|23| Say, .He is the One who has originated you, and made for you ears and eyes and hearts. How little you pay gratitude!.
67|24| Say, .He is the One who has scattered you on the earth, and to Him you will be assembled.
67|25| And they say, .When will this promise (of the Day of Judgment) be fulfilled, if you are true?.
67|26| Say, .The knowledge (of that Day) is only with Allah, and I am only a plain warner.
67|27| Then, once they will see it approaching, the faces of the disbelievers will be turned awkward, and it will be said, .This is what you were calling for!.
67|28| Say, .Tell me, if Allah destroys me and those who are with me (as you wish), or has mercy on us (as we wish), who can (in either case) save the disbelievers from a painful punishment?.
67|29| Say, .He is the RaHman; we have believed in Him, and in Him we placed our trust. So, you will soon come to know who is in open error.
67|30| Say, .Tell me, Should your water vanish into the earth, who will bring you a flowing (stream of) water?
68|1| Nun , by the pen and what they write,
68|2| with the grace of your Lord, you are not insane.
68|3| And you will definitely have a reward that will never end.
68|4| And you are surely on an excellent standard of character.
68|5| So, you will see, and they will see
68|6| which of you is demented.
68|7| Surely your Lord knows best who has strayed from his way, and He is well aware of those who are on the right path.
68|8| So, do not obey those who reject (the true faith.)
68|9| They wish that you become flexible (in your faith), so that they should become flexible (in their hostile attitude.)
68|10| And do not obey any contemptible one who swears much,
68|11| a slanderer who goes about with calumnies,
68|12| one who prevents good, (and who is) transgressor, sinful,
68|13| harsh, (and) after all that, notorious,
68|14| (do not obey such a person merely) because he is a man of wealth and sons.
68|15| When Our verses are recited to him, he says, .(These are) the tales of the ancient.
68|16| We will soon brand him on the snout.
68|17| We have tested them as We had tested the Owners of the Garden, when they had sworn an oath that they would pluck its fruits on the next morning,
68|18| and did not make any exception (by saying insha‘allah ).
68|19| Then, there whirled around it a whirl (of calamity) from your Lord, while they were asleep.
68|20| Thus, on the next morning, it was like a harvested field.
68|21| So, they called out each other as the morning broke,
68|22| saying, .Set out early, if you are going to pluck (the fruits).
68|23| So they set out while they were whispering to each other,
68|24| saying, .Let no poor man enter into it upon you today.
68|25| And in early hours they rushed quickly, while they were (assuming themselves) powerful (to pluck the fruits and prevent the poor.)
68|26| But when they saw it (the place of the ruined garden), they said, .We have missed the way.
68|27| (Then, once they realized that the garden is the same, but it has been destroyed, they said,) .No, but we are deprived (of the fruits).
68|28| Said he who was the best among them, .Did I not say to you, ‘Why do you not pronounce tasbiH (Allah‘s purity)?.
68|29| They said, .We pronounce the purity of our Lord. No doubt, we were wrongdoers.
68|30| Then, (at the beginning,) they started reproaching one another;
68|31| (and at last,) they said, .Woe to us! In fact, we (all) were outrageous.
68|32| We hope that our Lord will give us in exchange something better than this. Truly we turn to Allah.
68|33| In this way the punishment comes. And, of course, the punishment of the Hereafter is even greater, if they but realize!
68|34| Surely, for the God-fearing there are gardens of bliss.
68|35| Otherwise, shall We make the obedient like the sinners?
68|36| What has happened to you? How do you judge?
68|37| Do you have a book in which you read
68|38| that for you there is what you choose?
68|39| Or do you have oaths sworn by Us, remaining effective up to the Day of Judgment, that you will get what you decide?
68|40| Ask them which of them stands surety for that.
68|41| Or do they have associate-gods (who have guaranteed safety for them)? Then, let them bring their associate-gods, if they are true.
68|42| On the Day when the Shin will be exposed, and they will be called upon to prostrate themselves, they will not be able to.
68|43| With their eyes downcast, they will be enveloped by ignominy. They used to be called upon to prostrate when they were healthy (but they did not.)
68|44| So, leave Me alone with those who reject this discourse. We will draw them on little by little (towards Hell) from a way they do not know.
68|45| And I give them respite. Indeed, My plan is firm.
68|46| Is it that you ask them for a fee, due to which they are burdened with debt?
68|47| Or do they have the (knowledge of the) Unseen, and they write it down?
68|48| So, remain patient with your Lord‘s judgment, and be not like the Man of the Fish, he cried out while he was in anguish.
68|49| Had not a favour from His Lord come to his help, he would have been cast in the wilderness in a reproachable state.
68|50| Then his Lord chose him, and made him one of the righteous.
68|51| And indeed the disbelievers seem to trip you up with their glances when they hear the Reminder, and say, .He is a madman indeed.
68|52| And it is nothing else but a Reminder for all the worlds.
69|1| The Imminent Happening!
69|2| What is the Imminent Happening?
69|3| And what can let you know what the Imminent happening is?
69|4| Thamud and ‘Ad had denied (the happening of) the Shocking Event (the Day of Judgment).
69|5| As for Thamud, they were destroyed by that (dreadful cry), which exceeded all limits.
69|6| And as for ‘Ad, they were destroyed by a violent windstorm
69|7| that He imposed on them for seven nights and eight consecutive days; so you could see them thrown on the ground, as if they were trunks of hollow palm-trees.
69|8| Now, do you see any remnant of them?
69|9| And Fir‘aun (Pharaoh) and those before him and the overthrown towns came up with evil,
69|10| and they disobeyed the messenger of their Lord, so He seized them with an extremely severe seizure.
69|11| When the water overflowed (in the Deluge of NuH), We let you (O mankind,) board the floating ship,
69|12| so that We make it a reminder for you, and so that a preserving ear (that hears their story) may preserve it.
69|13| Then, once the Trumpet will be blown for the first time,
69|14| and the earth and the mountains will be lifted and crushed into pieces with a single blow,
69|15| then on that Day the Happening will happen,
69|16| and the sky will burst apart, while it will have become frail on that day.
69|17| And the angels will be on its borders. And on that Day, the Throne of your Lord will be carried above them by eight (angels).
69|18| On that day, you will be brought forward in a way that no secret of yours will remain secret.
69|19| Now, as for him who is given his book in his right hand, he will say (to his colleagues), .Come here, read my book.
69|20| I was sure that I would encounter my reckoning.
69|21| So he will be in a well-pleasing life
69|22| in a lofty garden,
69|23| the fruits of which will be close at hand.
69|24| (It will be said to such people,) .Eat and drink with pleasure, as a reward for what you did in advance during past days.
69|25| As for him who will be given his book in his left hand, he will say, . Oh, would that I had not been given my book,
69|26| and I had never known what my account is!
69|27| Oh, would that it (death) had been the end of the matter!
69|28| My wealth has not been of any use to me.
69|29| My power has gone from me for good.
69|30| (Then it will be said to angels,) .Seize him, then put a collar around his neck,
69|31| and then, let him burn in the blazing fire.
69|32| Thereafter, fasten him with a chain the measure of which is seventy hands.
69|33| Indeed, he did not believe in Allah, the Almighty,
69|34| and did not persuade (others) to feed the needy.
69|35| So, he has no friend here today,
69|36| nor any food except that which comes out from wounds when washing,
69|37| which is eaten by none but the sinners.
69|38| I swear by what you see,
69|39| and what you do not see,
69|40| it is surely the speech of a noble Messenger, (that he conveys from Allah).
69|41| and it is not the speech of a poet, (but) little you believe,
69|42| nor is it the speech of a soothsayer, (but) little you heed to the advice.
69|43| It is a revelation from the Lord of the worlds.
69|44| Had he (the prophet) forged some statements in Our name,
69|45| We would have certainly seized him by the right hand,
69|46| and then severed his life-artery,
69|47| and none of you could have saved him from it.
69|48| It is infact a Reminder for the God-fearing.
69|49| And, of course, We know that among you there are deniers.
69|50| And surely, it is a cause of remorse for the disbelievers.
69|51| And it is surely an absolute truth.
69|52| So, pronounce the purity of the name of your magnificent Lord.
70|1| A demanding person has asked for the punishment that is going to befall
70|2| the disbelievers; there is no one to avert it,
70|3| (and it will come) from Allah, the Lord of the stairways,
70|4| to whom ascend the angels and the Spirit in a day the length of which is fifty thousand years.
70|5| So, observe patience, a good patience.
70|6| They see it far off,
70|7| and We see it near.
70|8| (This punishment will befall) on the Day when the sky will be like dregs of oil,
70|9| and the mountains will be like dyed wool,
70|10| and no friend will ask about any friend,
70|11| (though) they will be made to see each other. A guilty person will desire that he may be able to ransom himself from the torment of that day even by his sons,
70|12| and his wife and his brother,
70|13| and his kindred that sheltered him,
70|14| and all those on earth, then he may redeem himself.
70|15| By no means! It is the flaming fire
70|16| that will pull out the skin of the scalp.
70|17| It will call him who had turned his back and fled away (from the truth)
70|18| and accumulated (wealth) and hoarded (it).
70|19| Indeed man is created weak in courage,
70|20| very upset when touched by evil,
70|21| and very niggard when visited by good (fortune),
70|22| except the performers of Salah,
70|23| who are regular in their Salah,
70|24| and those in whose riches there is a specified right
70|25| for the one who asks and the one who is deprived,
70|26| and those who believe in the Day of Judgment as true,
70|27| and those who are fearful of the torment of their Lord__
70|28| __Indeed the torment of their Lord is not something to be fearless from.__
70|29| and those who guard their private parts,
70|30| except from their wives and those (slave-girls) owned by their hands,__ because they are not to be blamed,
70|31| but the one who seeks (sexual gratification) beyond that, then such people are the transgressors,__
70|32| and those who are careful about their trusts and covenants,
70|33| and those who are upright in their testimonies,
70|34| and those who take due care of their Salah .
70|35| Those will be honoured in gardens (of Jannah ).
70|36| So what has happened to those who disbelieve that they are rushing towards you
70|37| from the right and from the left, in groups?
70|38| Does every one of them aspire to be admitted to the garden of bliss?
70|39| By no means! We have created them from what they know.
70|40| So, I swear by the Lord of the points of sunrise and those of sunset, We are powerful
70|41| to bring those better than them in their place, and We are not to be frustrated.
70|42| So, leave them involved in pastime and play until they encounter their Day, which they are promised,
70|43| the Day they will come out of the graves quickly, as if they were rushing toward idols,
70|44| with their eyes downcast, enveloped by ignominy. That is the Day, which they were being promised.
71|1| We sent NuH to his people (and said to him): .Warn your people before a painful punishment comes to them.
71|2| He said, .O my people, I openly warn you
71|3| that you must worship Allah, and fear Him, and obey me,
71|4| and Allah will forgive you your sins, and will respite you to an appointed term. Indeed when Allah‘s term comes, it is not deferred, if you only know!.
71|5| He said, .My Lord, I have called my people night and day,
71|6| but my call added only to their flight (from the truth).
71|7| Whenever I called them, so that You might forgive them, they put their fingers into their ears, and wrapped their clothes around themselves, and grew obstinate, and waxed proud in extreme arrogance.
71|8| Then I called them loudly,
71|9| and then I spoke to them in public and spoke to them in private.
71|10| So I said, ‘Pray to your Lord for your forgiveness,__ Indeed He is Very-Forgiving, __
71|11| and He will cause the heavens to rain upon you in abundance,
71|12| and will help you with riches and sons, and will cause gardens to grow for you, and cause rivers to flow for you.
71|13| What has happened to you that you do not appreciate the Majesty of Allah,
71|14| while He has created you in different phases?
71|15| Did you not see how Allah has created seven heavens one upon another,
71|16| and has made the moon a light therein, and made the sun a lamp?
71|17| And Allah has caused you to grow well out of the earth,
71|18| then He will send you back into it, and will bring you forth once again.
71|19| And Allah has made the earth a spread for you,
71|20| so that you may go about its broad ways.‘.
71|21| And said NuH, .My Lord, they disobeyed me, and followed him whose wealth and children added nothing to him but loss,
71|22| and they devised a mighty plot,
71|23| and said (to their people), .Never forsake your gods, and never forsake Wadd, nor Suwa‘, nor Yaghuth and Ya‘uq and Nasr.
71|24| And they have led many astray. And (O my Lord,) let not the wrongdoers progress in anything but deviation from the right path.
71|25| Because of their sins they were drowned, and then admitted into the Fire. So they found no helpers for them besides Allah.
71|26| And said NuH, .My Lord, do not leave on earth even a single inhabitant (surviving) out of the disbelievers.
71|27| If You leave them (surviving), they will lead Your servants astray, and will beget none but a sinful disbeliever.
71|28| My Lord, grant pardon to me, and to my parents, and to everyone who enters my home as a believer, and to all the believing men and believing women, and do not increase the wrongdoers but in ruin.
72|1| Say, .It has been revealed to me that a group from Jinn has listened (to the Qur‘an), and said (to their people), ‘Indeed we have heard an amazing Recital (Qur‘an)
72|2| that guides to the right way, so we have believed in it, and we will never associate a partner with our Lord.‘
72|3| and (then the Jinns started talking to each other) that exalted is the Glory of our Lord; He has taken neither a wife, nor a son,
72|4| and that the fools among us used to attribute to Allah extremely absurd things,
72|5| and that we thought that the humans and the Jinn would never tell a lie about Allah, (therefore, we had followed them in shirk under this impression),
72|6| and that some guys from human beings used to seek refuge with some guys of the Jinn, and thus they increased them (the Jinns) in arrogance,
72|7| and that they (humans) thought as you (O Jinns) thought that Allah will never resurrect anyone,
72|8| and that we sought (to reach) the sky, but we found it filled with stern guards and flames,
72|9| and that we used to sit at places therein to listen; but if one will (try to) listen now, he will find a flame in ambush for him,
72|10| and that we do not know whether it is a bad end that is intended for those on earth, or their Lord has intended for them a right thing,
72|11| and that some of us are (already) righteous, and some of us are otherwise, and we were on different ways;
72|12| and that we have now believed that we can never frustrate Allah on the earth, nor can we baffle Him by escape,
72|13| and that when we heard the Guiding Discourse, we believed in it; so if one believes in his Lord, he will have no fear of either any curtailment (in his reward) or any excess (in his punishment),
72|14| and that some of us are Muslims, and some of us are unjust. Now, those who submitted to Islam have found out the right path,
72|15| As for the unjust, they have become firewood for Hell.
72|16| .(And it is also revealed to me) that if they (the people of Makkah) had stood firm on the (right) way, We would have supplied water to them in abundance,
72|17| so that We test them thereby; and if one turns away from the remembrance of his Lord, He will thrust him into a severe torment,
72|18| and that masajid (mosques) belong to Allah; so, do not invoke anyone along with Allah,
72|19| and that when Allah‘s servant stood invoking Him, they almost rushed on him in crowds.
72|20| Say, .I invoke my Lord, and do not associate anyone with Him.
72|21| Say, .I possess no power to cause you any harm or bring you to a right way.
72|22| Say, .No one can ever save me from Allah, and I can never find a refuge save with Him.
72|23| However, (I have been given power) of conveying (commands) from Allah, and His messages. The one who disobeys Allah and His Messenger, for him there is the fire of Hell, wherein such people will live forever.
72|24| (The disbelievers will continue denying the truth and mock at it) until when they will see what they are promised, they will know whose supporters are weaker, and whose numbers are less.
72|25| Say, .I do not know whether that which you are promised is near, or my Lord has appointed for it a distant term.
72|26| (He is the) Knower of the Unseen. So He does not let anyone know the Unseen created by Him,
72|27| except a messenger whom He chooses (to inform through revelation), and then He appoints (angels as) watching guards before him and behind him, (so that devils may not tamper with the divine revelation,)
72|28| so that He knows that they (angels) have conveyed the messages of their Lord. And He has encompassed all that is with them, and has comprehensive knowledge of every thing by numbers.
73|1| O you, wrapped up in clothes,
73|2| stand at night (for prayer) except a little__
73|3| __half of it, or make it a little less,
73|4| or make it a little more; and recite the Qur‘an clearly with tartil (in a distinct and measured tone).
73|5| We are going to send down to you a weighty discourse.
73|6| Truly, rising by night (for prayer of tahajjud ) is the most effective way to subdue (one‘s base self) and to make speech more upright.
73|7| Surely, in daytime, you have a lengthy work to do.
73|8| And remember the name of your Lord, and devote yourself to Him with exclusive devotion.
73|9| He is the Lord of the East and the West; there is no god but He; so take Him for (your) Guardian.
73|10| And bear patiently what they (the opponents) say, and part with them in a beautiful manner.
73|11| And leave Me alone (to deal) with the deniers, the people of luxury, and give them respite for a while.
73|12| Surely with Us are fetters and flaming fire,
73|13| and food that chokes, and a painful punishment
73|14| on the Day when the earth and the mountains will quake, and the mountains will turn into a slipping heap of sand.
73|15| (O people,) We have sent to you a messenger, as a witness over you, just as We sent a messenger to Fir‘aun (Pharaoh).
73|16| Then, Fir‘aun disobeyed the messenger; so We seized him with a severe seizure.
73|17| So, if you disbelieve, how will you save yourself from a day that will turn the small boys into grey-headed old men,
73|18| whereby the sky will burst apart. His promise has to be fulfilled.
73|19| Indeed, this is a reminder; so let anyone who so wishes, adopt a way to his Lord.
73|20| Your Lord knows that you stand (in prayer) for nearly two thirds of the night, and (at times) for half of it, and (at times) for one third of it, and (so do) a group of those who are with you. And Allah measures the night and the day. He knows that you (O Muslims,) cannot do it in regular way; therefore He turned to you in mercy. Now, recite as much of the Qur‘an as is easy (for you). He knows that some of you may be sick, and others traveling in the land, seeking the grace of Allah, and yet others fighting in Allah‘s way. Therefore, recite as much of it as is easy. And establish Salah, and pay Zakah, and advance to Allah a goodly loan. And whatever good you will send ahead for your own-selves, you will find it with Allah much better in condition, and much greater in reward. And seek forgiveness from Allah. Indeed Allah is Most-Forgiving, Very-Merciful.
74|1| O you, enveloped in a mantle,
74|2| stand up and warn,
74|3| and pronounce the greatness of your Lord,
74|4| and purify your clothes,
74|5| and keep away from filth,
74|6| and do not do a favour (to anyone merely) to seek more (in return).
74|7| And for the sake of your Lord, observe patience.
74|8| For when the trumpet will be blown,
74|9| that day will be a difficult day,
74|10| not easy for the disbelievers.
74|11| Leave me alone (to deal) with the one whom I created lonely,
74|12| and gave him extensive wealth,
74|13| and sons present before (his) eyes,
74|14| and extended (power and honour) to him pretty well.
74|15| Still, he aspires that I should give him more.
74|16| Never! He is inimical towards Our verses.
74|17| I will force him to climb the mountain Sa‘ud.
74|18| He pondered and surmised.
74|19| Death onto him! How (bad) is the surmise he put forward!
74|20| Again, death unto him! How (bad) is the surmise he put forward!
74|21| Then he looked (to those around him,)
74|22| then he frowned and scowled,
74|23| then turned his back, and waxed proud,
74|24| then said, .This is nothing but traditional magic;
74|25| this is nothing but saying of a mortal.
74|26| I will put him into Saqar (Hell).
74|27| And what can let you know what Saqar is?
74|28| It neither spares (anything inside it from burning) nor leaves (any disbeliever outside).
74|29| It will disfigure the skins.
74|30| Appointed on it are nineteen (wardens).
74|31| And We did not make wardens of the Fire but (from) angels, and did not fix their number but as a test for those who disbelieve, so that those who are given the Book may come to believe, and those who believe may improve in belief, and so that those who are given the Book and those who believe may not doubt (its correctness), and so that those having malady in their hearts and the disbelievers say, .What has Allah meant by this strange statement?. Thus Allah lets go astray whomever He wills, and leads to the right path whomever He wills. And no one knows the hosts of your Lord but He. And this is nothing else but a reminder for mankind.
74|32| Truly, I swear by the moon,
74|33| and by the night when it goes back,
74|34| and by the morning when it becomes bright,
74|35| it (Saqar : Hell) is one of the greatest things
74|36| as a warning to the mankind,
74|37| to the one from among you who wishes to come forward (towards good deeds) or to go back (from them).
74|38| Everyone will be detained (in the Hell) because of what he did,
74|39| except the People of the Right, (i.e. those who will be given their Book of Deeds in their right hands)
74|40| who will be in gardens, asking
74|41| about the guilty persons,
74|42| .What has brought you to Saqar? (Hell).
74|43| They will say, .We were not among those who offered Salah , (obligatory prayer)
74|44| and we did not give food to the needy,
74|45| and we indulged (in mocking at the truth) along with those who indulged,
74|46| and we used to deny the Day of Requital,
74|47| until when we were overtaken by that which is certain.
74|48| Then intercession of intercessors will not benefit them.
74|49| So what has happened to them that they are turning away from the Reminder,
74|50| as if they were wild donkeys,
74|51| fleeing from a lion?
74|52| Rather, every one of them wishes that he should be given unrolled (divine) scriptures.
74|53| Never! But they do not fear the Hereafter.
74|54| Never! Indeed, this is a Reminder.
74|55| So, whoever so wishes may take advice from it.
74|56| And they will not take advice unless Allah so wills. He is worthy to be feared, and worthy to forgive.
75|1| I swear by the Day of Resurrection,
75|2| and I swear by the self-reproaching conscience, (that Resurrection is a reality.)
75|3| Does man think that We will never reassemble his bones?
75|4| Why (can We) not (do so), while We are able to reset (even) his fingertips perfectly?
75|5| But man wishes to go on violating Allah‘s injunctions (even in future) ahead of him.
75|6| He asks, .When will be this Day of Resurrection?.
75|7| So, when the eyes will be dazzled,
75|8| and the moon will lose its light,
75|9| and the sun and the moon will be joined together,
75|10| on that day man will say, .Where to escape?.
75|11| Never! There will be no refuge at all.
75|12| On that day, towards your Lord will be the destination (of everyone.)
75|13| Man will be informed of what he sent ahead and what he left behind.
75|14| Rather, man will be a witness against himself,
75|15| even though he may offer his excuses.
75|16| (O Prophet,) do not move your tongue (during revelation) for (reciting) it (the Qur‘an) to receive it in hurry.
75|17| It is surely undertaken by Us to store it (in your heart), and to let it be recited (by you after revelation is completed).
75|18| Therefore, when it is recited by Us (through the angel), follow its recitation (by concentration of your heart).
75|19| Then, it is undertaken by Us to explain it.
75|20| Never, (your denial of Resurrection is never based on any sound reason!) Instead, you love that which is immediate,
75|21| and neglect the Hereafter.
75|22| Many faces, that day, will be glowing,
75|23| looking towards their Lord,
75|24| and many faces, that day, will be gloomy,
75|25| realizing that a back-breaking calamity is going to be afflicted on them.
75|26| Never, (you will never remain in this world forever!) When the soul (of a patient) reaches the clavicles,
75|27| and it is said, .Who is an enchanter (that can save him?).
75|28| and he realizes that it is (the time of) departure (from the world,)
75|29| and one shank is intertwined with the other shank,
75|30| then on that day, it is to your Lord that one has to be driven.
75|31| So (the denier of the Hereafter) neither believed, nor prayed,
75|32| but rejected the truth and turned away (from it),
75|33| then he went to his home, puffed up with pride.
75|34| (It will be said to such a man,) Woe to you, then woe to you!
75|35| Again, woe to you, then woe to you!
75|36| Does man presume that he will be left unchecked?
75|37| Was he not an ejaculated drop of semen?
75|38| Then he became a clot of blood, then He created (him) and made (him) perfect,
75|39| and made from him two kinds, male and female.
75|40| Has He no power to give life to the dead?
76|1| There has come upon man a period of time in which he was nothing worth mentioning.
76|2| We have created man from a mixed sperm-drop to put him to a test; then We made him able to hear, able to see.
76|3| We have shown him the way to be either grateful or ungrateful.
76|4| We have prepared, for the disbelievers, shackles and iron-collars and a blazing Fire.
76|5| Indeed, the righteous will have a drink from a goblet, blended with (a drink from) Camphor
76|6| that will be a spring from which Allah‘s servants will drink, making it flow (wherever they wish) profusely.
76|7| They (are the ones who) fulfill their vows, and fear a day whose evil (events) will spread far and wide,
76|8| and they give food, out of their love for Him (Allah), to the needy, and the orphan, and the captive,
76|9| (saying to them,) .We feed you only for the sake of Allah; we have no intention of (receiving) either a return from you or thanks.
76|10| In fact, we are fearful of a day, from the side of our Lord, that will be frowning, extremely malignant.
76|11| So Allah will save them from the evil of that day, and will grant them bloom and delight,
76|12| and will give them, in return for their patience, Paradise and (garments of) silk,
76|13| wherein they will be reclining on couches, feeling neither heat of the sun nor intense cold.
76|14| And shades of gardens will be hanging low on them, and their fruits will be placed totally under their command.
76|15| Circulated among them will be vessels of silver, and cups that will be (as transparent as) crystals,
76|16| __crystals (as shining as if made) of silver, measured by those (who filled them) with due measure.
76|17| And they will be served with goblet of a drink blended with ginger,
76|18| (acquired from) a spring therein called Salsabil.
76|19| And circling around them will be serving boys, blessed with eternal youth; when you would see them, you would take them as scattered pearls.
76|20| When you will look around there, you will see the Bliss and a magnificent realm.
76|21| Upon them will be garments of green sundus (a kind of fine silk), and of istabraq (a kind of thick silk), and they will be adorned by bracelets of silver. Their Lord will give them a pure beverage to drink:
76|22| .This is a reward for you, and your effort has been appreciated.
76|23| Indeed we have revealed to you the Qur‘an through a gradual process.
76|24| So, be steadfast patiently in (obeying) your Lord‘s command, and do not obey any one of them who is sinner or ungrateful.
76|25| And pronounce the name of Allah morning and evening.
76|26| And in some parts of night prostrate yourself before Him, and pronounce His purity for long times at night.
76|27| In fact these people love that which is immediate, and neglect a Heavy Day ahead of them.
76|28| We have created them and have made their joints strong. And whenever We will, We would replace them with others like them, a total replacement.
76|29| Indeed, this is a reminder; so let anyone who so wishes, adopt a way to his Lord.
76|30| And you will not so wish unless Allah so wills. Indeed Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise.
76|31| He admits whomsoever He wills to His mercy. As for the wrongdoers, He has prepared for them a painful punishment.
77|1| (I swear) by those (winds) that are sent one after the other,
77|2| and by those that blow violently,
77|3| and by those that spread (clouds) all over,
77|4| and by those (angels) who differentiate (between right and wrong) distinctly,
77|5| then bring down the advice,
77|6| leaving no excuse (for the disbelievers) or giving warnings,
77|7| that which you are promised is sure to happen.
77|8| So, when the stars will be extinguished,
77|9| and when the sky will be split,
77|10| and when the mountains will be blown away as dust,
77|11| and when the messengers will be assembled at the appointed time, (then all matters will be decided.)
77|12| (Do you know) for which day has all this been delayed?
77|13| For the Day of Decision!
77|14| And what may let you know what the Day of Decision is?
77|15| Woe that Day to the deniers!
77|16| Did We not destroy the earlier people?
77|17| Then We will cause the later ones to follow them.
77|18| Thus We deal with the guilty people.
77|19| Woe that Day to the deniers!
77|20| Did We not create you from a worthless fluid?
77|21| Then We put it in a firm place of rest
77|22| for a known period.
77|23| Thus We did (all this with perfect) measure; so We are the best to measure.
77|24| Woe that Day to the deniers!
77|25| Did We not make the earth a container that collects
77|26| the living and the dead?
77|27| And We placed towering mountains therein, and provided you with sweet water to drink.
77|28| Woe that Day to the deniers!
77|29| (It will be said to them on that day,) .Push on to what you used to deny.
77|30| Push on to a canopy (of Hell‘s smoke) having three branches,
77|31| that neither has a comfortable shade, nor is it of any use against the scorching heat.
77|32| It emits sparks (as huge) as castles,
77|33| as if they were yellowish camels.
77|34| Woe that Day to the deniers!
77|35| This is the day when they will not speak,
77|36| nor will they be allowed to offer excuses.
77|37| Woe that Day to the deniers!
77|38| (It will be said to them,) .This is the Day of Decision. We have assembled you and the earlier ones together.
77|39| Now, if you have a trick, use the trick against Me.
77|40| Woe that Day to the deniers!
77|41| Of course, the God-fearing will be amid shades and streams,
77|42| and fruits of their desire.
77|43| It will be said to them, .Eat and drink with pleasure because of what you used to do.
77|44| This is how We reward those who do good deeds.
77|45| Woe that Day to the deniers!
77|46| .(O disbelievers,) eat and drink for a while! You are guilty ones.
77|47| Woe that Day to the deniers!
77|48| And when it is said to them, .Bow down (i.e. submit to Allah‘s commands)., they do not bow down.
77|49| Woe that Day to the deniers!
77|50| Now, in which discourse, after this, will they believe?
78|1| About what are they asking each other?
78|2| About the Great Event
78|3| in which they dispute!
78|4| Indeed they will soon know.
78|5| Again, indeed they will soon know.
78|6| Did We not make the earth a floor,
78|7| and the mountains bulwarks?
78|8| And We have created you in pairs,
78|9| and made your sleep a source of rest,
78|10| and made the night a covering,
78|11| and made the day a source of livelihood.
78|12| And We have built seven strong (skies),
78|13| and created a luminous lamp (the sun).
78|14| And We have sent down abundant water from the rain-laden clouds,
78|15| so that We bring out therewith grain and vegetation,
78|16| and thick gardens.
78|17| Surely the Day of Decision is an appointed time,
78|18| a day when the trumpet will be blown, so you will come in multitudes,
78|19| and the sky will be opened, so it will become as gates,
78|20| and the mountains will be set in motion, so they will be as mirage.
78|21| Surely Jahannam (the Hell) lurks in ambush.
78|22| (It is) abode for the rebellious people
78|23| who will be abiding in it for ages.
78|24| They will taste nothing cool in it, nor a drink,
78|25| except boiling water and pus,
78|26| this being a punishment, fully commensurate (with their deeds).
78|27| They did not expect (to face) accounting (of their deeds),
78|28| and they rejected Our signs totally.
78|29| And everything (from their deeds) is thoroughly recorded by Us in writing.
78|30| .So now taste! We will add nothing to you but torment.
78|31| Of course, the God-fearing will have great achievement,
78|32| __gardens and grapes,
78|33| and buxom maidens of matching age,
78|34| and goblets filled up to the brim.
78|35| They will not hear any vain talk therein, nor lies,
78|36| this being a reward from their Lord, a well calculated grant,
78|37| (from) the Lord of the heavens and the earth and what is between them, the All-Merciful. No one will have power to address Him,
78|38| on the Day when the Spirit and the angels will stand in rows. They will not speak, except the one who is permitted by the RaHman (the All- Merciful Allah) and speaks aright.
78|39| That is the Day that is sure to come. So whoever so wishes may take refuge with his Lord.
78|40| We have warned you of an approaching torment (that will be inflicted) on a day when one will see what his hands have sent ahead, and the disbeliever will say, .O would that I had turned into dust.
79|1| I swear by those (angels) who pull out (the souls of the infidels) with extreme force,
79|2| and by those (angels) who untie the knot (of the souls of the believers) smoothly,
79|3| and by those who float (in the atmosphere) swiftly,
79|4| then proceed forward quickly,
79|5| then manage (to do) everything (they are ordered to do,)
79|6| (you will be resurrected) on the Day when the shocking event (i.e. the first blowing of the trumpet) will shock (everything),
79|7| followed by the next one (i.e. the second blowing of the trumpet.)
79|8| On that day, hearts (of people) will be throbbing,
79|9| with their eyes downcast.
79|10| They (the infidels) say, .Are we going to be brought back to our former state (of Life)?
79|11| Is it when we are turned into decayed bones?.
79|12| They say, .If so, that will be a harmful homecoming.
79|13| In fact, it will be only a single harsh voice,
79|14| and in no time they will be (brought) into the plain (of Hashr).
79|15| Has there come to you the narrative about Musa?
79|16| (Recall) when his Lord called to him in the blessed valley of Tuwa:
79|17| .Go to Fir‘aun (Pharaoh). Indeed, he has crossed all bounds.
79|18| And say (to him,) ‘Would you like to purify yourself,
79|19| and that I should guide you to your Lord, so that you fear (Him)?‘.
79|20| So, he (Musa) showed him the biggest sign.
79|21| But he rejected and disobeyed,
79|22| then he turned back, and tried hard (to refute the Messenger),
79|23| then he gathered (his people) and shouted
79|24| and said, .I am your supreme lord.
79|25| So, Allah seized him for an exemplary punishment in the Hereafter and the present world.
79|26| Indeed, there is a lesson for him who fears (Allah).
79|27| Is your creation more difficult or that of the sky? He has built it,
79|28| He has raised its height, then made it proper,
79|29| and darkened its night, and brought forth its daylight,
79|30| and, after that, He spread out the earth.
79|31| From it, He brought out its water and its meadows,
79|32| and firmly fixed the mountains,
79|33| (all this) as a benefit to you and your cattle.
79|34| So when the Greatest Havoc will take place
79|35| on the day when man will recall what he did,
79|36| and the Hell will be exposed for all who see,
79|37| then for the one who had rebelled,
79|38| and preferred the worldly life (to the Hereafter),
79|39| the Hell will be the abode,
79|40| whereas for the one who feared to stand before his Lord, and restrained his self from the (evil) desire,
79|41| the Paradise will be the abode.
79|42| They ask you (O Prophet,) about the Hour (the Day of Judgment) as to when it will take place.
79|43| In which capacity are you to tell this?
79|44| With your Lord is the final word about it.
79|45| You are only a warner for anyone who fears it.
79|46| The day they will see it, it will seem to them as if they did not live (in the world) but only for one afternoon or for the morning thereof.
80|1| He (the Prophet) frowned and turned his face,
80|2| because the blind man came to him!
80|3| What could tell you (O prophet about the prospects of the blind man?) May be, (if you had attended him properly,) he would have attained purity,
80|4| or have received the advice, and the advice would have benefited him.
80|5| As for the one who does not care (about faith),
80|6| you are anxious to pursue him,
80|7| while there is no blame on you, if he does not attain purity.
80|8| As regards the one who has come to you rushing eagerly,
80|9| while he fears (Allah),
80|10| to him you pay no heed!
80|11| Never! (you should never act in this way,) Indeed this (Qur‘an) is an advice.
80|12| So, whoever so wills may pay heed to it.
80|13| It is (recorded) in those scripts (of the Preserved Tablet) that are honoured,
80|14| exalted, purified,
80|15| in the hands of those scribes
80|16| who are honorable, righteous.
80|17| Damned is the man! How ungrateful he is!
80|18| From which stuff did He (Allah) create him?
80|19| from a drop of semen! He created him, and designed him in due proportion,
80|20| then He made the way easy for him,
80|21| Later, he made him die, and put him into grave,
80|22| Thereafter, when He will intend, He will raise him up.
80|23| No! He has not yet fulfilled what He (Allah) had commanded him.
80|24| So, the man should consider his food,
80|25| how well We poured water,
80|26| then how nicely We split the earth,
80|27| then We grew in it grain,
80|28| and grapes and greens,
80|29| and olive and date-palms,
80|30| and gardens, full of thick trees,
80|31| and fruits and fodder,
80|32| as a benefit for you and your cattle.
80|33| So when the Deafening Noise will occur,
80|34| the Day when one will flee from his brother,
80|35| and from his mother and father,
80|36| and from his wife and sons,
80|37| every one of them will be too engaged in his own affairs to care for others.
80|38| Many faces, on that day, will be bright,
80|39| laughing, rejoicing,
80|40| and many faces, on that day, will be stained with dust,
80|41| covered by darkness.
80|42| Those are the disbelievers, the nefarious.
81|1| When the sun will be folded up,
81|2| and when the stars will swoop down,
81|3| and when the mountains will be set in motion,
81|4| and when the ten-months pregnant she-camels will be abandoned,
81|5| and when the wild beasts will be gathered together,
81|6| and when the seas will be flared up,
81|7| and when the people will be arranged in categories,
81|8| and when the girl-child that was buried alive will be asked,
81|9| for what sin she was killed,
81|10| and when the scrolls (of deeds) will be unrolled,
81|11| and when the sky will be stripped off,
81|12| and when the Hell will be set ablaze,
81|13| and when the Paradise will be brought close,
81|14| then everyone will know what he (or she) has put forward.
81|15| So, I swear by those (stars) that recede,
81|16| that proceed, that withdraw from the scene,
81|17| and by the night when it departs,
81|18| and the morning when it starts breathing,
81|19| it (the Qur‘an) is surely the word of a noble messenger (Jibra‘il X),
81|20| the one possessing power and a high status with the Lord of the Throne,
81|21| the one obeyed there, trusted.
81|22| Your companion (Muhammad ) is not a madman,
81|23| and he did see him (Jibra‘il X) on the clear horizon.
81|24| And he (the Prophet) is not stingy about (the news of) the unseen.
81|25| Nor is it the word of an outcast satan (devil).
81|26| Then where are you going?
81|27| It is nothing else but a message of advice for all the worlds,
81|28| for the benefit of any one from among you who intends to go straight.
81|29| And you cannot intend (to do anything) unless it is so willed by Allah, the Lord of all the worlds.
82|1| When the sky will be cleft asunder,
82|2| and when the stars will disperse,
82|3| and when the seas will be burst forth,
82|4| and when the graves will be overturned,
82|5| then one will know what he sent ahead and what he left behind.
82|6| O man! What has deceived you about your Gracious Lord,
82|7| who created you, then perfected you, then brought you in due proportion?
82|8| He composed you in whichever form He willed.
82|9| Never! (i.e. one should never be heedless towards him.) But you deny the Requital,
82|10| while (appointed) over you there are watchers,
82|11| who are noble, writers (of the deeds),
82|12| who know whatever you do.
82|13| Surely the righteous will be in bliss,
82|14| and the sinners in Hell,
82|15| in which they will enter on the Day of Requital,
82|16| and they will not (be able to) keep away from it.
82|17| And what may let you know what the Day of Requital is?
82|18| Again, what may let you know what the Day of Requital is?
82|19| A Day when no one will have power to do any thing for another! And command, on that Day, will belong to Allah (alone).
83|1| Woe to the curtailers
83|2| who, when they measure something to receive from people, take it in full,
83|3| and when they measure or weigh something to give it to them, give less than due.
83|4| Do they not think that they have to be raised up
83|5| on a Great Day,
83|6| the Day when all the people will stand before the Lord of the worlds?
83|7| Never! (i.e. they should never act in such a way.) Indeed the record of deeds of the sinners is in Sijjin .
83|8| And what may let you know what Sijjin is?
83|9| A register, inscribed!
83|10| Woe that day to the deniers,
83|11| who deny the Day of Requital!
83|12| And none denies it but every sinful transgressor.
83|13| When Our verses are recited to him, he says, .(These are) tales of the ancients.
83|14| No! But that which they used to commit has covered their hearts with rust.
83|15| No! Indeed they will be screened off from their Lord on that Day.
83|16| Then they will have to enter the Hell.
83|17| Then it will be said, .This is what you used to deny.
83|18| No! The record of deeds of the righteous is in ‘Illiyyun .
83|19| And what may let you know what ‘Illiyyun is ?
83|20| A register inscribed,
83|21| attended by those (angels) who are blessed with nearness to Allah!
83|22| Indeed the righteous will be in absolute bliss.
83|23| While (sitting) on thrones they will be watching (the scenes of Paradise).
83|24| You will recognize the glamour of bliss on their faces.
83|25| They will be served with a pure sealed wine to drink,
83|26| the seal of which will be of musk.___It is this (bliss) in aspiring for which the competitors should race each other.
83|27| __and it will be blended with (a drink from) Tasnim ,
83|28| a spring from which will drink those who are blessed with nearness.
83|29| Indeed those who were guilty used to laugh at those who believed,
83|30| and when they passed by them, they used to wink at one another,
83|31| and when they went back to their family, they went enjoying their mockery,
83|32| and when they saw them, they said, .Surely these are the ones who have gone astray.
83|33| while they were not sent as watchmen over them.
83|34| So, today those who believed will laugh at the disbelievers.
83|35| While (sitting) on thrones, they will be seeing
83|36| whether the disbelievers have been paid back for what they used to do.
84|1| When the sky will split apart,
84|2| and will listen to (the command of) its Lord,__ and it ought to,__
84|3| and when the earth will be stretched (to give room to more people),
84|4| and it will throw up whatever it contains, and will become empty,
84|5| and will listen to (the command of) its Lord,__ and it ought to,__ (then man will see the consequences of his deeds.)
84|6| O man, you have to work hard constantly to reach your Lord, and then you have to meet Him.
84|7| So, as for him whose book (of deeds) will be given to him in his right hand,
84|8| he will be called to account in an easy manner,
84|9| and he will go back to his people joyfully.
84|10| As for the one whose book (of deeds) will be given to him from his backside,
84|11| he will pray for death,
84|12| and will enter the blazing fire.
84|13| He had been joyful among his people (in the world).
84|14| He thought he would never revert (to Allah).
84|15| No! Indeed his Lord was watchful over him.
84|16| So, I swear by the twilight (after sunset),
84|17| and by the night and what it envelops,
84|18| and by the moon when it develops at the full,
84|19| you shall certainly ascend from stage to stage.
84|20| So, what is wrong with them that they do not believe,
84|21| and when the Qur‘an is recited to them, they do not offer sajdah (prostration)?
84|22| Rather, those who disbelieve deny (the truth).
84|23| And Allah is most aware of what they store.
84|24| So, give him the ‘good news‘ of a painful punishment,
84|25| but those who believed and did righteous deeds will have a reward that will never be interrupted.
85|1| I swear by the sky, the one having stellar formations,
85|2| and by the Promised Day,
85|3| and by that which attends, and that which is attended,
85|4| cursed were the People of the Trench,
85|5| the (people of the) fire that was rich with fuel,
85|6| when they were sitting by it,
85|7| and were watching what they were doing with the believers.
85|8| They punished them for nothing but that they believed in Allah, the All-Mighty, the Worthy of All Praise,
85|9| the One to whom belongs the Kingdom of the heavens and the earth. And Allah is witness over every thing.
85|10| Surely, those who persecuted the believing men and the believing women, then did not repent, __for them there is the torment of Jahannam (Hell), and for them there is the torment of burning.
85|11| As for those who believed and did righteous deeds, for them there are gardens beneath which rivers flow. That is the big achievement.
85|12| The seizure of your Lord is severe indeed!
85|13| Surely He originates (creation) and repeats (it after death).
85|14| And He is the Most-Forgiving, the Most-Loving,
85|15| the Master of the Throne, the Glorious.
85|16| He is ever doer of what He intends.
85|17| Has there come to you the story of the forces,
85|18| of Fir‘aun (Pharaoh) and Thamud?
85|19| But those who disbelieve are (engaged) in denying (the truth).
85|20| Allah has encompassed them from all sides.
85|21| The reality is that it is the glorious Qur‘an,
85|22| (recorded) in the Preserved Tablet (LauH MaHfuZ).
86|1| I swear by the sky and by the Night-Comer,__
86|2| __and what may let you know what the Night-Comer is?
86|3| The star of piercing brightness!_ _
86|4| __there is no human being, but there is a watcher over him.
86|5| So, let man consider of which stuff he is created.
86|6| He is created of spouting water
86|7| that comes out from between the loins and the chest-bones.
86|8| Surely He is Powerful to bring him back
86|9| on a day when all the secrets will be searched out,
86|10| and he will have neither strength (to defend), nor a supporter.
86|11| I swear by the sky that rains,
86|12| and the earth that cracks open (for plants),
86|13| this is a decisive word,
86|14| and it is not a joke.
86|15| They are devising plans,
86|16| and I Am devising plans.
86|17| So leave the disbelievers alone at the moment; give them respite for a while.
87|1| Pronounce the purity of the name of your most exalted Lord,
87|2| who created (everything), then made (it) well,
87|3| and who determined a measure (for everything), then guided (it),
87|4| and who brought forth pasturage,
87|5| then turned it into a blackening stubble.
87|6| We will make you recite, then you will not forget
87|7| except that which Allah wills. Indeed He knows what is manifest and what is hidden.
87|8| And We will facilitate for you (to reach) the easiest way.
87|9| So, extend advice (to people) if advice is useful.
87|10| The one who fears (Allah) will observe the advice,
87|11| and it will be avoided by the most wretched one
87|12| who will enter the Biggest Fire,
87|13| then he will neither die therein, nor live (a desirable life).
87|14| Success is surely achieved by him who purifies himself,
87|15| and pronounces the name of his Lord, then offers prayer.
87|16| But you prefer the worldly life,
87|17| while the Hereafter is much better and much more durable.
87|18| Indeed this is (written) in the earlier divine scripts,
87|19| the scripts of Ibrahim and Musa.
88|1| Has there come to you the description of the Overwhelming Event?
88|2| Many faces that day will be humbled,
88|3| laboring, exhausted.
88|4| They will enter into the scorching fire.
88|5| They will be made to drink water from a boiling spring.
88|6| There will be no food for them except from a thorny plant
88|7| that will neither nourish, nor satisfy hunger.
88|8| Many faces that day will be full of glamour,
88|9| well pleased with their endeavor,
88|10| in a lofty garden,
88|11| in which they will not hear any absurd talk.
88|12| In it there is a flowing spring.
88|13| In it there are elevated couches
88|14| and goblets, well placed,
88|15| and cushions, arrayed
88|16| and carpets, spread around.
88|17| So, do they not look at the camels how they are created,
88|18| and at the sky, how it is raised high,
88|19| and at the mountains, how they are installed,
88|20| and at the earth, how it is spread out?
88|21| So, (O Prophet,) keep on preaching; you are only a preacher.
88|22| You are not a taskmaster set up over them,
88|23| but whoever turns away and disbelieves,
88|24| Allah will punish him with the greatest torment.
88|25| Surely towards Us they have to return,
88|26| then it is Our job to call them to account.
89|1| I swear by the dawn,
89|2| and by Ten Nights,
89|3| and by the even and the odd,
89|4| and by the night when it moves away,
89|5| __Is there (not) in such an oath (enough assurance) for a man of sense?__
89|6| Have you not seen how your Lord dealt with (the people) of ‘Ad
89|7| of Iram , the men of tall pillars,
89|8| the like of whom were never created in the lands,
89|9| and (how He dealt) with (the people of) Thamud who had carved out the rocks in the Valley (of Qura),
89|10| and with Fir‘aun (Pharaoh), the man of the stakes,
89|11| __ those who had rebelled in the cities,
89|12| and spread a lot of mischief therein.
89|13| So, your Lord let loose on them the whip of torment.
89|14| Surely your Lord is ever on the watch.
89|15| As for man, when his Lord tests him, and thus gives him honour and bounties, he says, .My Lord has honoured me.
89|16| But when he tests him, and thus straitens his provision for him, he says, .My Lord has disgraced me.
89|17| No! But you do not honour the orphan,
89|18| and do not encourage one another to feed the needy.
89|19| And you devour the inheritance with a sweeping gulp,
89|20| and love wealth, an excessive love.
89|21| No! When the earth will be crushed thoroughly to be turned into bits,
89|22| and your Lord will come, and the angels as well, lined up in rows,
89|23| and Jahannam (Hell), on that day, will be brought forward, it will be the day when man will realize the truth, but from where will he take advantage of such realization?
89|24| He will say, .O Would that I had sent ahead (some good deeds) for (this) my life!.
89|25| So no one can punish like He will punish, that day,
89|26| nor can anyone shackle like He will shackle.
89|27| (As for an obedient man, it will be said to him,) .O content soul,
89|28| come back to your Lord, well-pleased, well-pleasing.
89|29| So, enter among My (special) servants,
89|30| and enter My Paradise.
90|1| I swear by this city,
90|2| __and (O Prophet,) you are going to be allowed (to fight) in this city__
90|3| and by the father and all those he begot,
90|4| indeed We have created man (to live) in hard struggle.
90|5| Does he think that no one has power over him?
90|6| He says, .I have spent a lot of wealth.
90|7| Does he think that no one has seen him?
90|8| Did We not make for him two eyes,
90|9| and one tongue and two lips,
90|10| and showed him the two ways?
90|11| Yet he did not make his way through the steep course,_ __
90|12| __ And what may let you know what the steep course is?
90|13| (It is) freeing of the neck of a slave,
90|14| or giving food in a day of hunger
90|15| to an orphan near of kin,
90|16| or to a needy person lying in dust_ ___
90|17| ___ then he did not join those who believe and advise each other to be patient and advise each other to be merciful.
90|18| Those are the People of the Right Hand. (i.e. their books of deeds will be given in their right hands)
90|19| As for those who reject Our verses, they are the People of the Left Hand. (i.e. their books of deeds will be given in their left hands.)
90|20| Upon them will be the Fire, enveloping them with closed exits.
91|1| I swear by the sun and his broad light,
91|2| and by the moon when she follows him,
91|3| and by the day when it shows his brightness,
91|4| and by the night when it envelops him,
91|5| and by the sky, and the One who built it,
91|6| and by the earth, and the One who spread it,
91|7| and by the soul, and the One who made it well,
91|8| then inspired it with its (instincts of) evil and piety,
91|9| success is really attained by him who purifies it,
91|10| and failure is really suffered by him who pollutes it.
91|11| (The People of) Thamud denied the truth because of their transgression,
91|12| when rose up the one who was most wretched of them.
91|13| So, the Messenger of Allah said to them, .Be careful of Allah‘s she-camel and her right to drink.
91|14| But they rejected him and killed her, so their Lord sent eradicating torment upon them because of their sin, and made it equal for all.
91|15| And He has no fear of its consequence.
92|1| I swear by the night when it covers (the sun),
92|2| and by the day when it unveils itself,
92|3| and by the One who created the male and the female,
92|4| your efforts are diverse:
92|5| As for the one who gives (in charity) and fears Allah,
92|6| and believes in the best (religion),
92|7| We will facilitate for him the way to extreme ease (i.e. the comforts of Paradise).
92|8| But the one who is miser and deems himself self-sufficient,
92|9| and rejects the best (religion),
92|10| We will facilitate for him the way to extreme distress.
92|11| And his wealth will not help him when he will fall down (into Hell).
92|12| Of course, it is undertaken by Us to guide,
92|13| and in Our control is the Hereafter and the worldly life.
92|14| So I have warned you of a blazing fire.
92|15| None will enter it but the wretched one,
92|16| who rejected (the truth) and turned away (from it).
92|17| And saved from it will be the most God-fearing one,
92|18| who gives his wealth (in charity) to become purified,
92|19| while no one has conferred any favour on him for which he would give a return,
92|20| but (he gave his wealth in charity) only to seek the Countenance of his Lord, the Most High.
92|21| And surely he will soon be happy.
93|1| I swear by the forenoon,
93|2| and by the night when it becomes peaceful,
93|3| your Lord (O Prophet,) has neither forsaken you, nor has become displeased.
93|4| Surely the Hereafter is much better for you than the present life.
93|5| And of course, your Lord will give you so much that you will be pleased.
93|6| Did He not find you an orphan, and give you shelter?
93|7| And He found you unaware of the way (the Shari‘ah ), then He guided you.
93|8| and He found you in need, then made you need-free.
93|9| Therefore, as for orphan, do not oppress him,
93|10| and as for the beggar, do not scold him.
93|11| And about the bounty of your Lord, do talk.
94|1| Have We not caused your bosom to be wide open for you?
94|2| And We removed from you your burden
94|3| that had (almost) broken your back,
94|4| and We raised high your name.
94|5| So, undoubtedly, along with the hardship there is ease.
94|6| Undoubtedly, along with the hardship there is ease.
94|7| So, when you are free (from collective services), toil hard (in worship),
94|8| and towards your Lord turn with eagerness.
95|1| I swear by the Fig and the Olive,
95|2| and by Tur, the mount of Sinai,
95|3| and by this peaceful city,
95|4| We have created man in the best composition,
95|5| then We turned him into the lowest of the low,
95|6| except those who believed and did righteous deeds, because for them there is a reward never ending.
95|7| So, what can make you, after all this, to deny the Requital?
95|8| Is Allah not the Greatest Ruler of all the rulers?
96|1| Read with the name of your Lord who created (every thing),
96|2| He created man from a clot of blood.
96|3| Read, and your Lord is the most gracious,
96|4| who imparted knowledge by means of the pen.
96|5| He taught man what he did not know.
96|6| In fact, man crosses the limits,
96|7| because he deems himself to be free of need.
96|8| Surely to your Lord is the return.
96|9| Have you seen him who forbids
96|10| a servant of Allah when he prays?
96|11| Tell me, if he is on the right path,
96|12| or bids piety, (would the former still forbid him?)
96|13| Tell me, if he rejects (the true faith) and turns away,
96|14| does he not know that Allah is watching (him)?
96|15| No! If he does not desist, We will certainly drag (him) by forelock,
96|16| a lying, sinful forelock.
96|17| So let him call the men of his council,
96|18| We will call the soldiers of the Hell.
96|19| No! Never obey him, and bow down in sajdah, and come close to Me.
97|1| We have sent it (the Qur‘an) down in the Night of Qadr.
97|2| And what may let you know what the Night of Qadr is?
97|3| The Night of Qadr is much better than one thousand months.
97|4| The angels and the Spirit descend in it, with the leave of your Lord, along with every command.
97|5| Peace it is till the debut of dawn.
98|1| Those who disbelieved from among the People of the Book and the polytheists were not (expected) to desist (from their wrong beliefs) unless there comes to them a clear proof,
98|2| a messenger from Allah who recites the purified scrolls
98|3| containing (right and) straight writings.
98|4| And those who were given the Book did not disagree but after the clear proof came to them,
98|5| while they were not ordered but to worship Allah, making their submission exclusive for him with no deviation, and to establish Salah and pay Zakah . That is the way of the straight religion.
98|6| Surely those who disbelieved from among the People of the Book and the polytheists will be in the fire of Jahannam , in which they will be living forever. Those are the worst of all human beings.
98|7| As for those who believed and did righteous deeds, they are the best of all human beings.
98|8| Their reward, with their Lord, is gardens of eternity beneath which rivers flow, in which they will be abiding forever. Allah is well pleased with them, and they are well pleased with Him. That (reward) is for him who has awe of his Lord.
99|1| When the earth will be trembled with its quake,
99|2| and the earth will bring forth its burdens,
99|3| and man will say, .What has happened to it?.
99|4| That day it will describe all its happenings,
99|5| because its Lord will have so commanded it.
99|6| That day the people will come back (from the place of reckoning) in different groups, so that they may be shown (the fruits of) their deeds.
99|7| So, whoever does any good act (even) to the weight of a particle will see it.
99|8| And whoever does evil (even) to the weight of a particle will see it.
100|1| (I swear) by those (horses) that run snorting,
100|2| then those that create sparks by striking (their hoofs) on the stones,
100|3| then those that invade at morning,
100|4| then raise, at the same time, a trail of dust,
100|5| then enter, at the same time, into the centre of the (opposing) host,
100|6| man is, indeed, very ungrateful to his Lord,
100|7| and he himself is a witness to that fact,
100|8| and in his love for wealth, he is very intense.
100|9| Does he not then know (what will happen) when all that is contained in the graves will be overturned,
100|10| and all that is contained in the hearts will be exposed.
100|11| Surely your Lord, that day, is fully aware of them.
101|1| The Striking Event!
101|2| What is the Striking Event?
101|3| And what may let you know what the Striking Event is?
101|4| (It will happen) on a day when people will be like scattered moths,
101|5| and the mountains will be like carded wool.
101|6| Then, as for him whose scales (of good deeds) are heavy,
101|7| he will be in a happy life.
101|8| But he whose scales are light,
101|9| __his abode will be Abyss.
101|10| And what may let you know what that (Abyss) is?
101|11| A blazing Fire!
102|1| You are distracted by mutual competition in amassing (worldly benefits),
102|2| until you reach the graves.
102|3| No! (This is not a correct attitude.) You will soon know (the reality).
102|4| Again, you will soon know.
102|5| No! Only if you knew (it) with a sure knowledge!
102|6| You will certainly see the Hell,
102|7| then you will see it with full certitude.
102|8| Then you will be asked about all the pleasures (you enjoyed in the world).
103|1| (I swear) by the Time,
103|2| man is in a state of loss indeed,
103|3| except those who believed and did righteous deeds, and exhorted each other to follow truth, and exhorted each other to observe patience.
104|1| Woe to every backbiter, derider
104|2| who accumulates wealth and counts it.
104|3| He thinks that his wealth has made him eternal.
104|4| Never! He will certainly be thrown into the Crushing Fire.
104|5| And what may let you know what the Crushing Fire is?
104|6| It is Allah‘s kindled fire
104|7| that will peep into the hearts.
104|8| It will be closed on them,
104|9| in outstretched columns.
105|1| Have you not seen how your Lord dealt with the People of the Elephant?
105|2| Has He not turned their plan into nullity?
105|3| And He sent upon them flying birds in flocks,
105|4| throwing upon them stones of baked clay,
105|5| and thus He turned them into an eaten-up chaff.
106|1| Because of the familiarity of the Quraish,
106|2| that is, their familiarity with the trips of winter and summer,
106|3| they must worship the Lord of this House,
106|4| who gave them food against hunger, and gave them security against fear.
107|1| Have you seen him who denies the Requital?
107|2| So, he is the one who pushes away the orphan,
107|3| and does not persuade (others) to feed the needy.
107|4| So, Woe to those performers of Salah ,
107|5| who are neglectful of their Salah,
107|6| who (do good only to) show off,
107|7| and refuse (to give even) small gifts.
108|1| (O Prophet,) surely We have given to you Al-Kauthar.
108|2| So, offer Salah (prayer) to your Lord, and sacrifice.
108|3| Surely it is your enemy whose traces are cut off.
109|1| Say, .O disbelievers,
109|2| I do not worship that which you worship,
109|3| nor do you worship the One whom I worship.
109|4| And neither I am going to worship that which you have worshipped,
109|5| nor will you worship the One whom I worship.
109|6| For you is your faith, and for me, my faith.
110|1| (O Prophet,) When there comes Allah‘s help and the Victory,
110|2| and you see people entering Allah‘s (approved) religion in multitudes,
110|3| then pronounce the purity and praise of your Lord, and seek forgiveness from Him. Surely He is Ever-Relenting.
111|1| Perish the two hands of Abu Lahab, and perish he!
111|2| Neither his wealth benefited him, nor what he earned.
111|3| He will soon enter a Fire, full of flames,
111|4| and his wife as well,__the wicked carrier of firewood.
111|5| Around her neck, there is (a collar of iron, like) a well-twisted rope.
112|1| Say, .The truth is that Allah is One.
112|2| Allah is Besought of all, needing none.
112|3| He neither begot anyone, nor was he begotten.
112|4| And equal to Him has never been any one.
113|1| Say, .I seek refuge with the Lord of the daybreak
113|2| from the evil of everything He has created,
113|3| and from the evil of the dark night when it penetrates,
113|4| and from the evil of the women who blow on the knots,
113|5| and from the evil of an envier when he envies.
114|1| Say, .I seek refuge with the Lord of mankind,
114|2| the King of mankind,
114|3| the God of mankind,
114|4| from the evil of the whisperer who withdraws (when Allah‘s name is pronounced),
114|5| the one who whispers in the hearts of people,
114|6| whether from among the Jinn or Mankind.

{
    "author": "Muhammad Taqi Usmani",
    "language": "English"
}