1|1| IN THE NAME OF GOD, THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE ALL-COMPASSIONATE
1|2| All praise and gratitude (whoever gives them to whomever for whatever reason and in whatever way from the first day of creation until eternity) are for God, the Lord of the worlds,
1|3| The All-Merciful, the All-Compassionate,
1|4| The Master of the Day of Judgment.
1|5| You alone do We worship and from You alone do we seek help.
1|6| Guide us to the Straight Path,
1|7| The Path of those whom You have favored, not of those who have incurred (Your) wrath (punishment and condemnation), nor of those who are astray.
2|1| Alif. Lam. Mim.
2|2| This is the (most honored, matchless) Book: there is no doubt about it (its Divine authorship and that it is a collection of pure truths throughout). A guidance for the God-revering, pious who keep their duty to God.
2|3| Those who believe in the Unseen; establish the Prayer in conformity with its conditions, and out of what We have provided for them (of wealth, knowledge, power, etc.,) they spend (to provide sustenance for the needy and in God’s cause, purely for the good pleasure of God and without placing others under obligation.)
2|4| And those who believe in what is sent down to you, and what was sent down before you (such as the Torah, Gospel and Psalms, and the Scrolls of Abraham); and in the Hereafter they have certainty of faith.
2|5| Those (illustrious ones) stand on true guidance (originating in the Qur’an) from their Lord; and they are those who are the prosperous.
2|6| (Despite the commitment and energy you show in striving to help people to believe,) those who willfully persist in unbelief: it is alike to them whether you warn them or do not warn them; (although it is your mission to warn them and you do it without any neglect,) they will not believe.
2|7| God has set a seal upon their hearts and on their hearing, and on their eyes is a covering. For them is a mighty punishment (in the Hereafter).
2|8| Among people are some who say, "We believe in God and in the Last Day", although they are not believers.
2|9| They would trick God and those who believe, and they trick only their own selves (of which they are enamored), but they do not perceive.
2|10| In the very center of their hearts is a sickness (that dries up the source of their spiritual life, extinguishes their power of understanding and corrupts their character), and (because of their moral corruption and the tricks they deploy out of envy and malice) God has increased them in sickness. For them is a painful punishment because they habitually lie.
2|11| (Because of the disorder they intend to provoke with their lies), whenever they are told (as part of the duty enjoined upon the believers to promote good and forbid evil), "Do not cause disorder and corruption on earth," they say: "Why! We indeed are the ones who set things right."
2|12| Beware, they themselves are those who cause disorder and corruption but they are unaware (of what they do and ignorant of what setting things right is and what causing disorder is).
2|13| Again, whenever they are told (as a duty of calling to faith), "Believe as the people believe," (in a way to demonstrate their self-pride and disparagement of the people) they say: "Shall we believe as the fools believe!?" Beware, they themselves are the fools, but they do not know (seeing that they have no true knowledge to distinguish between truth and falsehood, sincere faith and hypocrisy, right and wrong.)
2|14| When they meet those who believe, they declare (hypocritically), "We believe;" but when they are alone in secret with their (apparently human) satans (to whom they hasten in need to renew their unbelief and their pledge to them for fear of losing their support), they say: "Assuredly we are with you; we only mock (those others)."
2|15| (Since what they do only means demanding straying and ridicule,) God returns their mockery, leaving them to wander blindly on in their rebellion.
2|16| Such are the ones who have bought straying in exchange for guidance, but their trade has brought no profit, and they have no way out to escape it.
2|17| They are like him who (while traveling with company in the desert, halted for the night and) kindled a fire (for light and warmth and protection). However, when the fire had just lit all around him (and the company had become comfortable but were not properly appreciative of the fire and failed to guard it against wind, the fire was extinguished. Thus) God took away their light and left them in darkness, unseeing.
2|18| They are utterly deaf, dumb, and blind; they can no longer recover.
2|19| Or like (those caught in) a rainstorm from the sky, accompanied by veils of darkness, thunderclaps and flashes of lightning. (Terrified by the thunder, and as if they might thereby evade a possible stroke of lightning), they press their fingers into their ears in fear of death. This is how God has encompassed the unbelievers from all sides.
2|20| The lightning almost snatches away their sight. Whenever it gives them light, they take a few steps in it, and when the darkness covers them, they stand still. Had God so willed, indeed He would have taken away their hearing and sight. Surely God has full power over everything.
2|21| Now O humankind! Worship your Lord Who has created you as well as those before you (and brought you up in your human nature and identity), so that you may attain reverent piety toward Him and His protection (against any kind of straying and its consequent punishment in this world and the Hereafter);
2|22| And Who has made the earth a bed (comfortable, couch-like floor) for you, and the sky a canopy. He sends down from the sky water, with which He brings forth fruits for your provision. So do not set up rivals to God (as deities, lords and objects of worship) when you know (that there can be no deities, lords, creators and providers at all to worship save God).
2|23| If you are in doubt about the Divine authorship of what We have been sending down on Our servant (Muhammad) (and claim that it is the work of a human being like Muhammad who is illiterate), then produce just a surah like it and call for help to all your supporters, all those (to whom you apply for help apart from God), if you are truthful in your doubt and claim.
2|24| If you fail to do that – and you will most certainly fail – then guard yourselves against the Fire whose fuel is human beings and stones (that you have shaped into idols to adore), prepared for the unbelievers.
2|25| Give glad tidings to those who believe and do good, righteous deeds: for them are Gardens through which rivers flow. Every time they are provided with fruits (of different color, shape, taste, and fragrance and that are constantly renewed) therefrom, they say, "This is what we were provided with before." For they are given to them in resemblance (to what was given to them both in the world, and just before in the Gardens, familiar in shape and color so that they may not be unattractive because unknown). Furthermore, for them are spouses eternally purified (of all kinds of worldly uncleanliness). They will abide there (forever).
2|26| God does not disdain to strike any parable – (that of) something like a gnat or something greater or lower than it. Those who have already believed know that it is the truth from their Lord. As to those whose unbelief has long been established in their hearts, they say, "What does God mean by such a parable?" Thereby He leads many astray, and thereby He guides many. He thereby leads none astray save the transgressors;
2|27| (Those) who break God’s covenant after its solemn binding, and sever the bonds God commanded to be joined, and cause disorder and corruption on earth. Such are those who are the losers (in both this world and the next).
2|28| How can you disbelieve in God, seeing that you were dead, and He gave you life. Then He causes you to die. Then He will bring you to life again; and then you will be returned to Him.
2|29| It is He Who (prepared the earth for your life before He gave you life, and) created all that is in the world for you (in order to create you – the human species – and make the earth suitable for your life); then He directed (His Knowledge, Will, Power, and Favor) to the heaven, and formed it into seven heavens. He has full knowledge of everything.
2|30| Remember (when) your Lord said to the angels: "I am setting on the earth a vicegerent." The angels asked: "Will you set therein one who will cause disorder and corruption on it and shed blood, while we glorify You with Your praise (proclaim that You are absolutely free from any defect and that all praise belongs to You exclusively,) and declare that You alone are all-holy and to be worshipped as God and Lord." He said: "Surely I know what you do not know."
2|31| (Having brought him into existence, God) taught Adam the names, all of them. Then (in order to clarify the supremacy of humankind and the wisdom in their being created and made vicegerent on the earth), He presented them (the things and beings, whose names had been taught to Adam, with their names) to the angels, and said, "Now tell Me the names of these, if you are truthful (in your praising, worshipping, and sanctifying Me as My being God and Lord deserves).
2|32| (In acknowledgement of their imperfection, and their perception of the truth of the matter, the angels) said: "All-Glorified You are (in that You are absolutely above having any defect and doing anything meaningless, and Yours are all the attributes of perfection). We have no knowledge save what You have taught us. Surely You are the All-Knowing, the All-Wise."
2|33| (In order to demonstrate the superiority of humankind more clearly, God) said: "O Adam, inform them of these things and beings with their names." When he (Adam) informed them with their names, He said (to the angels), "Did I not tell you that I know the unseen of the heavens and the earth, and I know all that you reveal and all that you have been concealing?"
2|34| And (remember) when We said to the angels: "Prostrate before Adam!" They all prostrated, but Iblis did not; he refused, and grew arrogant, and displayed himself as an unbeliever.
2|35| "O Adam! Dwell you, and your spouse, in the Garden, and eat (of the fruits) thereof to your hearts’ content where you desire, but do not approach this tree, or you will both be among the wrongdoers.
2|36| But Satan (tempting them to the forbidden tree despite Our forewarning,) caused them both to deflect therefrom and brought them out of the (happy) state in which they were. And We said, "Go down, all of you, (and henceforth you will live a life,) some of you being the enemies of others. There shall be for you on the earth a habitation and provision until an appointed time."
2|37| (Aware of his lapse and in the hope of retrieving his error, rather than attempting to find excuses for it,) Adam received from his Lord words that he perceived to be inspired in him (because of his remorse, and he pleaded through them for God’s forgiveness). In return, He accepted his repentance. He is the One Who accepts repentance and returns it with liberal forgiveness and additional reward, the All-Compassionate (especially towards His believing servants).
2|38| We said: "Go down, all of you, from there!" (and executed Our order). If, henceforth, a guidance (like a Book through a Messenger) comes to you from Me, and whoever follows My guidance (and turns to Me with faith and worship), they will have no fear (in this world and the next, for they will always find My help and support with them), nor will they grieve."
2|39| But those who disbelieve and deny Our signs (the verses of the revealed Book of guidance as well as the signs in both their inner world and the outer world establishing My Existence and Unity and other pillars of faith), they will be the companions of the Fire; they will abide therein.
2|40| O Children of Israel! Remember My favor that I bestowed upon you, and fulfill My covenant (which I made with you through your Prophets), so that I fulfill your covenant, and of Me alone be in awe and fear (in awareness of My Power and of your being My servants).
2|41| Believe in that which I have sent down (the Qur’an), confirming what (of the truth) you already possess, and do not be the first to disbelieve in it. And (you scribes, fearful of losing your status and the worldly benefit accruing from it) do not sell My Revelations for a trifling price (such as worldly gains, status and renown); and in Me alone seek refuge through reverence for Me and piety.
2|42| Do not confound the truth by mixing it with falsehood, and do not conceal the truth while you know (the meaning and outcome of what you do, and that what you strive to hide is true, and that Muhammad is the Messenger of God, whose coming you have been anticipating).
2|43| Establish the Prayer, and pay the Prescribed Purifying Alms (the Zakah); and bow (in the Prayer, not by forming a different community or congregation, but) together with those who bow (the Muslims).
2|44| Do you enjoin upon people godliness and virtue but forget your own selves, (even) while you recite the Book (and see therein the orders, prohibitions, exhortations and warnings)? Will you not understand and come to your senses?
2|45| Seek help through patience (and fasting, which requires and enables great patience), and through the Prayer. Indeed the Prayer is burdensome, but not for those humbled by their reverence of God:
2|46| Those who feel as if always in the Presence of their Lord, having met with Him; and are certain of following the way to return to Him.
2|47| O Children of Israel! Remember My favor that I bestowed upon you, and that I once exalted you above all peoples;
2|48| And be fearful of and strive to be guarded against a day when (everybody will be seeking a means to save himself, and when) no soul will pay on behalf of another, nor will any intercession (of the sort common in the world but which does not meet with God’s permission and approval) be accepted from any of them, nor will compensation be received from them, nor will they be helped.
2|49| And (remember) that We saved you from the clan (the court and military aristocracy) of the Pharaoh, afflicting you with the most evil suffering (by enslaving you to such laborious tasks as construction, transportation and farming ), slaughtering your sons and letting live your womenfolk (for further humiliation and suffering). In that was a grievous trial from your Lord.
2|50| And remember when (after years of struggle to escape Egypt, you had just reached the sea with the army of the Pharaoh in close pursuit and) We parted the sea for you and saved you, and (as sheer grace from Us, which you had no part in) caused the family of the Pharaoh to drown while you were looking on.
2|51| And when on another occasion We appointed with Moses forty nights, then (during the time he stayed on Mount Sinai; ) you adopted the (golden) calf as deity and worshipped it after him; and you were wronging yourselves thereby with a most heinous wrong.
2|52| Then (even though adopting as deity any other than God is an unpardonable sin, We accepted your atonement and) We pardoned you after that, that you might (acknowledge Our many and great favors to you and) give thanks (believing in God and worshipping Him alone, and carrying out His commandments.)
2|53| And remember when We granted Moses (while he was on Mount Sinai for forty nights) the Book and the Criterion to distinguish between truth and falsehood, and the knowledge, and power of judgment to put it into effect, that you might be guided to truth and abide by it.
2|54| And when Moses said to his people: "O my people, assuredly you have wronged yourselves by adopting the (golden) calf as deity; so turn in repentance to your All-Holy Creator (Who is absolutely above having any partners), and kill amongst yourselves those who have committed that great offense, thus purifying yourselves of this tremendous sin. That will be best for you in the sight of your All-Holy Creator, and He will accept your repentance and pardon you. Surely He is the One Who accepts repentance and returns it with liberal forgiveness and additional reward, the All-Compassionate.
2|55| And (despite all that had occurred and the manifest signs of your Lord that you witnessed over many years, a time came) when you said: "Moses, we will never believe in you (whether the commandments you have brought are really from God) unless we plainly see God (speaking to you)." Thereupon the thunderbolt (that you saw come unexpectedly) seized you. Motionless as if dead, you were gazing.
2|56| Then after that death-like state (and your spiritual death), We revived you (recovering you from the death-like state) so that you might give thanks.
2|57| And (since, unaided, you could not survive in the desert without shelter and food) We caused the cloud (which you plainly saw was assigned for you) to shade you, and sent down upon you manna and quails: "Eat of the pure, wholesome things that We have provided for you." Yet (in breaking the laws, in refusing to obey the injunctions about even those foods) they did not wrong Us but they were wronging themselves.
2|58| And remember (after you had been wandering in the desert, how We guided you to a town) when We commanded: "Enter this town and eat (of the fruits) thereof as you may desire to your hearts’ content. Enter it (not through different ways with the aim of plundering and massacring its people but) through its gate humbly and in utmost submission to God. Say words of imploring forgiveness and loyalty to Him, that We forgive you your misdeeds." We will increase the reward for those devoted to doing good, aware that God is seeing them.
2|59| Then those who persisted in wrongdoing changed what had been said to them (regarding humility, imploring forgiveness, submission, and loyalty) for another saying (and so acted contrarily to how they had been ordered.) So We sent down upon those who did wrong a scourge from heaven because they were continually transgressing .
2|60| Again (remember) when Moses (on an occasion when his people were without water in the desert) beseeched water for his people, so We told him: "Strike the rock with your staff!" (As soon as he struck) there gushed forth from it twelve springs. Each tribe knew their drinking place. Eat and drink of that which God has provided, and do not go about acting wickedly on earth, causing disorder and corruption.
2|61| And (remember the time) when you said: "Moses, we will no longer be able to endure one sort of food. Pray for us to your Lord, that He may bring forth for us of all that the soil produces – its green herbs, and its cucumbers, and its corn, and its lentils, and its onions." He (Moses) responded: "Would you have in exchange what is meaner for what is better? Get you down to Egypt (or some city); surely there is for you there what you ask for." So in the end ignominy and misery were pitched upon them, and they earned wrath (a humiliating punishment) from God. That was because they were persistently disbelieving in Our Revelations and rejecting Our signs (despite continuously observing them in their lives), and killing the Prophets against all right and truth. That was because they disobeyed and kept on exceeding the bounds (of the Law).
2|62| (The truth is not as they – the Jews – claim, but this:) Those who believe (i.e. professing to be Muslims), or those who declare Judaism, or the Christians or the Sabaeans (or those of some other faith) – whoever truly believes in God and the Last Day and does good, righteous deeds, surely their reward is with their Lord, and they will have no fear, nor will they grieve.
2|63| And (remember) when We took your promise (to keep Our covenant) and (in order to stress the importance of both the covenant and keeping it, and warn you against breaking it,) We raised the Mount (causing it to tower) over you: "Hold firmly to what We haven given you (of the Book) and study its commandments and instructions so that you may attain reverent piety toward God and His protection (against any kind of straying and its consequent punishment in this world and the Hereafter.)"
2|64| Then, after that, you turned away again (breaking your promise and disobeying the commandments of the Book). So, had it not been for the grace of God to you and His mercy (overlooking your offenses and forgiving you,) surely you would have been of the losers (in this world and the next.).
2|65| You surely know of those among you who exceeded the bounds with respect to the Sabbath, how We said to them, "Be you apes, miserably slinking and rejected."
2|66| We made it a severe affliction exemplary for their own generations and those to follow them, and instruction and guidance for the God-revering, pious.
2|67| And (remember) when Moses told his people: "God commands you to sacrifice a cow." They responded: "Are you making fun of us?" He replied: "I seek refuge in God lest I should be among the ignorant (by making fun of anybody.)"
2|68| They said, "Pray for us to your Lord that He may make clear to us what it should be like." He (Moses) answered: "He says, it should be a cow neither old nor virgin, middling between the two. So do what you are commanded."
2|69| They (continuing to make trouble about the matter) responded: "Pray for us to your Lord that He may make clear to us what color it should be." He (Moses) answered: "He says, it should be a yellow cow, radiant its color, gladdening those who see."
2|70| They (still unwilling to carry out the order) replied: "Pray for us to your Lord that He make clear to us what it should be like; cows are much alike to us; and if God wills, we will then be guided (to find the precise type of cow we are commanded to sacrifice, and sacrifice it.)"
2|71| He (Moses) answered: "He says, it is a cow unyoked to plough the earth or water the tillage, one kept secure and sound, with no blemish on it." "Now you have brought the truth," they answered; and they sacrificed it, though they all but did not.
2|72| And (remember also) when you had killed a living soul, and were accusing one another to deny the responsibility, but God would disclose what you were concealing.
2|73| So We commanded: "Strike him (the corpse) with part of it (the sacrificed cow)." (So they did and the corpse, brought to life, informed of the murderer.) Even so God brings to life the dead, and shows you the signs (of His Power, Oneness and way of acting), that you may understand the truth, (and have no doubt at all, concerning the essentials of faith).
2|74| Then, a while after that, your hearts became hardened; they were like rocks, or even harder, for there are rocks from which rivers come gushing; there are some that split and water issues from them; and there are still others that roll down for fear and awe of God. (Whereas your hearts are harder than rocks, and) God is not unaware and unmindful of what you do.
2|75| (O community of the believers!) Do you hope that those people (whose hearts have become more hardened than rocks and who have continually shown disloyalty to God,) will believe you (and believe in the Prophet Muhammad, and in the Book he brought and the Religion he preaches)? (It is surely not possible) when there has been a party among them that hear the Word of God, and then, after they reasoned and judged it (to be the Word of God), have tampered with it knowingly.
2|76| When they meet those who believe, they declare (hypocritically), "We believe (in what you believe in);" but when they are alone with one another in private, they say (chiding each other): "Will you tell them what God has disclosed to you, that they might use it as an argument against you before your Lord? Do you have no sense?
2|77| Do they not know that surely God knows what they keep concealed and what they disclose?
2|78| Among them are the illiterate folk who do not know anything about the Book except fancies from hearsay, and merely follow their conjectures.
2|79| Woe, then, to those who write the Book with their hands (interpolating into it their readings of the Scriptures and their explanatory notes thereto, stories from their national history, superstitious ideas and fancies, philosophical doctrines and legal rules) and then in order to sell it for a trifling price (such as worldly benefit, status, and renown), they declare: "This is from God." So woe to them for what their hands have written and woe to them for what they have earned (of the worldly income and the sin thereby).
2|80| They say (despite all that): "The Fire will not touch us at all except for a certain number of days." Say, then, (to them): "Have you made a covenant with God and received a promise from Him? If so, God will never break His covenant. Or do you say things against God that you do not know?"
2|81| (It is indeed the case that you speak in ignorance. The truth is,) rather, that whoever earns an evil (by his free will) and his vices engulf him – those are the companions of the Fire; they will abide therein.
2|82| While those who believe and do good, righteous deeds, those are the companions of Paradise; they will abide therein.
2|83| And (remember) when We took a promise from the Children of Israel: You shall worship none save God (as the only Deity, Lord and Sovereign), and do good to parents in the best way possible, and to the near (relatives), to the orphans, and to the destitute; and speak kindly and well to the people; and establish the Prayer, and pay the Prescribed Purifying Alms. But then you turned away in aversion, all except a few of you; in fact you are a people always avoiding your compacts and responsibilities.
2|84| And (remember also) when We took a promise from you: you shall not shed blood among yourselves, and shall not expel one another from your habitations. You confirmed it, and you yourselves were (and still must be) witnesses to it.
2|85| Then, here you are, killing one another, and expelling a party of your own from their habitations, conspiring against them in iniquity and enmity. If you take them as captives, you hold them to ransom, and if they are brought to you as captives, you ransom them; yet their expulsion was made religiously forbidden to you. Then (like a people having no sense) do you believe in part of the Book, and disbelieve in part? What else, then, could be the recompense of those of you who act thus than disgrace in the life of this world? On the Day of Resurrection, they will be consigned to the severest of punishment. God is not unaware and unmindful of what you do.
2|86| Such are the ones who have bought the present, worldly life (the life of corporeal desires and ambitions) in exchange for the Hereafter. So (in consequence of this exchange) the punishment will not be lightened for them, nor will they be helped (not saved from the punishment in any of the ways they resort to in the world such as bribery, influence, or unjust intercession).
2|87| (That is their just deserts. For) We assuredly granted Moses the Book, and after him sent succeeding Messengers (in the footsteps of Moses to judge according to the Book, and thus We have never left them without guides and the light of guidance.) And (in the same succession) We granted Jesus son of Mary the clear proofs of the truth (and of his Messengership), and confirmed him with the Spirit of Holiness. Is it (ever so) that whenever a Messenger comes to you with what (as a message and commandments) does not suit your selves, you grow arrogant, denying some of them (the Messengers) and killing others?
2|88| (Despite all such favors, affection, forgiveness, advice and truths, they refuse to believe, and by way of excuse they ask derisively: "Do we need any of what you have to tell?" Recognizing that what they are told has no effect on them) they say: "Our hearts have become covered (callous, no longer having any ability to believe)." No! Rather, because of their unbelief God has cursed them (excluded them from His mercy and set a seal on their hearts and hearing and a veil on their eyes.) So, little do they believe (or can admit of the truth).
2|89| And when there has (now) come to them a Book from God, confirming what (of the truth) they already possess – and though before that they were asking for a victory over the (tribes of al-Aws and Khazraj who were then) unbelievers, (saying: "The Last Prophet will come and we will defeat and destroy you under his leadership") – and when there has come to them what they recognize (as well as their own sons), they have disbelieved in it. Then God’s curse (rejection) is on the unbelievers.
2|90| How evil is that for which they have sold themselves: (they have disbelieved in what God has sent down) begrudging that God should send down out of His grace the Book (and bestow Messengership) on whomever He wills of His servants. So they have earned wrath upon wrath. And, (as with other unbelievers who, defeated by their haughtiness, malicious envy, racial prejudice, worldly desires and ambitions, knowingly reject the truth) for those unbelievers is a shameful, humiliating punishment.
2|91| And when they are told (since the sign of a believer is believing in whatever God has sent down): "Believe in that which He has sent down (on Muhammad, namely the Qur’an)," they retort: "We believe in only what was sent down on us," and they disbelieve in what is beyond that, though it is the truth, confirming what (of the truth) they already possess. Say (to them, O Messenger): "Why then did you kill the Prophets of God before, if indeed you are believers (loyal to what was sent down on you)?"
2|92| Assuredly, Moses came to you with the clear proofs of the truth. Then however, very soon after he left you, you adopted the calf as deity, proving yourselves to be wrongdoers (who were continually committing such sins as breaking your covenants with God and serving false deities in His place).
2|93| And (remember) when We took your promise (to keep Our covenant) and (in order to stress the importance of both the covenant and keeping it, and warn you against breaking it) We raised the Mount (and caused it to tower) above you: Hold firmly to what We haven given you (of the Book) and give ear (to Our commandments and obey Moses.) They replied: "We give ear," (but by doing the opposite of what they were commanded, they meant) "we disobey." Because of their unbelief, they were made to drink into their hearts (love of) the calf (with then no place left therein for faith). Say (to them): "How evil is that which your belief enjoins on you, if you are believers."
2|94| Say (to them again): "If (as you claim, you are the beloved ones of God and the sole followers of the Straight Path, and therefore) the abode of the Hereafter with God is (reserved) for you alone, excluding other people, then long for death, if you are sincere in your belief and truthful in your claim."
2|95| But because of what they have forwarded with their own hands (to the Hereafter, namely the sins and offenses which have destroyed the desire in them to meet God), they will never long for it. God has full knowledge of the wrongdoers (who wrong their own selves by what they have done).
2|96| And you will undoubtedly find them the greediest of all people for life, (more greedy) than even those who associate partners with God. Everyone of them wishes if only he might be spared for a thousand years, yet his being spared to live will not remove him from the punishment. God sees well all that they do.
2|97| (This is not all. They feel enmity toward Gabriel because he brings the Qur’an to you, not to one among them.) Say (O Messenger, to them): "(The Lord of the worlds, my and your Lord, declares:) ‘Whoever is an enemy to Gabriel (should know that) it is he who brings down the Qur’an on your heart by the leave of God, (not of his own accord), confirming (the Divine origin of and the truths still contained in) the Revelations prior to it, and (serving as) guidance and glad tidings for the believers.’"
2|98| (Enmity to Gabriel, who does nothing other than what he is commanded to do by God, means enmity to God and to His will.) Whoever is an enemy to God, and His angels, and His Messengers, and (so) Gabriel, and Michael, (should know that) God is surely an enemy to the unbelievers.
2|99| (O Messenger, do not grieve about their persistence in unbelief!) Assuredly We have sent down to you truths so manifest (that they both prove your Messengership and the Divine Authorship of the Qur’an as brightly as the sunlight). None disbelieve in them except transgressors (who have strayed from the Straight Path in belief, thought and conduct.)
2|100| Is it not ever so that whenever they (those transgressors) make a covenant, a party of them set it aside? (Indeed, they do so, and they are not a small party,) rather, most of them do not believe (so that they might be expected to keep their covenant.)
2|101| (This is not all.) When (finally) there has come to them a Messenger from God, confirming what (of the truth) they already possess, a party of those who were given the Book (the Torah) have (instead of paying heed to what it contains concerning the Last Messenger) flung the Book of God (the Qur’an) behind their backs, as if they did not know (that it is a Book from God and that the Messenger who has brought it is the Last Prophet they have been anticipating.)
2|102| And (just as their ancestors did) they follow the fictions the satans invented and spread about the rule of Solomon (falsely attributing his employment of jinn, devils, and animals in his kingdom to sorcery). But (ascribing creativity or creative effect to sorcery is a kind of unbelief and) Solomon (being a Prophet and excellent servant of God) never disbelieved. Rather, the satans (who spread false things about his rule) disbelieved, teaching people sorcery and the (distorted form of the) knowledge that was sent down on Harut and Marut, the two angels in Babylon. And they (these two angels charged with teaching people some occult sciences such as breaking a spell and protection against sorcery) never taught them to anyone without first warning, "We are a trial, so do not disbelieve (– It is risky to learn the knowledge given to us, therefore use it in lawful ways, and beware of committing an act of unbelief by abusing it.)" And (yet) they (those who followed the falsehoods of the satans) learned from them (the two angels) that by which they might divide a man and his wife. But (though they wrongly attributed creative power to sorcery, in fact) they could not harm anyone thereby save by the leave of God. And they learned what would harm them, not what would profit them. Assuredly, they knew well that he who bought it (in exchange for God’s Book) will have no share (no happy portion) in the Hereafter. How evil was that for which they sold their selves; and if only they had known (acted like people of true knowledge and understanding).
2|103| And if only they had believed and, in fear and reverence of God, sought to deserve His protection (against their straying and His punishment), a reward from God (of which they could not conceive) would have been absolutely good; if only they had known (acted like people of true knowledge and understanding).
2|104| O you who believe! Do not say (in your relationship and conversations with God’s Messenger,) ra‘ina (please attend to us), but say, unzurna (favor us with your attention), and pay heed to him. (And be assured that) for the unbelievers (who are disrespectful to God’s Messenger) is a painful punishment.
2|105| Those who disbelieve among the People of the Book (by denying any of the Prophets or Divine Books or associating partners with God or cherishing enmity to His angels or in another way), and those who associate partners with God (among the people of Makkah and others) love not that there should be sent down on you any good from your Lord. But God singles out for His mercy (of favoring with Prophethood or another similar mission) whom He wills. God is of tremendous grace.
2|106| (Though they would exploit the abrogation of some rules of secondary degree to challenge your authority, the truth is that) We do not abrogate any verse or omit it (leaving it to be forgotten) but We bring one better than it or the like of it (more suited to the time and conditions in the course of perfecting religion and completing Our favor upon you). Do you not know (and surely you do know) that God has full power over everything?
2|107| Do you not know (and surely you do know) that God is He to Whom belongs the sovereignty (absolute ownership and dominion) of the heavens and the earth (with all that is therein)? (He acts as He wills in His dominion, and you are His servants wholly submitted to Him. Given this, and unless He wills,) you have, apart from God, neither a guardian (to whom you can entrust your affairs) nor a helper.
2|108| Or do you desire (prompted by the unbelievers among the People of the Book and without perceiving the wisdom in the abrogation of some verses) to harass your Messenger with senseless questions and unanswerable demands (such as seeing God plainly) as Moses was harassed before? Whoever exchanges faith for unbelief has surely strayed from the right, even way.
2|109| Many among the People of the Book, out of the envy ingrained in their souls, wish they could restore you as unbelievers after you have believed, after the truth was clear to them (that the Qur’an is God’s Word and Muhammad is the last, awaited Messenger). Yet pardon and overlook them (avoiding useless debates and polemics with them) until God brings in His verdict about them. Surely God has full power over everything.
2|110| (Let your concern be to) establish the Prayer in conformity with its conditions and pay the Prescribed Purifying Alms. Whatever good you send ahead (to your future life in this world and the next) to your own souls’ account, you will find it with God. Whatever (good or evil) you do, surely God sees it well.
2|111| They (Jews or Christians) say that none will enter Paradise unless he be a Jew or a Christian. That is their wishfulness (vain desires and fancies). Say (to them, O Messenger): "Produce your proof if you are truthful (in and convinced of your claim)!"
2|112| No! Rather, whoever submits his whole being to God (and does so) as one devoted to doing good, aware that God is seeing him, his reward is with his Lord, and all such will have no fear (in this world and the next, for they will always find My help and support with them), nor will they grieve.
2|113| The Jews say the Christians have nothing (from God) to be based on, and the Christians say the Jews have nothing (from God) to be based on; yet they (both) recite the Book. So too those who have no knowledge (from God) say the like of their word. God will judge between them on the Day of Resurrection concerning what they have been disputing.
2|114| Who is greater in doing wrong than he who bars God’s places of worship, so that His Name be not mentioned and invoked in them, and strives to ruin them? Such people might never enter them, save in fear (whether because of their alienation from the Religion or because they try to destroy them owing to their animosity against God). For them is disgrace in the world, and in the Hereafter a tremendous punishment.
2|115| (They attempt to exploit the issue of qiblah – the direction of Prayer – as a pretext to bar Muslims from places of worship and to prevent God’s Name being mentioned and invoked in them.) To God belong the East and the West (and therefore the whole earth with its east and west: wherever you are, you can turn to Him in the Prayer). Then, in whatever direction you turn, there is the "Face" of God. God is All-Embracing (with His mercy), All-Knowing.
2|116| And (despite this fact and that God is infinite, with nothing to restrict Him, and therefore has no equal or like) they claim that God has taken to Him a son. All-Glorified He is (in that He is absolutely above having any attributes particular to those contained in time and space). Rather, to Him belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth (under His absolute rule;) all are (by their very nature as beings created by Him) subservient to Him.
2|117| The Originator of the heavens and the earth with nothing preceding Him to imitate. When He decrees a thing, He does but say to it "Be!" and it is.
2|118| Those who have no knowledge (from Him, those who do not recognize God, and therefore lead an ignorant life) say: "Why does not God speak to us (directly) or a manifest sign (a miracle) come to us?" So spoke those before them, a word like theirs. Their hearts are alike. Yet We have made clear the signs (the Revelations establishing the Unity and Sovereignty of God, the Messengership of Muhammad, and the Divine authorship of the Qur’an,) to a people who seek certainty (with open, inquiring minds).
2|119| (O Messenger! Let not what they say grieve you.) Assuredly We have sent you as a Messenger with the truth (with the true Book and clear truths) as a bearer of glad tidings (of prosperity in return for faith and righteousness) and as a warner (against the consequences of straying and transgression). You (carry out your duty truly and perfectly, and therefore) will not be questioned concerning the companions of the Blazing Flame.
2|120| Never will the Jews be pleased with you, nor the Christians, unless you follow their way of faith and life. Say (to them, O Messenger): "God’s guidance (represented by the Qur’an) is the true guidance." If (supposing the impossible) you were to follow their desires and fancies after the knowledge that has come to you, you will have against God neither a guardian (who can protect you from His punishment) nor a helper.
2|121| Those (people) to whom We gave the Book (and who) recite it with true recitation, following its commandments without making any changes or distortions in it: they have (renewed, ever-strengthening) faith in it. Whoever disbelieves in it (conceals and distorts the truths the Book contains): they are the losers (in both this world and the Hereafter).
2|122| O Children of Israel! Remember My favor that I bestowed upon you (by choosing Prophets and Messengers from amongst you and granting you a great kingdom, and by giving you a Book and guiding you to the Straight Path), and that I once exalted you above all peoples.
2|123| And be fearful and strive to be guarded against a day when (everybody will be seeking a means to save himself, and when) no soul will pay on behalf of another, nor will compensation be accepted from any of them, nor will any intercession (of the sort common in the world but which does not meet with God’s permission and approval) be of use to them, nor will they be helped.
2|124| (You refuse to believe in and follow Muhammad chiefly because Prophethood was not retained with you and so he did not appear amongst you. Now, you surely do admit Abraham’s Prophethood, so) remember that his Lord tested Abraham with commands and ordeals (such as his being thrown into a fire, the destruction of the people of his kinsman Lot, and his being ordered to sacrifice his son Ishmael), and he fulfilled them thoroughly. He said: "Indeed I will make you an imam for all people." He (Abraham) pleaded: "(Will You appoint imams) also from my offspring?" He (his Lord) answered: "(I will appoint from among those who merit it. But) My covenant does not include the wrongdoers."
2|125| Remember, again, that We made the House (the Ka‘bah in Makkah) a resort for people, and a refuge of safety (a sanctuary, that is, a sign of the truth). Stand in the Prayer (O believers, as you did in earlier times) in the Station of Abraham. And We imposed a duty on Abraham and Ishmael: "Purify My House for those who go around it as a rite of worship, and those who abide in devotion, and those who bow and prostrate (in the Prayer)."
2|126| And (remember) once Abraham prayed: "My Lord! Make this (untilled valley) a land of security, and provide its people with the produce of earth, such of them as believe in God and the Last Day." He (his Lord) answered: "(I will bestow provision upon both believers and unbelievers. But) whoever is thankless and disbelieves, I will provide for him to enjoy himself for a short while, then I will compel him to the punishment of the Fire – how evil a destination to arrive at!
2|127| And when Abraham, and Ishmael with him, raised the foundations of the House (they were praying): "Our Lord! Accept (this service) from us. Surely You are the All-Hearing, the All-Knowing.
2|128| "Our Lord! Make us Muslims, submissive to You, and of our offspring a community Muslim, submissive to You. Show us our rites of worship (including particularly the rites of the Pilgrimage) and accept our repentance (for our inability to worship You as worshipping You requires). Surely You are the One Who accepts repentance and returns it with liberal forgiveness and additional reward, the All-Compassionate.
2|129| "Our Lord! Raise up among that community a Messenger of their own, reciting to them Your Revelations, and instructing them in the Book (that You will reveal to him) and the Wisdom, and purifying them (of false beliefs and doctrines, of sins and all kinds of uncleanness). Surely You are the All-Glorious with irresistible might, the All-Wise."
2|130| Who (therefore) shrinks from the Way of Abraham, save him who makes himself a fool. Indeed We chose him as one pure and distinguished in the world, and he is surely among the righteous in the Hereafter.
2|131| When his Lord told him, "Submit yourself wholly (to your Lord)," he responded: "I have submitted myself wholly to the Lord of the worlds."
2|132| Abraham bequeathed and enjoined this submission to his sons (Ishmael and Isaac) and (to his grandson) Jacob, saying: "My sons, God has chosen for you (from different ways of faith and life) the Religion (of Islam, based on submission to Him and absolutely free from any kind of associating partners with Him). Therefore, make sure that you do not die except as Muslims (those submitted to Him exclusively)."
2|133| Or were you (O Children of Israel, of Jacob) witnesses when death came to Jacob (so that you might claim that he bequeathed and enjoined a religion otherwise than as Abraham did, to give yourselves an excuse for refusing Islam,) when he said to his sons: "What will you worship after me?" They answered: "We will worship your God and the God of your fathers, Abraham, Ishmael, and Isaac, One God; we are Muslims submitted to Him."
2|134| Those were a people that passed away. Theirs is what they earned, and yours is what you earn. You will not be called to account for what they used to do.
2|135| And they (the Jews) say, "Be Jews" or (the Christians say,) "Be Christians (hudan aw nasara), that you may be rightly guided." Say (to them, O Messenger): "Rather, the Way of Abraham of pure faith (is what we choose, the Way free from unbelief, associating partners with God and hypocrisy, that we may be rightly guided.)" Abraham was never of those who associate partners with God.
2|136| (O Muslims! You) declare: "We have believed in God (without associating any partners with Him), and that which has been sent down to us, and that which was sent down to Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob and the Prophets who were raised in the tribes, and that which was given to Moses and Jesus, and that (knowledge, Wisdom and Prophethood) which was given to all other Prophets from their Lord. We make no distinction between any of them (in believing), and we are Muslims (submitted to Him wholly and exclusively)."
2|137| If (the Jews and Christians who claim to be guided) believe in the same as that which you believe in, they are rightly guided; but if they turn away, then they are in schism. God suffices you against them. He is the All-Hearing, the All-Knowing.
2|138| (O Muslims, say: "We take) the "color" of God (the "color" that He has put on the whole universe, not the color some party put upon themselves through some rites in the name of religion )." Who is better than God in coloring, (and whose color is better than God’s)? And We are those who worship Him (as He is to be worshipped,) exclusively."
2|139| Say: "Do you dispute with us concerning God (as if He had said Paradise is only for the Jews or the Christians) seeing that He is our Lord and your Lord (He has created and provides for us as well as for you). (Whatever He commands us to believe, He also commands you to believe. Yet if you persist in disputing and asserting your superiority, then) to us are accounted our deeds, and to you, your deeds. It is we who are sincere to Him (in believing in Him and worshipping Him exclusively)."
2|140| Or do you claim that Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob and the Prophets who were raised in the tribes were "Jews" or "Christians?" Say (to them): "Do you know better, or does God?" (They know well that any of the Prophets were neither "Jews" nor "Christians," but they conceal the truth.) Who is greater in wrongdoing than he who conceals the testimony he has from God? God is never unaware and unmindful of what you do.
2|141| Those were a people that passed away. Theirs is what they earned, and yours is what you earn. You will not be called to account for what they used to do.
2|142| The (hypocritical) fools among the people will say, "What has turned them from the direction they were facing in the Prayer?" Say (O Messenger): "To God belong the east and the west (and therefore the whole earth with its easts and wests; in whatever direction He wants us to turn, we turn). He guides whomever He wills to a straight path."
2|143| And in that way (O Community of Muhammad! whereas others turn in different directions and, straying from the Straight Path, falter between extremes in thought and belief) We have made you a middle-way community, that you may be witnesses for the people (as to the ways they follow), and that the (most noble) Messenger may be a witness for you. We formerly appointed (the Bayt al-Maqdis in Jerusalem) the direction to turn in the Prayer (and now are about to change it) so that We may determine who truly follows the Messenger from him who turns back on his heels (when the Messenger’s way does not suit his desires). And indeed that testing was burdensome, save for those whom God has guided (and made steadfast in faith). God will never let your faith go to waste. Surely God is for the people All-Pitying, All-Compassionate.
2|144| Certainly We have seen you (O Messenger) often turning your face to heaven (in expectation of a Revelation. Do not worry, for) We will surely turn you towards a direction that will please and satisfy you. (Now the time has come, so) turn your face towards the Sacred Mosque. (And you, O believers) turn your faces towards it wherever you are. Surely those who were given the Book (before, no matter if the hypocrites or the foolish among them deny or object to it) do know (the coming of this Prophet and this change of qiblah) to be true (commandments) from their Lord. God is not unaware or unmindful of whatever they do.
2|145| Even if (O Messenger) you were to bring to those who were given the Book (before) all kinds of signs and evidences, they would not follow your direction (qiblah). Indeed you are not a follower of their direction, nor are they followers of one another’s direction. (Theirs is an attitude arising from their fancies and desires, not from knowledge.) Were you to follow their fancies and desires after the knowledge that has come to you, then you would surely be among the wrongdoers (those who wrong themselves because of the errors they have done).
2|146| Those to whom We gave the Book (before) know him (the Messenger with all his distinguishing attributes including the direction he will turn to in the Prayer) as they know their own sons. Yet a party among them conceal the truth and they do it knowingly.
2|147| It (your turning towards the Sacred Mosque, O Messenger,) is the truth from your Lord, and only that which is from your Lord is the truth; be not, then, among the doubters.
2|148| Every people has a direction towards which they turn, (a goal they turn to in life, and those who turn to the Sacred Mosque have a way they follow to their goal). So strive together as if in a race, (O community of believers,) towards all that is good. Wherever you may be, God will bring you all together. Surely God has full power over everything.
2|149| From wherever you go out (for journeying), turn your face (O Messenger) towards the Sacred Mosque (in the Prayer). This is the truth from your Lord. (O you who believe! Do the same, for) God is not unaware and unmindful of what you do.
2|150| From wherever you go out (for journeying), turn your face (O Messenger) towards the Sacred Mosque (in the Prayer). Wherever you may be, (O you who believe,) turn your faces towards it, that the people may not have an argument against you – unless they be those immersed in wrongdoing; and hold not them in awe, but stand in awe of Me – and that I may complete My favor (of faith and Islam) upon you, and that you may be wholly guided (in Islam to the truth.)
2|151| As We have sent among you a Messenger of your own, reciting to you Our Revelations, and purifying you (of false beliefs and doctrines, and sins, and all kinds of uncleanness), and instructing you in the Book and the Wisdom, and instructing you in whatever you do not know.
2|152| So (in return for all that) always remember and make mention of Me (when service to Me is due), that I may remember and make mention of you (when judgment and recompense are due); and give thanks to Me, and do not be ungrateful to Me.
2|153| O you who believe! Seek help (against all kinds of hardships and tribulations) through persevering patience and the Prayer; surely God is with the persevering and patient.
2|154| And say not of those who are killed in God’s cause: "They are dead." Rather they are alive, but you are not aware.
2|155| We will certainly test you with something of fear and hunger, and loss of wealth and lives and fruits (earnings); but give glad tidings to the persevering and patient:
2|156| Those who, when a disaster befalls them, say, "Surely we belong to God (as His creatures and servants) and surely to Him we are bound to return." (And they act accordingly.)
2|157| Such are those upon whom are blessings from their Lord (such as forgiveness, answering their calls and satisfying their needs) and mercy (to come in the form of help in both this world and Hereafter, and favors in Paradise beyond human imagination); and they are the rightly guided ones.
2|158| (The hills of) as-Safa and Marwah are among the emblems God has appointed (to represent Islam and the Muslim community). Hence whoever does the Hajj (the Major Pilgrimage) to the House (of God, the Ka‘bah) or the ‘Umrah (the Minor Pilgrimage), there is no blame on him to run between them (and let them run after they go round the Ka‘bah as an obligatory rite). And whoever does a good work voluntarily (such as additional going-round the Ka‘bah and running between as-Safa and Marwah, and other kinds of good works) surely God is All-Responsive to thankfulness, All-Knowing.
2|159| Those who conceal anything of the clear truths (concerning the fundamentals of the Religion, including Muhammad’s Messengership in particular) and (the Revelations conveying) the Guidance that We have sent down, after We have made them clear in the Book – God curses such people (excludes them from His mercy) and so do all who (have any authority to) curse.
2|160| Except those who repent and mend their ways, and openly declare (those signs and Revelations) – for those, I return their repentance with forgiveness (and include them in My special mercy). I am the One Who accepts repentance and returns it with liberal forgiveness and additional reward, the All-Compassionate.
2|161| But those who reject belief (demonstrated in their persisting in concealing the truths) and die unbelievers, on them is the curse of God and the angels, and of all humankind.
2|162| Abiding therein (in the Fire, the consequence or place of the curse); the punishment will not be lightened for them, nor will they be reprieved.
2|163| (So, O people, refrain from concealing the truths and from disbelieving, and do not seek in vain a source of help and another refuge for yourselves. For) Your God is One God; there is no deity but He, the All-Merciful, the All-Compassionate.
2|164| Surely in the creation of the heavens and the earth, and the alternation of night and day (with their periods shortening and lengthening), and the vessels sailing in the sea with profit to people, and the water that God sends down from the sky, therewith reviving the earth after its death and dispersing therein all kinds of living creatures, and His disposal of the winds, and the clouds subservient between sky and earth – surely there are signs (demonstrating that He is the One God deserving worship, and the sole Refuge and Helper) for a people who use their reason.
2|165| Yet there are among humankind those who (devoid of good sense and unable to reason), take to themselves objects of worship as rivals to God, loving them with a love like that which is the due of God only – while those who truly believe are firmer in their love of God. If only those who do this (greatest) wrong could see – as they will see when they behold the punishment – that the power altogether belongs to God, and that God is severe in punishment.
2|166| At that time those who were followed (in the world as elders, heads, or leaders and loved as only God is to be loved) disown those who followed them and declare themselves innocent of their evil deeds, and they see the punishment, and the relations between them are cut off.
2|167| And those who followed say: "If only we might return (to the world) and disown them, as they have disowned us." Thus does God show them their deeds in a manner that will cause them bitter regrets. Never will they come out of the Fire.
2|168| O humankind! (Observe whatever God commands you. He has made you dwell on the earth, so) eat of what is on the earth provided it is lawful, pure and wholesome (in composition and religiously); and do not follow in the footsteps of Satan (who deceives both those who are followed and those who follow); indeed he is a manifest enemy to you.
2|169| He only commands you to evil and indecency and that you should speak against God the things about which you have no (sure) knowledge.
2|170| When it is said to them (who follow in the footsteps of Satan), "Follow what God has sent down," they respond: "No, but we follow that (the traditions, customs, beliefs, and practices) which we found our forefathers in." What, even if their forefathers had no understanding of anything, and were not rightly guided?
2|171| The likeness of those who refuse to believe is that of those who hear, from the one who is calling them, nothing except a shouting and crying out – they are deaf, dumb and blind, and so they have no understanding of (what is said to them).
2|172| O you who believe! (Without concern for the rules the unbelievers contrive in regard to food) eat of the pure, wholesome things that We have provided for you, and (in return) give thanks to God, if you worship Him alone.
2|173| He has made unlawful to you only carrion, and blood, and the flesh of swine, and that (the animal) which is offered in the name of other than God. Yet whoever is constrained by dire necessity to eat of them, provided he does not covet (that which is forbidden) nor transgress (the bounds of necessity), no sin shall be on him. Surely God is All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate.
2|174| Those who conceal the truths and commandments in the Book that God has sent down, and sell them for a trifling price (such as worldly benefit, status and renown), they eat nothing but fire in their bellies. And God will not speak to them on the Day of Resurrection (when they will be in dire need to speak to Him to implore forgiveness and mercy), nor will He absolve them to pronounce them pure. For them is a painful punishment.
2|175| Such are the ones who have bought straying in exchange for guidance, and punishment in exchange for forgiveness. How they persevere in their striving to reach the Fire (and enduring it)!
2|176| That is so because God is sending down the Book with the truth, and there is nothing false in it. Those who are at variance regarding the Book (believing in part of it, disbelieving in part, and believing in one or some of the Divine Books, while disbelieving in the others), have certainly veered far (from the truth) into wide schism.
2|177| Godliness (and virtue) is not that you should turn your faces in the direction of the east and west; but he is godly who believes in God and the Last Day, the angels, the Book, and the Prophets, and gives away of his property with pleasure, although he loves it, to relatives, orphans, the destitute, the wayfarer, and those who have to beg (or who need a loan), and for the liberation of slaves, and establishes the Prayer and pays the Prescribed Purifying Alms. And those (are godly) who fulfill their covenant when they have engaged in a covenant, and who are patient and persevering in misfortune, hardship, and disease, and at the time of stress (such as battle between the truth and falsehood). Those are they who are true (in their faith), and those are they who have achieved righteousness, piety and due reverence for God.
2|178| O you who believe! Prescribed for you is retaliation in cases of (deliberate, unjust) killing: freeman for freeman, slave for slave, female for female. Yet if he (the murderer) is granted some remission by his brother (any of the heirs of the victim), then what falls on the pardoning side is fulfilling in fairness what has been agreed on, and the other side is making the payment kindly enough to please the other side. This is a lightening from your Lord, and a mercy. Whoever offends after that, for him is a painful punishment.
2|179| There is life for you in retaliation, (if you understand,) O people of discernment, so it may be that you (will perceive it and fulfill God’s command and in so doing) attain the desired piety and righteousness and deserve His protection.
2|180| Prescribed for you, when any of you is visited by death, if he leaves behind wealth, is to make testament in favor of his parents and near relatives according to customary good and religiously approvable practice – a duty for the truly God-revering, pious.
2|181| Then if anyone changes the will after hearing it (and the will is not carried out as it must be) then the sin thereof is on those who change it. Surely God is All-Hearing, All-Knowing.
2|182| But if anyone fears from the testator an injustice or sin and brings about a settlement between the parties (by making the necessary change), then no sin will be on him. Surely God is All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate.
2|183| O you who believe! Prescribed for you is the Fast, as it was prescribed for those before you, so that you may deserve God’s protection (against the temptations of your carnal soul) and attain piety.
2|184| (Fasting is for) a fixed number of days. If any of you is so ill that he cannot fast, or on a journey, he must fast the same number of other days. But for those who can no longer manage to fast, there is a redemption (penance) by feeding a person in destitution (for each day missed or giving him the same amount in money). Yet better it is for him who volunteers greater good (by either giving more or fasting in case of recovery), and that you should fast (when you are able to) is better for you, if you but knew (the worth of fasting).
2|185| The month of Ramadan, in which the Qur’an was sent down as guidance for people, and as clear signs of Guidance and the Criterion (between truth and falsehood). Therefore whoever of you is present this month, must fast it, and whoever is so ill that he cannot fast or on a journey (must fast the same) number of other days. God wills ease for you, and He does not will hardship for you, so that you can complete the number of the days required, and exalt God for He has guided you, and so it may be that you will give thanks (due to Him).
2|186| And when (O Messenger) My servants ask you about Me, then surely I am near: I answer the prayer of the suppliant when he prays to Me. So let them respond to My call (without hesitation), and believe and trust in Me (in the way required of them), so that they may be guided to spiritual and intellectual excellence and right conduct.
2|187| It is made lawful for you to go in to your wives on the night of the Fast. (There is such intimacy between you that) they are a garment for you (enfolding you to protect you against illicit relations and beautifying you) and you are (in the same way for the same reasons) a garment for them. God knows that (you felt that) you were betraying yourselves (by doing what you supposed was prohibited), and has turned to you in lenience (and protected you from possible sins by not legislating such a prohibition). So now associate in intimacy with them and seek what God has ordained for you. And (you are permitted to) eat and drink until you discern the white streak of dawn against the blackness of night; then observe the Fast until night sets in. But do not associate in intimacy with them (your wives) during the period when you are in retreat in the mosques. These are the bounds set by God; do not draw near them (keep a safe distance away from them). Thus does God make His Revelations clear to people, so that they may attain piety and be protected against the punishment therefor.
2|188| (Eat and drink, but do the kinds of worship that help you to control your soul such as the Fast.) And do not consume your wealth among yourselves in false ways (in vanities, sins and crimes such as theft, usurpation, bribery, usury, and gambling); nor proffer it to those in authority so that you may sinfully consume a portion of other people’s goods, and that knowingly.
2|189| They ask you (O Messenger) about the new moons (because of the month of Ramadan). Say: "They are appointed times (markers) for the people (to determine time periods) and for the Pilgrimage." (Do not link them to superstitions and superstitious behavior like entering dwellings by the back rather than the front.) It is not virtue that you enter dwellings from the backs of them, but virtue is (the state of) one who (truly believing in God) strives to attain righteousness and piety (by carrying out His commandments and refraining from His prohibitions). So come to dwellings (in the normal way) by their doors. (Do everything according to the rule and establish relations with your leader and among yourselves in proper terms.) And strive to obey God in due reverence for Him and piety so that you may prosper.
2|190| Fight in God’s cause (in order to exalt His Name) against those who fight against you, but do not exceed the bounds (set by God), for surely God loves not those who exceed the bounds.
2|191| (While at war) kill them wherever you come upon them, and drive them out from where they drove you out (thus recovering your lands from their usurpation). (Though killing is something you feel aversion to) disorder (rooted in rebellion against God and recognizing no laws) is worse than killing. Do not fight against them in the vicinities of the Sacred Mosque unless they fight against you there; but if they fight against you (there), kill them – such is the recompense of the (rebellious) unbelievers.
2|192| Then if they desist (from fighting), surely God is All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate (especially towards those who return to Him in repentance.)
2|193| (But if they persist in causing disorder, continue to) fight against them until there is no longer disorder rooted in rebellion against God, and the religion (the right for worship and the authority to order the way of life is recognized) for God. However, if they desist, then there is no hostility except to the wrongdoers.
2|194| A sacred month is retributive for another sacred month, and the inviolate values demand retaliation. So, whoever attacks you, attack them in like manner as they attacked you. Nevertheless, fear God and remain within the bounds of piety and righteousness, and know that God is with the God-revering, pious.
2|195| (Just retaliation, as well as war or other defensive measures to maintain your existence, are not possible without expense. So) spend in God’s cause (out of whatever you have) and do not ruin yourselves by your own hands (by refraining from spending. Whatever you do,) do it in the best way in the awareness that God sees it. Surely God loves those who are devoted to doing good, aware that God is seeing them.
2|196| Complete the Hajj (the Major Pilgrimage) and the ‘Umrah (the Minor Pilgrimage) for God, and if you are impeded (after you have already put on the Pilgrimage attire), then send (to Makkah) a sacrificial offering you can afford. Do not shave your heads (to mark the end of the state of consecration for the Pilgrimage) until the offering has reached its destination and is sacrificed. However, if any of you is ill (so that he is obliged to leave the state of consecration) or has an ailment of the head, he must make redemption by fasting, or giving alms, or offering a sacrifice. When you are secure (when the Pilgrimage is not impeded, or the impediment is removed), then whoever takes advantage of the ‘Umrah before the Hajj, must give a sacrificial offering he can afford. For whoever cannot afford the offering, a fast for three days during the Hajj, and for seven days when you return home, that is, ten days in all. This is for those whose families do not live in the environs of the Sacred Mosque. Act in due reverence for God and piety (avoiding disobedience to Him and obeying His ordinances), and know that God is severe in retribution.
2|197| The Hajj is in the months well-known. Whoever undertakes the duty of Hajj in them, there is no sensual indulgence, nor wicked conduct, nor disputing during the Hajj. Whatever good you do (all that you are commanded and more than that, especially to help others), God knows it. Take your provisions for the Hajj (and do not be a burden upon others). In truth, the best provision is righteousness and piety, so be provided with righteousness and piety to guard against My punishment, O people of discernment!
2|198| There is no blame on you that you should seek of the bounty of your Lord (by trading during the Hajj but beware of preoccupation to the extent of neglecting any of the rites of the Hajj.) When you press on in multitude from ‘Arafat (after you have stayed there for some time,) mention God at Mash‘ar al-Haram (al-Muzdalifah); mention Him aware of how He has guided you, for formerly you were surely of those astray.
2|199| Then (do not choose to remain in al-Muzdalifah without climbing ‘Arafat in order to refrain from mixing with other people because of vanity. Instead,) press on in multitude from where all the (other) people press on, and implore God’s forgiveness (for your opposing Him in any way before now and for the mistakes you have made during the Hajj). Surely God is All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate.
2|200| And when you have performed those rites, mention God, as you mentioned your fathers (with the merits you approve of in them), or yet more intensely. For there are, among humankind, those who pray, "Our Lord, grant us in the world," and they have no share in the Hereafter.
2|201| And among them are those who pray, "Our Lord, grant us in the world what is good, and in the Hereafter what is good, and protect us from the punishment of the Fire."
2|202| Those people – for them is a portion, each according to what they have earned. God is swift at reckoning.
2|203| Mention God during the (three) appointed days (of ‘Id al-adha). Whoever is in haste and content with two days (of mentioning God, having performed the rite of throwing pebbles at Satan), it is no sin for him; and whoever delays (continuing the rite to the third day), it is no sin for him, for him who is careful of the bounds of piety. Keep from disobedience to God in due reverence for Him and piety, and know that you will be gathered to Him.
2|204| Among the people there is he whose conversation on (the affairs of) the present, worldly life fascinates you, and he calls on God to bear testimony to what is in his heart, yet he is most fierce in enmity.
2|205| When he leaves (you) or attains authority, he rushes about the land to foment disorder and corruption therein and to ruin the sources of life and human generations. Surely God does not love disorder and corruption.
2|206| When he is told, "Be fearful of your duty to God (and so follow His commands)," vainglory seizes and thrusts him toward (greater) sin. Hell will settle the account for him – how evil a cradle indeed it is!
2|207| And (in contrast, there is) among the people one who sells himself in pursuit of God’s good pleasure. God is All-Pitying towards His servants (and therefore commends to them reverent piety and fear of His punishment).
2|208| O you who believe! Come in full submission to God, all of you, (without allowing any discord among you due to worldly reasons), and do not follow in the footsteps of Satan, for indeed he is a manifest enemy to you (seeking to seduce you to rebel against God with glittering promises).
2|209| If you stumble and fall back (from following God’s way to realize peace and agreement) after the clear proofs of the truth have come to you, then know that God is All-Glorious with irresistible might, All-Wise.
2|210| What do those (who fail to come in full submission to God) look for but that God(’s command of destruction) should come to them in the shades of clouds with angels, and the matter be settled? To God are all matters ultimately referred, (and whatever He wills occurs).
2|211| Ask the Children of Israel how many clear proofs We gave to them (and what happened when they heeded them or did not heed them). Whoever tampers with God’s blessing after it has come to him (whoever alters the guidance or exchanges it for straying): surely God is severe in retribution.
2|212| The present, worldly life is decked out as appealing to those who are ungrateful to God’s blessing and disbelieve, and they deride those who believe (and attach no importance to the worldly life). But those who obey God in due reverence for Him and piety will be above them on the Day of Resurrection. God provides whomever He wills without reckoning.
2|213| Humankind were (in the beginning) one community (following one way of life without disputing over provision and other similar things. Later on differences arose and) God sent Prophets as bearers of glad tidings (of prosperity in return for faith and righteousness) and warners (against the consequences of straying and transgression), and He sent down with them the Book with the truth (containing nothing false in it) so that it might judge between the people concerning that on which they were differing. And only those who were given it differed concerning it, after the most manifest truths came to them, because of envious rivalry and insolence among themselves. God has guided by His leave those who have believed (in the Book and the Prophets, those who now believe in the Qur’an and Muhammad) to the truth about that on which they were differing. God guides whomever He wills to a straight path.
2|214| (Given the history of humankind in this world,) do you think that you will enter Paradise while there has not yet come upon you the like of what came upon those who passed away before you? They were visited by such adversities and hardships, and were so shaken as by earthquake that the Messenger and those who believed in his company nearly cried out: "When comes God’s help?" Beware! the help of God is surely near!
2|215| They ask you what they will spend (to provide sustenance for the needy). Say: "Whatever you spend of your wealth is for (your) parents and the near relatives, and the (needy) orphans, the destitute, and the wayfarer. Whatever good you do, surely God has full knowledge of it.
2|216| Prescribed for you is fighting, though it is disliked by you. It may well be that you dislike a thing but it is good for you, and it may well be that you like a thing but it is bad for you. God knows, and you do not know.
2|217| They ask you about the Sacred Month and fighting in it. Say: "Fighting in it is a grave sin; but barring people from the way of God, unbelief in Him, and denying entry into the Sacred Mosque, and expelling its inmates from it are far graver and more sinful in the sight of God; disorder (rooted in rebellion to God and recognizing no laws) is even far graver and more sinful than killing. And they will not cease fighting against you until they turn you from your religion, if they can. Whoever of you turns away from his religion and dies an unbeliever – those are they whose works have been wasted in both the world and the Hereafter, and those are the companions of the Fire; they will abide therein.
2|218| Surely those who believe, those who emigrate and strive in God’s cause – they are the ones who may hope for the mercy of God. God is All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate.
2|219| They ask you about intoxicating drinks and games of chance. Say: "In both there is great evil, though some use for people, but their evil is greater than their usefulness." They also ask you what they should spend (in God’s cause and for the needy). Say: "What is left over (after you have spent on your dependents’ needs). Thus does God make clear to you His Revelations, that you may reflect
2|220| Upon this world and the Hereafter (with all the truths related to both). And they ask you about (how they should act in regard to) orphans. Say (to them): "(Rather than doing nothing for fear of doing wrong) set their affairs aright for their good, that is the best. If you intermix (your expenses) with theirs, (there is no harm in that) for they are your brothers(-in-religion, and brotherhood demands doing what is good for one’s brothers). God knows well him who causes disorder from him who sets aright. Had God willed, He would have imposed on you exacting conditions. Indeed He is All-Glorious with irresistible might, All-Wise.
2|221| Do not marry the women who associate partners with God until they believe. A believing slave-girl is better than a (free) woman who associates partners with God, even though she pleases and attracts you (with her beauty, wealth, status, or family). Nor marry (your believing women) to the men who associate partners with God until they believe. A believing slave is better than a (free) man who associates partners with God, even though he pleases and attracts you. Those call to the Fire, while God calls to Paradise and forgiveness (of your sins) by His leave. He makes clear His Revelations for people, that they may reflect and be mindful (of their duty to God).
2|222| They also ask you about (the injunctions concerning) menstruation. Say: "It is a state of hurt (and ritual impurity), so keep away from them during their menstruation and do not approach them until they are cleansed. When they are cleansed, then (you can) go to them inasmuch as God has commanded you (according to the urge He has placed in your nature and within the terms He has enjoined upon you). Surely God loves those who turn to Him in sincere repentance (of past sins and errors) and He loves those who cleanse themselves.
2|223| Your women are like a tilth for you (where you plant seed to obtain produce) so come to your tilth as you wish, and send ahead (good issue) for (the future of) your souls. Act in due reverence for God, keeping within the bounds of piety and obedience to Him (both in your relations with your women and bringing up offspring, as in all other matters). And know that you are to meet with Him; and give glad tidings to the believers (of what they will find in His Presence).
2|224| (Do not make thoughtless oaths by God,) and do not (in striving to keep your oaths) make Him a hindrance by your oaths to doing greater good, acting from piety, and making peace among people. And God is All-Hearing, All-Knowing.
2|225| God does not take you to task for a slip in your oaths, but He takes you to task for what your hearts have earned (through intention). And God is All-Forgiving, All-Clement.
2|226| For those who vow abstinence from their wives there is a respite of four months. Then, if they go back on their vow (within this period by atoning), then surely God is All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate.
2|227| But if (the period ends and) they resolve on divorce, (know that) God is All-Hearing, All-Knowing, (well aware of what they say and do).
2|228| Divorced women shall keep themselves in waiting for three menstrual courses, and it is not lawful for them, if they believe in God and the Last Day, to conceal what God has created in their wombs. In such time their husbands have better right to take them back, if they desire a settlement. According to customary good and religiously approvable practice, women have rights similar to those against them (that men have), but men (in respect of their heavier duty and responsibility) have a degree above them (which they must not abuse). And God is All-Glorious with irresistible might, All-Wise.
2|229| Divorce is (to be) pronounced twice. Then (at the end of each pronouncement) the husband should either retain (his wife) without offending her honor and in a fair manner, or release (her) kindly and in a manner fairer and pleasing (to her). (In the event of divorce) it is not lawful for you to take back anything of what you have given them (as bridal-due or wedding gift or gifts on other occasions), unless both fear that they might not be able to keep within the bounds set by God. If you fear that they might not be able to keep within the bounds set by God (and deviate into unlawful acts particularly because of the wife’s disgust with the husband), there is no blame on them that the wife might pay some compensation to be released from the marriage tie. Those are the bounds set by God, therefore do not exceed them. Whoever exceeds the bounds set by God, such are wrongdoers.
2|230| If he divorces her (finally, for the third time), she will no longer be lawful to him unless she marries another husband (of her own volition). (If she and her new husband do not get along well and) if he divorces her, there is no blame on them (the woman and her first husband, if they agree) to return to each other, if they think that they can keep within the bounds set by God. These are the bounds set by God; He makes them clear for a people who know (the wisdom and benefit in the bounds prescribed for them by their Creator).
2|231| And when you divorce women and they reach the end of their waiting term, then either retain them without offending their honor and in a fair manner, or release them without offending their honor and in a fair manner. Do not retain them to their hurt and to transgress (their rights). Whoever does that, surely he has wronged himself. Do not take God’s Revelations for a mockery and remember God’s favor on you and what He has sent down on you of the Book and the Wisdom wherewith He exhorts you (to guidance). Keep from disobedience to God in due reverence for Him and piety, and know that God has full knowledge of everything.
2|232| When you divorce women and they have reached the end of their waiting term, (then, you judges, and you who are guardians of either party,) do not debar them from marrying their (former) husbands, (and O former husbands of them), from marrying other men, if they have come to an agreement between them on equitable terms. This is an admonition to whoever among you truly believes in God and the Last Day; that is a cleaner and purer way for you. And God knows, and you do not know.
2|233| Mothers (whether married or divorced) are to suckle their children for two complete years, if the fathers wish that the period be completed. It is incumbent upon him who fathered the child to provide the mothers (during this period) with sustenance and clothing according to customary good and religiously approvable practice. But no soul is charged save to its capacity; a mother should not be made to suffer because of her child, nor the one who fathered the child because of his child. The same duty (toward the suckling mother) rests upon the heir (of a father who has died). If the couple desire by mutual consent and consultation to wean the child (before the completion of the two years’ period), then there is no blame on them. And if you desire to seek nursing for your children, there is no blame on you, provided you pay what is due from you according to customary good and religiously approvable practice. Keep from disobedience to God and try to act within the bounds of piety, and know that whatever you do, surely God sees it well.
2|234| Those among you who die, leaving behind their wives: they (the wives) shall keep themselves in waiting for four months and ten days, (during which they should refrain from marrying and from self-adornment with a view to presenting themselves for marriage). When they have reached the end of the waiting term, then there is no blame on you for what they may do by themselves within (the bounds of) decency. God is fully aware of all that you do.
2|235| There is no blame on you that (during this waiting period) you indicate a marriage proposal to such women or keep it hidden in yourselves. God knows that you will think of them (with such proposals in mind), but do not make any secret engagement with them, except that you speak it properly in decent words. Do not resolve on the marriage tie until the ordained term has come to its end. Know that God knows what is in your hearts, so be careful about Him; and know that God is All-Forgiving, All-Clement, (Who shows no haste in punishing).
2|236| There is no blame on you if you divorce women (with whom you made a marriage contract,) while as yet you have not touched them nor appointed any marriage-portion for them. Yet, make some provision for them, the affluent according to his means, and the straitened according to his means – a provision according to customary good and religiously approvable practice, as a duty upon those devoted to doing good, aware that God is seeing them.
2|237| If you divorce them before you have touched them but have already appointed for them a marriage-portion, then (give them) half of what you appointed, unless they make remission and forgo it or he in whose hand the marriage tie is makes remission (and pays the full amount). If you make remission, this is nearer and more suited to piety, and do not forget magnanimity among yourselves. Whatever you do, surely God sees it well.
2|238| Be ever mindful and protective of the prescribed Prayers, and the middle Prayer, and stand in the presence of God in utmost devotion and obedience.
2|239| If you are exposed to danger (and it is impossible for you to perform the Prayer standing in a place, then pray) afoot or mounted. When you are secure, mention God (and establish the Prayer) as He has taught you what you did not know (of faith, Book, and the Prayer.)
2|240| Those of you who (are about to) die leaving behind wives should make testament in their favor of one year’s provision without expulsion. If they themselves leave (of their own accord), there is no blame on you for what they may do of lawful deeds by themselves. Surely God is All-Glorious with irresistible might, All-Wise.
2|241| Likewise, there should be a provision for the divorced women according to customary good and religiously approvable practice, as a duty upon the God-revering, pious.
2|242| Thus does God make His Revelations (and signposts of His way) clear to you, that you may understand (where your benefit lies and act accordingly).
2|243| Do you not call to mind those who went forth from their habitations for fear of death even though they were in thousands? God said to them "Die!", then He restored them to life. Indeed God is gracious to humankind, but most of humankind do not give thanks.
2|244| (Do not act in fear of death; rather,) fight in God’s cause, and know that God is All-Hearing, All-Knowing.
2|245| Who is he that (by spending out of his wealth purely in God’s cause) lends to God a handsome loan that He will return after multiplying it for him manifold? God straitens (your means of livelihood), and He enlarges it; (in either case) you are being returned to Him.
2|246| Do you not consider what happened with the elders of the Children of Israel after Moses: once they appealed to a Prophet chosen for them, saying: "Set up for us a king and we will fight in God’s cause." He said: "Is it possible you would hold back from fighting, if fighting were prescribed for you?" They said: "Why should we not fight in God’s cause when we have been driven from our habitations and our children?" But when fighting was prescribed for them, they did turn away, except a few of them. God has full knowledge of (such) wrongdoers.
2|247| Their Prophet said to them: "God has set up Saul (Talut) for you as king." They said: "How can he have kingdom over us when we are more deserving of kingdom than him, seeing that he has not been given abundance of wealth?" He said: "God has chosen him over you and increased him abundantly in knowledge and physical power (so that he can execute his decrees). God bestows kingdom on whomever He wills, and God is All-Embracing (with His mercy), All-Knowing.
2|248| Their Prophet added: "The sign of his kingdom is that the Ark will come to you, in which there is inward peace and assurance from your Lord, and a remnant of what the house of Moses and the house of Aaron left behind, the angels bearing it. Truly in that is a sign for you, if you are (true) believers.
2|249| And when Saul (Talut) set out with the army and said (to them): "God will put you to a test by (means of) a river: whoever then drinks of it is not of my company, and whoever does not taste it, he is of my company; but forgiven will he be who takes thereof in the hollow of his hand. But they drank thereof, all save a few of them; and when he crossed it, he and those who believed with him, (those who, with weak faith, took of the river in the hollow of their hands) said: "Today we have no power against Goliath and his forces." But those who had certainty of their meeting with God and felt as if always standing in His Presence said: "Many a small company has overcome a numerous company by God’s leave." God is with the patient and persevering.
2|250| And when they went forth against Goliath and his forces, they prayed: "Our Lord, pour out upon us steadfastness, and set our feet firm, and help us to victory over the disbelieving people."
2|251| So they routed them by God’s leave, and David killed Goliath, and God granted him kingdom and Wisdom, and taught him of that which He willed. Were it not that God repelled people, some by means of others, the earth would surely be corrupted; but God is gracious for all the worlds.
2|252| Those are the Revelations of God and His signs (demonstrating Him with His Names and Attributes) that We recite to you in truth, for indeed you (O Muhammad) are one of the Messengers (sent with the Book and receiving Revelation).
2|253| Of those Messengers, some We have exalted above others (in some respects). Among them are those to whom God spoke, and He raised some others in degrees. We granted Jesus son of Mary the clear proofs (of his Messengership), and confirmed him with the Spirit of Holiness. Had God willed (to deny humankind free will and compelled them to act in a pre-determined way), those who came after them would not have fought one against the other after the most manifest truths had come to them; but they differed among themselves, some of them believing and some disbelieving. Yet had God so willed, they would not have fought one against the other, but God does whatever He wills.
2|254| O you who believe! (So that you may enjoy solidarity and discipline, as a cohesive, peaceful community) spend (in God’s cause and for the needy) out of what We have provided for you (of wealth, power, and knowledge, etc.) before there comes a Day when there will be no trading nor friendship (which will bring any benefit), nor intercession (of the sort you resort to unjustly in the world). The unbelievers – it is they who are wrongdoers (those unable to discern the truth, who darken both their inner and outer world, and who wrong, first and most of all, themselves).
2|255| God, there is no deity but He; the All-Living, the Self-Subsisting (by Whom all subsist). Slumber does not seize Him, nor sleep. His is all that is in the heavens and all that is on the earth. Who is there that will intercede with Him save by His leave? He knows what lies before them and what lies after them (what lies in their future and in their past, what is known to them and what is hidden from them); and they do not comprehend anything of His Knowledge save what He wills. His Seat (of dominion) embraces the heavens and the earth, and the preserving of them does not weary Him; He is the All-Exalted, the Supreme.
2|256| There is no compulsion in the Religion. The right way stands there clearly distinguished from the false. Hence he who rejects the taghut (false deities, and powers of evil who institute patterns of faith and rule in defiance of God) and believes in God (as the only God, Lord and Object of Worship) has indeed taken hold of the firm, unbreakable handle; and God is All-Hearing, All-Knowing.
2|257| God is the confidant and guardian of those who believe (to Whom they can entrust their affairs and on Whom they can rely), bringing them out from all kinds of (intellectual, spiritual, social, economic and political) darkness into the light, and keeping them firm therein. And those who disbelieve, their confidants and guardians are the taghut (authorities who rule and devise false religions and systems in defiance of God); bringing them out from the light into all kinds of darkness. Those are companions of the Fire; and they will abide therein.
2|258| Do you not consider the one who remonstrated with Abraham about his Lord (in defiance of Him) because of the kingdom God had granted him? When Abraham said, "My Lord is He Who gives life and causes to die," he retorted: "I give life and make to die." Said Abraham: "Surely God causes the sun to rise in the east, now you cause it to rise in the west." Thus was the unbeliever utterly confounded. God does not guide (such) wrongdoing people.
2|259| Or (as another proof that it is God alone Who gives and takes life, and will restore life to the dead, call to mind) him who passed by a town that had fallen into utter ruin, and asked himself (in bewilderment): "How will God restore life to this town that is now dead?" So God made him remain dead for a hundred years and then raised him to life, and asked him: "How long did you remain in this state?" He said: "I remained so for a day or part of a day." God said: "No, you have rather remained thus for a hundred years. But look at your food and drink: it has not spoiled; and look at your donkey! So We would make you a sign for the people (that they might understand how We have created them and will restore life to them after their death.) And look at the bones, how We will set them up, and then clothe them with flesh." Thus when the truth became clear to him, he said: "I know that God has full power over everything."
2|260| And recall when Abraham said: "My Lord, show me how You will restore life to the dead!" God said: "Why? Do you not believe?" Abraham said: "Yes, but that my heart may be at rest." He (his Lord) said: "Then take four of the birds (of different kinds), and tame them to yourself to know them fully. Then (cut them into pieces and mix the pieces with each other, and) put on every one of the hills a piece from each, and then summon them, and they will come to you flying. Know that surely God is All-Glorious with irresistible might, All-Wise.
2|261| The parable of those who spend their wealth in God’s cause is like that of a grain that sprouts seven ears, and in every ear there are a hundred grains. God multiplies for whom He wills. God is All-Embracing (with His mercy), All-Knowing.
2|262| Those who spend their wealth in God’s cause and then do not follow up what they have spent with putting (the receiver) under obligation and taunting, their reward is with their Lord, and they will have no fear, nor will they grieve.
2|263| A kind word and forgiving (people’s faults) are better than almsgiving followed by taunting. God is All-Wealthy and Self-Sufficient, (absolutely independent of the charity of people), All-Clement (Who shows no haste in punishing.)
2|264| O you who believe! Render not vain your almsgiving by putting (the receiver) under an obligation and taunting – like him who spends his wealth to show off to people and be praised by them, and believes not in God and the Last Day. The parable of his spending is that of a rock on which there is soil; a heavy rain falls upon it, and leaves it barren. They have no power (control) over what they have earned. God guides not such disbelieving people (to attain their goals).
2|265| The parable of those who spend their wealth in pursuit of where God’s good pleasure lies and to make their hearts firmly established (in faith) is that of a garden on a hilltop: a heavy rain falls upon it, and it yields its produce twofold; even if no heavy rain falls upon it, yet a light shower suffices. Whatever you do, God sees it well.
2|266| Would any of you wish to have a garden of palms and vines with rivers flowing in it, where he has all kinds of crops, and that, when old age has come upon him while he has offspring still too small (to look after their affairs), a fiery whirlwind should smite it, and it should be burnt up? Thus does God make clear to you the Revelations (and signs of truth), that you may reflect (on them and act accordingly.)
2|267| O you who believe! Spend (in God’s cause and for the needy) out of the pure, wholesome things you have earned and of what We have produced for you from the earth, and do not seek after the bad things to spend thereof (in alms and in God’s cause) blot oout when you would not take it save with disdain; and know that God is All-Wealthy and Self-Sufficient (absolutely independent of the charity of people), All-Praiseworthy (as your Lord, Who provides for you and all other beings and meets all your needs).
2|268| Satan frightens you with poverty and bids you into indecencies, whereas God promises you forgiveness from Himself and bounty. God is All-Embracing (with His mercy), All-Knowing.
2|269| He grants the Wisdom to whomever He wills, and whoever is granted the Wisdom, has indeed been granted much good. Yet none except people of discernment reflect and are mindful.
2|270| Whatever you spend (whether little or much, good or bad, in God’s cause or in the way of Satan) and whatever vow you make, God surely knows it. (Even though they may regard their future as secured) the wrongdoers have no helpers (with regard to their ultimate future).
2|271| If you dispense your alms openly, it is well, but if you conceal it and give it to the poor (in secret), this is better for you; and God will (make it an atonement to) blot out some of your evil deeds. God is fully aware of all that you do.
2|272| (O Messenger! Your mission is to communicate all such commandments, so) it is not your duty to secure their guidance (in every matter); but God guides whomever He wills. (O people,) whatever good you spend (in charity and other good causes) is to your own benefit, and (as believers) you do not spend but in search of God’s "Face" (seeking to be worthy of His favor). Whatever good you spend will be repaid to you in full, and you will not be wronged.
2|273| That (which you spend) is for the poor who, having dedicated themselves to God’s cause, are in distressed circumstances. They are unable to move about the earth (to render service in God’s cause and earn their livelihood). Those who are unaware (of their circumstances) suppose them wealthy because of their abstinence and dignified bearing, but you will know them by their countenance – they do not beg of people importunately. And whatever good you spend, surely God has full knowledge of it.
2|274| Those who spend their wealth night and day, secretly and in public, their reward is with their Lord, and they will have no fear, nor will they grieve.
2|275| As to those who devour interest, (even though they seem, for a time, to be making a profit), they turn out like one whom Satan has bewitched and confounded by his touch, (and they will rise up (from their graves in the same way before God). That is because they say interest is just like trading, whereas God has made trading lawful, and interest unlawful. To whomever an instruction comes from his Lord, and he desists (from interest), he may keep his past gains (legally), and his affair is committed to God (– if he repents sincerely and never again reverts to taking interest, he may hope that God will forgive him). But whoever reverts to it (by judging it to be lawful), they are companions of the Fire, they will abide therein.
2|276| God deprives interest (which is thought to increase wealth) of any blessing, and blights it, but makes alms-giving (which is thought to decrease wealth) productive. God does not love any obstinate unbeliever (who regards what God has made lawful as unlawful or vice versa), any obstinate sinner.
2|277| Those who believe and do good, righteous deeds, and establish the Prayer in conformity with its conditions, and pay the Prescribed Purifying Alms, their reward is with their Lord, and they will have no fear, nor will they grieve.
2|278| O you who believe! Keep from disobedience to God and try to attain piety in due reverence for Him, and give up what remains (due to you) from interest, if you are (in truth) believers.
2|279| If you do not (and you persist in taking interest, whether regarding it as lawful or not) be warned of war from God and His Messenger. If you sincerely repent (and give up all interest transactions completely), you will have your principal. Then you will neither be doing wrong nor being wronged.
2|280| If the debtor is in straitened circumstances, let him have respite until the time of ease; if you make any remission (of his debt) by way of charity, this is better for you, if only you knew.
2|281| And guard yourselves against a Day in which you will be brought back to God (with all your deeds referred to His judgment). Then every soul will be repaid in full what it has earned (while in the world), and they will not be wronged.
2|282| O you who believe! When you contract a debt between you for a fixed term, record it in writing. Let a scribe write it down between you justly, and let no scribe refuse to write it down: as God has taught him (through the Qur’an and His Messenger), so let him write. And let the debtor dictate, and let him avoid disobeying God, his Lord (Who has created him and brought him up with mercy and grace) and curtail no part of it. If the debtor be weak of mind or body, or incapable of dictating, let his guardian dictate justly. And call upon two (Muslim) men among you as witnesses. If two men are not there, then let there be one man and two women, from among those of whom you approve as witnesses, that if either of the two women errs (through forgetfulness), the other may remind her. Let the witnesses not refuse when they are summoned (to give evidence). And (you, O scribes) be not loath to write down (the contract) whether it be small or great, with the term of the contract. Your doing so (O you who believe), is more equitable in the sight of God, more upright for testimony, and more likely that you will not be in doubt. If it be a matter of buying and selling concluded on the spot, then there will be no blame on you if you do not write it down; but do take witnesses when you settle commercial transactions with one another, and let no harm be done to either scribe or witness (nor let either of them act in a way to injure the parties). If you act (in a way to harm either party or the scribe and witnesses) indeed it will be transgression on your part. (Always) act in due reverence for God and try to attain piety. God teaches you (whatever you need in life and the way you must follow in every matter); God has full knowledge of everything.
2|283| If you are (in circumstances like being) on a journey and cannot find a scribe, then a pledge in hand will suffice. But if you trust one another, let him (the debtor) who is trusted fulfill his trust, and let him act in piety and keep from disobedience to God, his Lord (by fulfilling the conditions of the contract). And do not conceal the testimony; he who conceals it, surely his heart (which is the center of faith) is contaminated with sin. God has full knowledge of what you do.
2|284| To God belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth; whether you reveal what is within yourselves (of intentions, plans) or keep it secret, God will call you to account for it. He forgives whom He wills (either from His grace or His grace responding to the repentance of the sinful), and He punishes whom He wills (as a requirement of His justice). God has full power over everything.
2|285| The Messenger believes in what has been sent down to him from his Lord, and so do the believers; each one believes in God, and His angels, and His Books, and His Messengers: "We make no distinction between any of His Messengers (in believing in them)." And they say: "We have heard (the call to faith in God) and (unlike some of the people of Moses) obeyed. Our Lord, grant us Your forgiveness, and to You is the homecoming."
2|286| (O believers, if you are worried that God will take every soul to account even for what the soul keeps within it of intentions and plans, know that) God burdens no soul except within its capacity: in its favor is whatever (good) it earns, and against it whatever (evil) it merits. (So, pray thus to your Lord:) "Our Lord, take us not to task if we forget or make mistake. Our Lord, lay not on us a burden such as You laid on those gone before us. Our Lord, impose not on us what we do not have the power to bear. And overlook our faults, and forgive us, and have mercy upon us. You are our Guardian and Owner (to Whom We entrust our affairs and on Whom we rely) so help us and grant us victory against the disbelieving people!"
3|1| Alif. Lam. Mim.
3|2| God, there is no deity but He; the All-Living, the Self-Subsisting (by Whom all subsist).
3|3| He sends down on you the Book in parts with the truth, confirming (the Divine origin of, and the truths still contained by) the Revelations prior to it; and He sent down the Torah and the Gospel
3|4| In time past, as guidance for the people; and He has sent down the Criterion to distinguish between truth and falsehood, and the knowledge, and power of judgment to put it into effect. Those who disbelieve in the Revelations of God, for them is a severe punishment. God is All-Glorious with irresistible might, Ever-Able to Requite.
3|5| Surely God – nothing whatever on the earth and in the heaven is hidden from Him.
3|6| It is He Who fashions you in the wombs as He wills. There is no deity but He, the All-Glorious with irresistible might, the All-Wise.
3|7| It is He Who has sent down on you this (glorious) Book, wherein are verses absolutely explicit and firm: they are the core of the Book, others being allegorical. Those in whose hearts is swerving pursue what is allegorical in it, seeking (to cause) dissension, and seeking to make it open to arbitrary interpretation, although none knows its interpretation save God. And those firmly rooted in knowledge say: "We believe in it (in the entirety of its verses, both explicit and allegorical); all is from our Lord"; yet none derives admonition except the people of discernment.
3|8| (They entreat God:) "Our Lord, do not let our hearts swerve after You have guided us, and bestow upon us mercy from Your Presence. Surely You are the All-Bestowing.
3|9| "Our Lord, You it is Who will gather humankind for a Day about (the coming of) which there is no doubt. Surely God does not fail to keep the promise."
3|10| Those who disbelieve, neither their wealth nor their offspring will avail them at all against God; they are fuel for the Fire.
3|11| It is just as that which happened to the court (the court and military aristocracy) of the Pharaoh, and those before them. They denied Our Revelations, and so God seized them for their sins. God is severe in retribution.
3|12| Say (O Messenger) to those who disbelieve: "You will soon be overpowered and gathered into Hell!" – How evil a cradle it is!
3|13| There has already been a manifest sign (of the truth of God’s way) and lesson for you in the two hosts that encountered (at the Battle of Badr): one host fighting in God’s cause, and the other disbelieving, who saw with their very eyes (the host of the believers) as twice their actual number (during fighting). God confirms with His help and victory whom He wills. Surely in that is a lesson for those who have the power of seeing.
3|14| Made innately appealing to men are passionate love for women, children, (hoarded) treasures of gold and silver, branded horses, cattle, and plantations. Such are enjoyments of the present, worldly life; yet with God is the best of the goals to pursue.
3|15| Say (to them): "Shall I inform you of what is better than those (things that you so passionately seek to obtain)? For those who keep from disobedience to God in due reverence for Him and piety there are, with their Lord, Gardens through which rivers flow, wherein they will abide, and spouses purified, and God’s good pleasure (with them). God sees the servants well.
3|16| Those (the God-revering, pious) pray: "Our Lord, we do indeed believe, so forgive us our sins and guard us against the punishment of the Fire."
3|17| Those who are persevering (in misfortune and steadfast in fulfilling God’s commandments and in refraining from sins), and truthful (in their words and actions, and true to their covenants), and devoutly obedient, and who spend (out of what God has provided for them, in His way and for the needy), and who implore God’s forgiveness before daybreak.
3|18| God (Himself) testifies that there surely is no deity but He, and so do the angels and those of knowledge, being firm in upholding truth and uprightness: (these all testify that) there is no deity but He, the All-Glorious with irresistible might, the All-Wise.
3|19| The (true) religion with God is Islam. Those who were given the Book before differed only after the knowledge (of truth) came to them because of envious rivalry and insolence among themselves. Whoever disbelieves in the Revelations of God (should know that) God is swift at reckoning.
3|20| If they still remonstrate with you, say (to them, O Messenger): "I have submitted my whole being to God, and so have those who follow me." And ask those who were given the Book before, and the common folk who know nothing about the Book: "Have you also submitted (to God)?" If they have submitted, then they are indeed rightly guided; but if they turn away, then what rests with you is only to convey the Message fully. God sees the servants well.
3|21| Those who disbelieve in the Revelations of God, and frequently kill the Prophets (sent to them) against all right, and who kill those who advocate and try to establish equity and justice – give them the glad tidings of a painful punishment.
3|22| Those are the ones whose works have been wasted in both this world and the Hereafter, and they have no helpers (to restore their works to their benefit and save them from punishment).
3|23| Do you not consider those who were given a portion from the Book? They are called to the Book of God to judge between them, and then, (after the judgment was given,) a party of them turn away in aversion.
3|24| (They venture to do so) because they claim: "The Fire will not touch us at all, except for a certain number of days." (The false beliefs) that they used to invent have deluded them in their religion.
3|25| How then will they fare when We gather them all together for a (terrible) Day about (the coming of) which there is no doubt, and when every soul will be repaid in full for what it earned (while in the world), and none will be wronged?
3|26| Say: "O God, absolute Master of all dominion! You give dominion to whom You will, and take away dominion from whom You will, and You exalt and honor whom You will, and abase whom You will; in Your hand is all good; surely You have full power over everything.
3|27| "You make the night pass into the day and You make the day pass into the night, (and so make each grow longer or shorter); You bring forth the living out the dead, and You bring the dead out of the living, and You provide whomever You will without reckoning."
3|28| Let not the believers take the unbelievers for friends, guardians, and councilors in preference to the believers. Whoever does that is not on a way from God and has no connection with Him, unless it be to protect yourselves against them and take precautions (against the danger of being persecuted and forced to turn away from your religion or betray your community, or of losing your life). And God warns you that you beware of Himself; and to God is the homecoming.
3|29| Say (to the believers): "Whether you keep secret what is in your bosoms or reveal it, God knows it. He knows whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth. God has full power over everything."
3|30| The Day when every soul will find whatever good it has done brought forward, and whatever evil it has done. It will wish that there were a far space between it and that evil. God warns you that you beware of Himself; and God is All-Pitying for the servants.
3|31| Say (to them, O Messenger): "If you indeed love God, then follow me, so that God will love you and forgive you your sins." God is All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate.
3|32| Say (again): "Obey God, and the Messenger." If they still turn away (then know that only the unbelievers turn away from this call, and let them know that) God does not love the unbelievers.
3|33| (They refuse belief in you and some of the Prophets because you did not appear among them, but God favors whomever He wishes with Messengership, and) God made pure Adam and Noah and the House of Abraham and the House of ‘Imran, choosing them above all humankind,
3|34| As descendants of one another, (and they were following the same way. Therefore, do not, in respect of believing in them as Prophets, make any distinction between the Prophets and do not think or speak ill of God’s preference). God is All-Hearing, All-Knowing.
3|35| (Remember) when the woman (from the House) of ‘Imran entreated: "My Lord, I have dedicated that which is in my womb to Your exclusive service. Accept it, then, from me. Surely You are the All-Hearing, the All-Knowing."
3|36| When she was delivered of it she said: "My Lord, I have given birth to a female." – God knew best of what she was delivered, (so she did not need to be sorry, because) the male child (she expected) could not be the same as (the) female child (whom We bestowed on her and would honor with a great favor). – I have named her Mary and commend her and her offspring to You for protection from Satan eternally rejected from God’s Mercy."
3|37| (In response to her mother’s sincerity and purity of intention in dedicating the child,) her Lord accepted her with gracious favor and enabled to her a good growth (upbringing), and entrusted her to the care of Zachariah. Whenever Zachariah went in to her in the Sanctuary, he found her provided with food. "Mary," he asked, "how does this come to you?" "From God," she answered. Truly God provides to whomever He wills without reckoning.
3|38| At that point, Zachariah turned to his Lord in prayer and said: "My Lord, bestow upon me out of Your grace a good, upright offspring. Truly, You are the Hearer of prayer."
3|39| It was when he stood praying in the Sanctuary after some time that the angels called to him: "God gives you the glad tidings of John to confirm a Word from God, and as one lordly, perfectly chaste, a Prophet, among the righteous."
3|40| "Lord," said he (Zachariah), "How shall I have a son when old age has overtaken me, and my wife is barren?" "Just so," he (the angel) said: "God does whatever He wills."
3|41| "Lord," he (Zachariah) entreated, "appoint a sign for me." "Your sign," He said, "is that you will not be able to speak to people for three days except by gesture. And (meanwhile) remember and mention your Lord much and glorify Him in the afternoon and the early hours of morning."
3|42| And (in due time came the moment) when the angels said: "Mary, God has chosen you and made you pure, and exalted you above all the women in the world.
3|43| "Mary, be devoutly obedient to your Lord, prostrate and bow (in the Prayer and devotion to Him) with those who bow!"
3|44| (O Messenger:) that is of the tidings of the things of the unseen (the things that took place in the past and have remained hidden from people with all their truth), which We reveal to you, for you were not present with them when they drew lots with their pens about who should have charge of Mary; nor were you present with them when they were disputing (about the matter).
3|45| And (remember) when the angels said: "Mary, God gives you the glad tidings of a Word from Him, to be called the Messiah, Jesus son of Mary; highly honored in the world and the Hereafter, and one of those near-stationed to God.
3|46| "He will speak to people in the cradle and in manhood, and he is of the righteous."
3|47| "Lord," said Mary, "how shall I have a son seeing no mortal has ever touched me?" "That is how it is," he (the Spirit who appeared before her) said, "God creates whatever He wills; when He decrees a thing, He does but say to it ‘Be!’ and it is.
3|48| "And He will teach him the Book and the Wisdom – and the Torah and the Gospel,
3|49| "(And He will make him) a Messenger to the Children of Israel (saying to them, by way of explaining his mission): ‘Assuredly, I have come to you with a clear proof from your Lord: I fashion for you out of clay something in the shape of a bird, then I breathe into it, and it becomes a bird by God’s leave. And I heal the blind from birth and the leper, and I revive the dead, by God’s leave. And I inform you of what things you eat, and what you store up in your houses. Surely in this is a clear proof for you (demonstrating that I am a Messenger of God), if you are sincere believers (as you claim.)
3|50| ‘And confirming (the truth contained in) the Torah that was revealed before me, and to make lawful for you certain things that had been forbidden to you. Be sure that I have come to you with a clear proof (demonstrating that I am a Messenger of God) from your Lord. So keep from disobedience to God in due reverence for Him and piety, and obey me
3|51| ‘Surely, God is my Lord and your Lord, so worship Him. This is a straight path (to follow).’ "
3|52| (Having preached his message in this way for a long time) Jesus perceived their willful persistence on unbelief (and open hostility), and called out: "Who will be my helpers (on this way) to God?" The disciples answered: "We are the helpers of God(’s cause). We believe in God, and (we call you to) bear witness that we are Muslims (submitted to Him exclusively).
3|53| "Our Lord! We believe in what You have sent down and we follow the Messenger, so write us down among the witnesses (of Your Oneness and Lordship, and of the truth You have revealed)."
3|54| And they (the unbelievers) schemed (against Jesus), and God put His will into effect (and brought their schemes to nothing). God wills what is the best (for His believing servants) and makes His will prevail.
3|55| (It was part of His countering their scheme) when God said: "Jesus, (as your mission has ended) I will take you back (to Myself) and raise you up to Myself, and will purify you of (the groundless slanders of) those who disbelieve, and set your followers above those who disbelieve until the Day of Resurrection. Then to Me you will all return, and I will judge between you concerning all that on which you were used to differ.
3|56| "As for those who disbelieve, I will punish them with a severe punishment in the world and the Hereafter; and they will have no helpers (against My punishment).
3|57| "As for those who believe and do good, righteous deeds, He will pay their rewards in full. God does not love the wrongdoers (and Himself never does wrong)."
3|58| Thus (O Messenger,) all this that We recite to you consists of Revelations and is from the Wise Reminder (the Qur’an).
3|59| (The creation of) Jesus in reference to God resembles (the creation of) Adam. He created him from earth, then said He to him, "Be!" and he is.
3|60| (As the truth always consists in what your Lord wills and decrees,) so is this the truth from your Lord (in this matter); do not then be, (and you are never expected to be,) of those who doubt.
3|61| After the (true) knowledge has come to you, whoever still disputes with you about him (Jesus), say (in challenging them): "Come, then! Let us summon our sons and your sons, and our women and your women, our selves and your selves, and then let us pray and invoke God’s curse upon those who lie."
3|62| This is indeed the true narrative; and there is no deity but God, and truly God is the All-Glorious with irresistible might, the All-Wise.
3|63| If they (still) turn away, be assured that God has full knowledge of those engaged in causing disorder and corruption.
3|64| Say (to them, O Messenger): "O People of the Book, come to a word common between us and you, that we worship none but God, and associate none as partner with Him, and that none of us take others for Lords, apart from God." If they (still) turn away, then say: "Bear witness that we are Muslims (submitted to Him exclusively)."
3|65| O People of the Book (Jews and Christians)! Why do you dispute concerning Abraham (whether he was a Jew or a Christian), when both the Torah and the Gospel were not sent down save after him? Will you ever not use your reason?
3|66| Indeed, you are such people that you dispute concerning even a matter about which you have knowledge; why, then, should you dispute on a matter about which you have no knowledge? God knows, but you do not know.
3|67| Abraham was not a Jew, nor a Christian; but he was one pure of faith and Muslim (who submitted to God with a sound heart). He was never of those who associate partners with God.
3|68| Surely those of humankind who have the best claim to relationship with Abraham are those who followed him (during the term of his mission), and this (most illustrious) Prophet, and those (in his company) who believe. God is the confidant and guardian of the believers (to Whom they can entrust their affairs and on Whom they can rely.)
3|69| A party of the People of the Book wish that they could lead you astray; yet they lead none astray except themselves, but they do not perceive (that this is so).
3|70| O People of the Book! Why do you disbelieve in God’s Revelations (the clear proofs of truth), when you yourselves bear witness (to their truth in your own Books)?
3|71| O People of the Book! Why do you confound the truth (by mixing it) with falsehood and conceal the truth knowingly?
3|72| (In attempting a trick on the believers,) a party of the People of the Book say (to each other): "Feign belief at the beginning of the day in what has been sent down upon those who believe, and disbelieve at the end of it, that they may thus (doubt their religion and) turn back (to their former condition).
3|73| "But do not believe in any but him who follows your religion –Say (O Messenger): "Surely, the only guidance is God’ guidance"– that anyone should be given the like of what you were given, or that they should argue against you before your Lord." Say: "Assuredly, all grace and bounty is in God’s hand; He gives it to whomever He wills." God is All-Embracing (with His mercy), All-Knowing.
3|74| He singles out for His mercy (of favoring with Prophethood or another calling) whom He wills. God is of tremendous grace and bounty.
3|75| Among the People of the Book are some who, if you entrust them with a weight of treasure, restore it to you; and among them are some who, if you entrust them with one gold piece, do not restore it unless you keep standing over them. That is because they claim: "We have no responsibility toward the unlettered (those who do not have a Book like ours and follow our religion)." Thus they speak lies in attribution to God, and do so knowingly.
3|76| On the contrary (what God decrees is this): Whoever fulfills his pledge and keeps from disobedience to God in due reverence for Him and piety, surely God loves the God-revering, pious.
3|77| As to those who sell God’s covenant and their oaths for a trifling price, there will be no share for them in the Hereafter; and God will not speak to them nor look upon them (with mercy) on the Day of Resurrection, nor will He purify them (of their sins to absolve them). And for them is a painful punishment.
3|78| And among them is a party twisting (the words of) the Book with their tongues (during their reading in order to distort its meaning), so that you may suppose it part of the Book, when it is not part of the Book; and they say it is from God’s Presence, when it is not from God’s Presence. They speak lies in attribution to God, and do so knowingly.
3|79| It is not (conceivable) that God should give a human being the Book, authority with sound, wise judgment, and Prophethood, and then he should say to people: "Be servants to me, apart from God." Rather (he would say): "Be pure, dedicated servants of the Lord in that you teach the Book and in that you study it."
3|80| And he never commands you to take the angels and the Prophets for Lords. Would he command you to unbelief, when you have (answered his call and) become Muslims (submitted to God exclusively)?
3|81| And when God took compact with the Prophets: "That I have given you a Book and Wisdom; then there will come to you a Messenger confirming what (of the Divine Revelations) you already possess – you shall certainly believe in him and you shall certainly help him." So saying, He asked: "Have you affirmed this and agreed to take up My burden (that I lay upon you) in this matter?" They answered: "We have affirmed (it)." He said: "Then bear witness (you and your communities), and I will be with you among the witnesses."
3|82| Then whoever after this turns away, those are the transgressors.
3|83| Do they now seek a religion other than God’s, when to Him submits whoever is in the heavens and on the earth, willingly or unwillingly, and to Him they are being returned?
3|84| Say: "We have believed in God (without associating any partners with Him), and that which has been sent down on us, and that which was sent down on Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob and the Prophets who were raised in the tribes, and that which was given to Moses, Jesus, and all other Prophets from their Lord; we make no distinction between any of them (in believing), and we are Muslims (submitted to Him exclusively)."
3|85| Whoever seeks as religion other than Islam, it will never be accepted from him, and in the Hereafter he will be among the losers.
3|86| How would God guide a people who have disbelieved after their belief, and after they have borne witness that the Messenger is true and after the clear proofs (of His Messengership and the Divine origin of the Book he has brought) have come to them? God guides not wrongdoing people.
3|87| For those – their recompense is that on them rests the curse of God, and of angels, and of humankind, all together.
3|88| Therein will they abide. Neither will their punishment be lightened, nor will they be granted any respite.
3|89| Save those who afterwards repent and mend their ways. Surely God is All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate.
3|90| But those who have disbelieved after their (profession of) belief and then have hardened in unbelief, (they have lost the capacity for believing so they can no longer return to faith, nor repent until they are held in the jaws of death, and) their repentance (at that moment) will not be accepted. And they are those who are altogether astray.
3|91| Assuredly, those who disbelieve and die as unbelievers, no ransom even if it was as much gold as to fill the earth will be accepted from any of them. Such are those for whom is a painful punishment, and they will have no helpers (against it).
3|92| You will never be able to attain godliness and virtue until you spend of what you love (in God’s cause or to provide sustenance for the needy). Whatever you spend, God has full knowledge of it.
3|93| All (kinds of) food (that are lawful in the Law revealed to Muhammad) were lawful to the Children of Israel (in the beginning) except what Israel (i.e. Prophet Jacob) forbade for himself before the Torah was sent down. Say (to them, O Messenger): "Bring the Torah and recite it, if you are truthful (in your claim that there is no abrogation in it).
3|94| So whoever fabricates falsehood in attribution to God after that (statement, above, of the truth of the matter) – such are the wrongdoers.
3|95| Say (O Messenger): "God speaks the truth." Therefore follow the way of Abraham as people of pure faith (a faith free of unbelief, of associating partners with God, and of hypocrisy). He was never of those who associate partners with God.
3|96| Behold, the first House (of Prayer) established for humankind is the one at Bakkah (Makkah), a blessed place and a (center or focus of) guidance for all peoples.
3|97| In it there are clear signs (demonstrating that it is a blessed sanctuary, chosen by God as the center of guidance), and the Station of Abraham. Whoever enters it is in security (against attack and fear). Pilgrimage to the House is a duty owed to God by all who can afford a way to it. And whoever refuses (the obligation of the Pilgrimage) or is ungrateful to God (by not fulfilling this command), God is absolutely independent of all creatures.
3|98| Say: "O People of the Book! Why do you conceal and disbelieve in God’s Revelations, God being witness to all that you do?"
3|99| Say: "O People of the Book! Why do you bar from God’s way those who believe, seeking to make it appear crooked, when you yourselves are witnesses (to its being the right way)? God is not unaware and unmindful of all that you do."
3|100| O you who believe! Were you to obey a party of those who were given the Book, they would turn you, after your faith, into unbelievers.
3|101| How do you disbelieve, seeing you are the ones to whom God’s Revelations are recited and His Messenger is amidst you? Whoever holds fast to God, he has certainly been guided to a straight path.
3|102| O you who believe! Keep from disobedience to God in reverent piety with all the reverence that is due to Him, and see that you do not die save as Muslims (submitted to Him exclusively).
3|103| And hold fast all together to the rope of God and never be divided. Remember God’s favor upon you: you were once enemies and He reconciled your hearts so that through His favor you became like brothers. You stood on the brink of a pit of fire, and He delivered you from it. Thus God makes His signs of truth clear to you that you may be guided (to the Straight Path in all matters and be steadfast on it.)
3|104| There must be among you a community calling to good, and enjoining and actively promoting what is right and forbidding and trying to prevent evil (in appropriate ways). They are those who are the prosperous.
3|105| Be not as those who split into parties and followed different ways after the manifest truths had come to them. Those are the ones for whom is a tremendous punishment.
3|106| On the Day when some faces turn bright and some faces turn dark: and as to those whose faces have turned dark (they will be told): "What, did you disbelieve after having believed? Taste, then, the punishment because you used to follow the way of unbelief!"
3|107| As for those whose faces have turned bright, they are (embraced) in God’s mercy, therein abiding forever.
3|108| These are God’s Revelations: We recite them to you in truth, and God wills not any wrong to the world’s people.
3|109| (How could that be so, seeing that) to God belongs whatever is in the heavens and on the earth, and to God are all matters ultimately referred, (and whatever He wills occurs).
3|110| (O Community of Muhammad!) You are the best community ever brought forth for (the good of) humankind, enjoining and actively promoting what is right and good and forbidding and trying to prevent the evil, and (this you do because) you believe in God. If only the People of the Book believed (as you do), this would be sheer good for them. Among them there are believers, but most of them are transgressors.
3|111| They will never be able to harm you except hurting a little (mostly with their tongues). If they fight against you, they will turn their backs in flight; then they will not be helped (to victory over you).
3|112| Ignominy has been their (the Jews’) portion wherever they have been found except for (when they hold on to) a rope from God or a rope from other peoples; and they were visited with a wrath (humiliating punishment) from God, and misery has been pitched upon them – and all this because they were persistently disbelieving in Our Revelations, rejecting Our signs of truth (that they continually observed in their lives), and killing the Prophets against all right; and all this because they disobeyed and kept on transgressing (the bounds of the Law).
3|113| Yet they are not all alike: among the People of the Book there is an upright community, reciting God’s Revelations in the watches of the night and prostrating (themselves in worship).
3|114| They believe in God and the Last Day, and enjoin and promote what is right and good and forbid and try to prevent the evil, and hasten to do good deeds as if competing with one another. Those are of the righteous ones.
3|115| Whatever good they do, they will never be denied the reward of it; and God has full knowledge of the God-revering, pious.
3|116| As to those who disbelieve, their riches will not avail them in the least, nor their children, against God; and those (unfortunate ones) are the companions of the Fire, abiding therein.
3|117| Their spending (to attain their goals in humanitarian or religious guises) in this life of the world is like a biting wind accompanied with frost that smites the harvest of a people who wronged themselves (by their wrong belief and their wrong actions), and devastates it. God has never wronged them but they do wrong themselves.
3|118| O you who believe! Take not for intimates from among others than your own people, for those (who especially cherish hostility towards you) spare no effort to ruin you, and yearn for you to always suffer. Hatred has shown itself by their mouths, and what their bosoms conceal is even greater. Now We have told you the manifest truths, if you reason and understand.
3|119| You are such (frank, clear-hearted) people that you love them (even those who are enemies to you), but they do not love you; and you believe in the whole of the Book (without making any distinction between the verses, and believe in all of the God-revealed Books). When they meet you they say (hypocritically), "We believe;" but when they find themselves alone, they gnaw their fingers in rage against you. Say (to them, O Messenger): "Perish in your rage!" Assuredly, God has full knowledge of what lies hidden in the bosoms.
3|120| If anything good happens to you, this grieves them; if any misfortune befalls you, they rejoice at it. Yet if you endure and persevere in your way and act in piety keeping from evil and any injustice, their guile will never harm you. Surely God fully encompasses (with His Knowledge and Power) all that they do.
3|121| (Remember, O Messenger) when you set forth from your home at dawn to place the believers in battle order – God is All-Hearing, All-Knowing (He heard and knew all that was happening and being talked about on that day).
3|122| When two parties of you were about to lose heart, although God was their helper and protector – and in God let the believers put all their trust.
3|123| For sure God had helped you to victory at Badr when you were a despised (small) force. So observe your duty to God in due reverence for Him, that you may be thankful.
3|124| When you said to the believers: "Does it not suffice you that your Lord will come to your help with three thousand angels sent down?"
3|125| Surely it does. (More than that), if you are steadfast and act in piety to deserve His protection, and the enemy should fall upon you all at once, your Lord will come to your help with five thousand angels swooping down.
3|126| God did not ordain this save as a message of good hope for you, and so that thereby your hearts might be at peace – victory comes only from God, the All-Glorious with irresistible might, the All-Wise.
3|127| And that (through you) He might cut off a (leading) party of those who disbelieved, or overwhelm them, so that they (and others) would retreat in utter disappointment.
3|128| (O Messenger, you are a servant charged with a certain duty, therefore) it is not a matter for you whether He turns towards them in mercy (to accept their repentance for their unbelief, and grants them faith) or punishes them because they are wrongdoers.
3|129| To God belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth; He forgives whom He wills and punishes whom He wills. And God is All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate.
3|130| O you who believe! Do not consume usury, doubled and redoubled; and act in piety, keeping from disobedience to Him, so that you may prosper (in both worlds).
3|131| And (be careful of your acts and transactions and) guard yourselves against the Fire, prepared for the unbelievers.
3|132| Obey God and the Messenger, so that you may be shown mercy (granted a good, virtuous life in this world and eternal happiness in the Hereafter).
3|133| And hasten, as if competing with one another, to forgiveness from your Lord, and to a Garden as spacious as the heavens and the earth, prepared for the God-revering, pious.
3|134| They spend (out of what God has provided for them,) both in ease and hardship, ever-restraining their rage (even when provoked and able to retaliate), and pardoning people (their offenses). God loves (such) people who are devoted to doing good, aware that God is seeing them.
3|135| They are also the ones who, when they have committed a shameful deed or wronged themselves (through any kind of sinful act), immediately remember God and implore Him to forgive their sins – for who will forgive sins save God? – and do not persist knowingly in whatever (evil) they have committed.
3|136| Such are the ones whose reward is forgiveness from their Lord and Gardens through which rivers flow, to abide therein. How excellent is the reward of those who always do good deeds!
3|137| Assuredly, before you have passed many ways of life and practices (that illustrate the law God has established for the life of human societies). Go about, then, on the earth and behold how the outcome was for those who denied (God’s manifest signs and Messengers).
3|138| This (history of peoples past) is a plain exposition (of the truth) for all people, and a clear guidance (to a more substantial faith and devotion) and an instruction for the God-revering, pious.
3|139| Do not, then, be faint of heart, nor grieve, for you are always the superior side if you are (true) believers.
3|140| If a wound has touched you (at Uhud), (you know that) a similar wound touched those (disbelieving) people (at Badr). Such (historic, eventful) days – We deal them out in turns among people so that God may mark out those who (truly) believe and select from among you such as bear witness to the truth (with their lives); – (it is a fact that) God does not love the wrongdoers (and in the end He punishes wrong and makes truth superior) –
3|141| And that He may purify the believers (individually, of all base metal, and collectively, of the hypocrites among them) and gradually blot out the unbelievers.
3|142| Did you suppose that you should enter Paradise without God marking out those among you who really strive hard (in His cause and marking out the patient and steadfast?
3|143| You did indeed long for death (for God’s cause) before you came face to face with it; now you have faced it (on the battlefield), only observing it with your own eyes (without doing anything to meet it).
3|144| (Did you think that this cause of Islam subsisted not by God but while Muhammad was alive among you? If so, know that this cause depends on God and as for his part in it, know that) Muhammad is but a Messenger, and Messengers passed away before him. If, then, he dies or is killed, will you turn back on your heels? Whoever turns back on his heels can in no way harm God. But God will (abundantly) reward the thankful ones (those who are steadfast in God’s cause).
3|145| It never occurs that a soul dies save by God’s leave, at a time appointed. So whoever desires the reward of this world, We give him of it (in the world); and whoever desires the reward of the Hereafter, We give him of it; and We will soon reward the thankful.
3|146| And how many a Prophet has had to fight (for God’s cause), followed by numbers of godly, dedicated servants of God; and they did not become faint of heart for all that befell them in God’s cause, nor did they weaken, nor did they abase themselves (before the enemy). And God loves the patient and steadfast.
3|147| What they said (when they encountered the enemy) was: "Our Lord! Forgive us our sins and any wasteful act we may have done in our duty, and set our feet firm, and help us to victory over the disbelieving people!"
3|148| So God granted them the reward of this world as well as the best reward of the Hereafter. Indeed God loves those devoted to doing good, aware that God is seeing them.
3|149| O you who believe! If you follow those who disbelieve (the hypocrites and Jews in Madinah who spread negative propaganda concerning the events at Uhud), they will drive you back on your heels (into unbelief), and you will turn utter losers (in both this world and the next).
3|150| But God is your Guardian and Owner, and He is the best of helpers.
3|151| We will throw alarm into the hearts of those who disbelieve because they associate with God partners, for which He has sent no authority at all; and their refuge will be the Fire; and how evil is the dwelling of the wrongdoers!
3|152| God did indeed fulfill His promise to you when you routed them by His leave, up to (the point) when you lost heart, and disagreed about the order (given to the archers among you not to leave their positions), and disobeyed, after He had brought you within sight of that (victory) for which you were longing. Among you were such as cared for this world, and among you were such as cared for the Hereafter. Then He diverted you from them (the enemy), that He might try you. But He has surely pardoned you: God has grace and bounty for the believers.
3|153| When you were running off (from the battlefield), paying no heed to anyone, and at your rear the Messenger was calling out to you (to stay in the battle), then God requited you with grief after grief so that you might not grieve either for what escaped you, or for what befell you. God is fully aware of all that you do.
3|154| Then, after grief, He sent down peace and security for you: a slumber overtook some of you; and some, being concerned (merely) about themselves, were entertaining false notions about God – notions of (the pre-Islamic) Ignorance – and saying: "Do we have any part in the authority (in the decision-making)?" Say (to them, O Messenger): "The authority rests with God exclusively." Indeed, they concealed within themselves what they would not reveal to you, and were saying (among themselves): "If only we had had a part in the authority (in the decision-making), we would not have been killed here." Say (O Messenger): "Even if you had been in your houses, those for whom killing had been ordained would indeed have gone forth to the places where they were to lie (in death)." (All of this happened as it did) so that He may test what (thoughts, intentions, and inclinations) is in your bosoms and purify and prove what is (the faith) in your hearts. God has full knowledge of what lies hidden in the bosoms.
3|155| Those of you who turned away on the day when the two hosts encountered (at Uhud), Satan made them slip because of some of the errors they themselves had committed. But now God has pardoned them. Surely God is All-Forgiving, All-Clement.
3|156| O you who believe! Be not as those who disbelieve and say of their brothers who (died) after having set out on a journey or gone forth to war, "Had they remained with us, they would not have died or been killed." God wills that such thoughts as this should be a cause of sighs and anguish in their hearts. God (He alone) gives life and causes to die; and whatever you do, God sees it well.
3|157| And if you are killed, or die, in God’s cause, then forgiveness from God and mercy are far better than all that they could amass (in this life).
3|158| And, assuredly, if you die or are killed, it is to God that you will be gathered.
3|159| It was by a mercy from God that (at the time of the setback), you (O Messenger) were lenient with them (your Companions). Had you been harsh and hard-hearted, they would surely have scattered away from about you. Then pardon them, pray for their forgiveness, and take counsel with them in the affairs (of public concern), and when you are resolved (on a course of action), put your trust in God. Surely God loves those who put their trust (in Him).
3|160| If God helps you, there will be none who can overcome you; if He forsakes you, who is there that can help you thereafter? In God, then, let the believers put all their trust.
3|161| It is not conceivable that a Prophet defrauds; and whoever defrauds (by stealing from public property or war-gains) will come with what he gained by his fraud on the Day of Resurrection. Then every soul shall be repaid in full what it has earned (while in the world), and they will not be wronged.
3|162| What, is he who strives after God’s good pleasure and approval like him who is laden with God’s condemnation and whose refuge is Hell? How evil a destination to arrive at!
3|163| They are in varying grades in God’s sight, and God sees well all that they do.
3|164| Assuredly, God has done the believers a great kindness by raising among them a Messenger of their own, reciting to them His Revelations, and purifying them (of false beliefs and doctrines, and sins, and all kinds of uncleanness), and instructing them in the Book and the Wisdom. Whereas, before that, they were lost in obvious error.
3|165| And do you, now that a disaster has befallen you, though you inflicted the double (of that on your foes at Badr), say: "Whence is this?" Say (to them, O Messenger): "It is from your own selves." Surely God has full power over everything.
3|166| What befell you on the day when the two hosts met (in battle) was by God’s leave, and that He might mark out the (true) believers.
3|167| And that He might mark out those who acted in hypocrisy: when they were told, "Come and fight in God’s cause, or defend yourselves (actively, in order to keep the enemy outside the city)," they said: "If we but knew there would be fighting, we would indeed follow you." They that day were nearer to unbelief than to faith, uttering with their mouths what was not in their hearts. God knows very well what they were concealing.
3|168| They who, having themselves held back (from fighting), say of their (slain) brothers, "Had they but paid heed to us, they would not have been killed." Say (to them, O Messenger): "Avert, then, death from yourselves, if you are truthful (in your claim)."
3|169| Do not think at all of those killed in God’s cause as dead. Rather, they are alive; with their Lord they have their sustenance,
3|170| Rejoicing in what God has granted them out of His bounty, and joyful in the glad tidings for those left behind who have not yet joined them, that (in the event of martyrdom) they will have no fear, nor will they grieve.
3|171| They are joyful in the glad tidings of God’s blessing and bounty (that He has prepared for the martyrs), and in (the promise) that God never leaves to waste the reward of the believers.
3|172| Those who responded to the call of God and the Messenger after the hurt had befallen them – for all those of them who persevered in doing good, aware that God was seeing them, and acted in reverence for God and piety, there is a tremendous reward.
3|173| Those to whom some people said: "Look, those people have gathered against you, therefore be fearful of them." But it increased them only in faith, and they responded: "God is sufficient for us; how excellent a Guardian He is!"
3|174| So they returned with favor and bounty from God, having suffered no harm. They strove after God’s good pleasure by acting in the way He approved of. God is of tremendous grace and bounty.
3|175| It was but that (human) devil who, (by provoking alarm,) desires to make you fearful of his allies. So do not fear them, but fear Me, if you are (true) believers.
3|176| Let not those who rush in unbelief as if competing with one another grieve you; they can in no way harm God (and His true friends). God wills that they will have no share in (the blessings of) the Hereafter. For them is a tremendous punishment.
3|177| Those (unthinking ones) who have bought unbelief in exchange for belief can in no way harm God (and His true friends who fear and rely on Him.) For them is a tremendous punishment.
3|178| And let not those who disbelieve think that Our giving them rein is good for them. We give them rein only that they may grow in sin and wickedness (and deserve God’s punishment). For them is a shameful, humiliating punishment.
3|179| It was not (the will) of God to leave the believers in the state you are now in (with the people of true faith indistinguishable from the hypocrites), until He distinguishes the corrupt from the pure. Nor was it (the will of God) that He would make you aware of the Unseen (so that you would know your future and have insight into the hearts of people). But (to that end) God chooses of His Messengers whom He wills (and completes the test to which He puts you in the world). So believe in God and His Messengers: if you (truly) believe and live in piety, keeping from disobedience to Him and to His Messenger, then there is for you a tremendous reward.
3|180| Let not those who are niggardly with what God has granted them out of His bounty think that it is good for them: rather, it is bad for them. What they are niggardly with, they will have it hung about their necks on the Day of Resurrection. (Why are they niggardly, seeing that to God belongs the absolute ownership of the heavens and the earth, and) He will inherit them in the end. And God is fully aware of all that you do.
3|181| God has indeed heard the saying of those who said, "God is poor, and we are rich." We will record what they have said, as well as their killing the Prophets against all right; and We will say (to them): "Taste the punishment of the scorching fire!"
3|182| This is because of (the unrighteous deeds) that your own hands have forwarded, for never does God do the least wrong to the servants.
3|183| (Also it is) they who said: "God made covenant with us, that we believe not in any Messenger unless he brings us an offering which (as a sign of its being accepted by God) a fire (from heaven) will consume." Say (to them, O Messenger): "Before me there came to you Messengers with the clear proofs (of their Messengership) and with that (same miracle) which you describe: why, then, did you kill them, if you are true in your claim?"
3|184| (O Messenger!) If they deny you, (do not grieve!) For in the same way Messengers were denied before you, who came with the clear proofs (of their Messengership), Scrolls (full of wisdom and advice), and the Book (the Torah and the Gospel) enlightening (their mind and hearts, and) illuminating (their way).
3|185| (No one will live for ever doing what they do:) Every soul is bound to taste death. So (O people) you will but be repaid in full on the Day of Resurrection (for whatever you have done in the world). Whoever is spared the Fire and admitted into Paradise has indeed prospered and triumphed. (Know that) the present, worldly life is nothing but a transient enjoyment of delusion.
3|186| (So, O believers, as a requirement of the wisdom in and purpose for your life of the world,) you will surely be tested in respect of your properties and your selves, and you will certainly hear many hurtful things from those who were given the Book before you and those who associate partners with God. If you remain patient (are steadfast in your religion and observe the bounds set by God in your relations with them) and keep within the limits of piety (in obeying God and in your conduct toward them), (know that) this is among meritorious things requiring great resolution to fulfill.
3|187| (Remember) when God took a covenant from those who were given the Book: "You shall make clear to the people (the whole truth of all that is in) the Book (including mention of the Last, promised Prophet), and not conceal it." But they paid no heed to it, flinging it behind their backs, and sold it for a trifling price (such as worldly advantage and position, status and renown). How evil a bargain they made!
3|188| Never suppose that those who rejoice in what they have thus contrived, and who love to be (famed and) praised for what they have not achieved (such as being devout and pious and defenders of God’s law) – never suppose that they have saved themselves from the punishment: for them is a painful punishment.
3|189| And God’s is the sovereignty (absolute ownership and dominion) of the heavens and the earth, and God has full power over everything.
3|190| Surely in the creation of the heavens and the earth and the alternation of night and day (with their periods shortening and lengthening) there are signs (manifesting the truth) for the people of discernment.
3|191| They remember and mention God (with their tongues and hearts), standing and sitting and lying down on their sides (whether during the Prayer or not), and reflect on the creation of the heavens and the earth. (Having grasped the purpose of their creation and the meaning they contain, they conclude and say): "Our Lord, You have not created this (the universe) without meaning and purpose. All-Glorified You are (in that You are absolutely above doing anything meaningless and purposeless), so save us from (having wrong conceptions of Your acts and acting against Your purpose for creation, and so deserving) the punishment of the Fire!
3|192| "Our Lord! Whomever You admit into the Fire, indeed You have brought him to disgrace. (Having concealed or rejected God’s signs in the heavens and on the earth and so denied God or fallen into associating partners with Him,) the wrongdoers will have no helpers (against the Fire).
3|193| "Our Lord! Indeed We have heard a caller calling to faith, saying: ‘Believe in your Lord!’, so we did believe. Our Lord, forgive us, then, our sins, and blot out from us our evil deeds, and take us to You in death in the company of the truly godly and virtuous.
3|194| "Our Lord! Grant us what You have promised us through Your Messengers. Do not disgrace us on the Day of Resurrection; indeed You never break Your promise."
3|195| And thus does their (All-Gracious and Generous) Lord answer them: "I do not leave to waste the work of any of you (engaged in doing good), whether male or female. (As males and females following the same way) you are all one from the other. Hence, those who have emigrated (in My cause) and been expelled from their homelands and suffered hurt in My cause, and have fought and been killed, indeed I will blot out from them their evil deeds and will admit them into Gardens through which rivers flow, as a reward from God (with infinite Mercy and Power to fulfill whatever He promises)." With God lies the best reward.
3|196| Let it not deceive you (O Messenger) that those who disbelieve strut about the land in pomp and show of dominion.
3|197| It is but a brief enjoyment, with Hell thereafter as their final refuge: how evil a cradle it is!
3|198| Whereas those who keep from disobedience to their Lord (Who created and raised them, and sustains them, and Who has sent them the best of laws to order their lives), and act within the limits of piety – for them are Gardens through which rivers flow, therein to abide: a hospitality from the Presence of God; and that which is with God is best for the truly godly and virtuous.
3|199| And, behold, among the People of the Book are those who believe in God and what has been sent down to you, and what was sent down to them, those humbling themselves before God in reverence, not selling God’s Revelations for a trifling price. Such are those whose reward is with their Lord. God is swift at reckoning.
3|200| O you who believe! Be patient (persevere through what befalls you in the world in God’s cause); encourage each other to patience vying in it with one another and outdoing all others in it; and observe your duties to God in solidarity, and keep from disobedience to God in due reverence for Him and piety, so that you may prosper (in both worlds)!
4|1| O humankind! In due reverence for your Lord, keep from disobedience to Him Who created you from a single human self, and from it created its mate, and from the pair of them scattered abroad a multitude of men and women. In due reverence for God, keep from disobedience to Him in Whose name you make demands of one another, and (duly observe) the rights of the wombs (i.e. of kinship, thus observing piety in your relations with God and with human beings). God is ever watchful over you.
4|2| Restore their property to the orphans (in your custody, when they come of age), and do not exchange the corrupt for the good (the unlawful for the lawful), nor consume their property by mixing it up with your own. For doing that would be a great crime (whereby you risk the spiritual reward you hope for by caring for them).
4|3| If you fear that you will not be able to observe their rights with exact fairness when you marry the orphan girls (in your custody), you can marry, from among other women (who are permitted to you in marriage and) who seem good to you, two, or three, or four. However, if you fear that (in your marital obligations) you will not be able to observe justice among them, then content yourselves with only one, or the captives that your right hands possess. Doing so it is more likely that you will not act rebelliously.
4|4| Give to the women (whom you marry) their bridal-due (mahr) willingly and for good (i.e. without expecting a return); however, if of their own accord they remit any part of it to you, then you are welcome to enjoy it gladly.
4|5| Do not give to those of weak mind your property that God has put in your charge (as a means of support for you and for the needy), but feed and clothe them out of it (especially with the profit you will make by exploiting it), and speak to them kindly and words of honest advice.
4|6| (Care for and) test the orphans well until they reach the age of marriage. Then, if you find them to be mature of mind, hand over to them their property; and do not consume it by wasteful spending, nor do so in haste fearing that they will come of age (and so take it over). If the guardian is rich (enough to support himself and his family), let him abstain (from his ward’s property); but if he is poor, let him consume thereof in a just and reasonable manner. When you hand (their property) over to them, let there be witnesses on their behalf. God suffices as One Who reckons and settles the accounts (of His servants).
4|7| For the male heirs is a share out of what parents and near kindred leave behind, and for the female heirs is a share of what parents and near kindred leave behind, whether it (the inheritance) be little or much – a share ordained by God.
4|8| If some from among other relatives (who do not have a legally defined share), and orphans and the destitute, are present at the division (of the inheritance), give them something thereof (for their provision), and speak to them kindly and pleasing words.
4|9| Let those fear (be anxious for the rights of the orphans) who, if they (themselves) were to leave behind weak offspring, would be fearful on their account – and let them keep from disobedience to God for fear of His punishment, and let them speak the truth and proper words (in respect of the division of the inheritance and their treatment of the orphans.)
4|10| Surely those who consume the property of orphans wrongfully, certainly they consume a fire in their bellies; and soon they will be roasting in a Blaze (the like of which you have never seen and the degree of whose intensity none knows except God).
4|11| God commands you in (the matter of the division of the inheritance among) your children: for the male is the equivalent of the portion of two females. If there are more than two females (with no males), for them is two-thirds of the inheritance; if there is only one, then the half. As for the parents (of the deceased): for each of the two is one-sixth of the inheritance, in case of his having left a child; but if he has left no children and his parents are his only heirs, then for his mother is one-third. If he has (a surviving mother and, together with or without sisters,) two or more (surviving) brothers, then for his mother is one-sixth – (all these commands to be put into effect) after deduction for any bequest he may have made (provided such bequest is in conformity with the relevant teachings of Islam) and any debt (incurred by him) (– first the debt is paid, then the bequest is fulfilled, and then the inheritance is shared). Your parents and your children: you do not know which of them is nearer to you in (bringing you) benefit. This (law of inheritance) is an ordinance from God (that you must absolutely obey). Assuredly, God is All-Knowing (of your affairs and what benefits or harms you), and All-Wise.
4|12| And for you is a half of what your wives leave behind, if they have no children; but if they have a child, then you shall have one-fourth of what they leave behind – after deduction for any bequest they may have made and any debt (incurred by them). And for them is one-fourth of what you leave behind, if you have no children; but if you have a child, then they shall have one-eighth of what you leave behind – after deduction for any bequest you may have made and any debt (incurred by you). And if a man or a woman has no heir in the direct line, but has a brother or a sister (on the mother’s side), for him or her is one-sixth; but if there are two or more, then they shall be sharers in one-third – after deduction for any bequest that may have been made or debt; neither (bequest or debt) intending harm (to the rights of the heirs in such ways as declaring fictitious debts or bequeathing more than one-third of one’s estate). A commandment from God. God is All-Knowing (of all your intentions, actions, and outcomes), All-Clement (not hasty to punish the errors of His servants).
4|13| These are the bounds set by God. Whoever obeys God and His Messenger (by remaining within these bounds), God will admit him into Gardens through which rivers flow, abiding therein. That is the supreme triumph.
4|14| But whoever disobeys God and His Messenger and exceeds His bounds, God will admit him into a Fire, to abide therein, and for him is a shameful, humiliating punishment.
4|15| Such of your women as have committed indecency (unlawful sex), there must be four male witnesses of you who (having seen them in the act) will testify against them (within one succeeding month in towns and six months in the rural areas). If they do bear witness, then confine those women to their houses until death takes them away or God opens some way for them.
4|16| When two from among you have committed it, then punish them both by scolding and beating; but if they are remorseful and repent, and make amends, then withdraw from them. Assuredly, God is He Who accepts repentance and returns it with liberal forgiveness, All-Compassionate.
4|17| God’s acceptance of repentance is only for those who commit evil due to an instance of defeat to the evil commanding soul, and then (pull themselves together and) repent shortly afterwards. It is they whose repentance God returns with forgiveness; and God is All-Knowing (of what everyone does and why), and All-Wise.
4|18| But of no avail is the repentance of those who commit evil (for a lifetime) until, when one of them is visited by death, he says, "Indeed now I repent." Nor (likewise does the repentance avail) of those who (spend their lives in unbelief and offer to repent just at the time of death, but) die as unbelievers (since such repentance is not acceptable). For such We have prepared a painful punishment.
4|19| O you who believe! It is not lawful for you to become inheritors, against their will, of women (of your deceased kinsmen, marrying them against their will, without paying their bridal-due, or forcing them to marry others in return for their bridal-due as though they were a part of heritable property); nor should you constrain your wives in order to take away anything of what you have given them (as bridal-due or bridal gift), unless they be guilty of indecency in an obvious manner (such as to justify divorce). Consort with them in a good manner, for if you are not pleased with them, it may well be that you dislike something but God has set in it much good.
4|20| But if you still decide to dispense with a wife and marry another and you have given the former (even so much as amounts to) a treasure, do not take back anything thereof. Would you take it back by slandering (for the purpose of contriving the kind of divorce that allows you to take it back) and so committing a flagrant sin?
4|21| Then, how could you take it back when you have gone in to each other, and they (the married women) have taken from you a most solemn pledge (of honoring their rights)?
4|22| And do not marry the women whom your fathers married – except what has happened (of that sort) in the past (before your conversion: such occurrences are forgivable provided you rectify your conduct and terminate any such contract of marriage). This was indeed a shameful deed and hateful thing, and how evil a way!
4|23| Forbidden to you (O believing men) are your mothers (including stepmothers and grandmothers) and daughters (including granddaughters), your sisters (including full sisters and half-sisters), your aunts paternal and maternal, your brothers’ daughters, your sisters’ daughters, your mothers who have given suck to you, your milk-sisters (all those as closely related to you through milk as through descent ), your wives’ mothers, your stepdaughters – who are your foster-children, born of your wives with whom you have consummated marriage; but if you have not consummated marriage with them, there will be no blame on you (should you marry their daughters) – and the spouses of your sons who are of your loins, and to take two sisters together in marriage (including a niece and her aunt maternal or paternal) – except what has happened (of that sort) in the past. Surely God is All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate.
4|24| And (also forbidden to you are) all married women save those (captives) whom your right hands possess (and whose ties with their husbands have practically been cut off). This is God’s decree, binding upon you. Lawful for you are all beyond those mentioned, that you may seek, offering them of your wealth, taking them in sound chastity (i.e. in marriage), and not in licentiousness. And whomever of them you seek to enjoy in marriage (under these conditions), give them their bridal-due as a duty. But there is no blame on you for what you do by mutual agreement after the duty (has been done). Assuredly, God is All-Knowing (of what you do and why), and All-Wise.
4|25| If any of you cannot afford to marry free, believing women, (let them marry) believing maidens from among those whom your right hands possess. (Do not regard marriage to such believing maidens as a degradation. Rather, degradation is deviating into licentiousness without marrying.) God knows well all about your faith (and measures you by it); and (whether you be free or slaves) you are one from another (belonging, as believers, to the same faith and community). Marry them, then, with the leave of their guardians, and give them their bridal-due according to religiously lawful and customary good practice, they being women who give themselves in honest chastity, not in licentiousness, nor having secret love-companions. Then if they commit indecency after they have entered into wedlock, they shall be liable to half the penalty to which free (unmarried) women are liable. That (permission to marry slave-girls) is for those of you who fear to fall into sin (by remaining unmarried). But if you persevere (in self-restraint with no fear of falling into sin), that is better for you. And God is All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate.
4|26| God wills to explain to you (His commandments in which your happiness lie), and to guide you to the (righteous) ways of life of those who preceded you, and to turn to you (with mercy and favor). God is All-Knowing, All-Wise.
4|27| God wills to turn to you (with mercy and favor by explaining to you His commandments and guiding you to the Straight Path), whereas those who follow (their) lusts (for women, offspring, wealth, fame, status, and position) desire you to deviate greatly (from the Straight Path).
4|28| God wills to lighten for you (your burdens), for human has been created weak (liable to err).
4|29| O you who believe! Do not consume one another’s wealth in wrongful ways (such as theft, extortion, bribery, usury, and gambling), except it be dealing by mutual agreement; and do not destroy yourselves (individually or collectively by following wrongful ways like extreme asceticism and idleness. Be ever mindful that) God has surely been All-Compassionate toward you (particularly as believers).
4|30| Whoever acts wrongfully through enmity (toward others) and by way of deliberate transgression and wronging (both himself and others), We will surely land him in a Fire to roast therein (the like of which you have never seen and the degree of whose intensity none knows except God); that indeed is easy for God.
4|31| If you avoid the major sins which you have been forbidden, We will blot out from you your minor evil deeds and make you enter by a noble entrance (to an abode of glory).
4|32| (People differ from each other in capacity and means of livelihood; nor is it in your hands to be born male or female. Therefore) do not covet that in which God has made some of you excel others (thus envying others in such things as status or wealth or physical charms and so objecting to God’s distribution). Men shall have a share according to what they have earned (in both material and spiritual terms), and women shall have a share according to what they have earned. (On the other hand, do not refuse effort and aspiration; instead of envying others,) ask God (to give you more) of His bounty (through lawful labor and through prayer). Assuredly God has full knowledge of everything.
4|33| And to everyone We have appointed heirs to what the parents and near kindred might leave behind. (As those heirs have defined portions in the inheritance that must be given them,) so to those with whom you have made a solemn covenant, give them their due share. God is indeed a witness over everything.
4|34| Men (those who are able to carry out their responsibilities) are the protectors and maintainers of women inasmuch as God has endowed some of people (in some respects) with greater capacity than others and inasmuch as they (the men) spend of their wealth (for the family’s maintenance). Good, righteous women are the devoted ones (to God) and observant (of their husbands’ rights), who guard the secrets (family honor and property, their chastity, and their husband’s rights, especially where there is none to see them and in the absence of men) as God guards and keeps undisclosed (what should be guarded and private). As for those women from whose determined disobedience and breach of their marital obligations you have reason to fear, admonish them (to do what is right); then, (if that proves to be of no avail), remain apart from them in beds; then (if that too proves to be of no avail) beat them (lightly without beating them in their faces). Then if they obey you (in your directing them to observe God’s rights and their marital obligations) do not seek ways against them (to harm them). (Be ever mindful that) God is indeed All-Exalted, All-Great.
4|35| And if you fear that a breach might occur between a couple, appoint an arbiter from among his people and an arbiter from among her people. If they both want to set things aright, God will bring about reconciliation between them. Assuredly, God is All-Knowing, All-Aware.
4|36| And (as the essential basis of contentment in individual, family and social life,) worship God and do not associate anything as a partner with Him; and do good to your parents in the best way possible, and to the relatives, orphans, the destitute, the neighbor who is near (in kinship, location, faith), the neighbor who is distant (in kinship and faith), the companion by your side (on the way, in the family, in the workplace, etc.), the wayfarer, and those who are in your service. (Treat them well and bring yourself up to this end, for) God does not love those who are conceited and boastful;
4|37| Those who act meanly (in spending out of what God has granted them) and urge others to be mean, and conceal the things God has granted them out of His bounty (such as wealth or knowledge, and certain truths in their Book). We have prepared for (such) unbelievers a shameful, humiliating punishment.
4|38| And (likewise) those who spend their wealth (in charity or other good cause) to make a show of it to people (so as to be praised by them) when they believe neither in God nor in the Last Day: Whoever has Satan for a comrade, how evil a comrade he is!
4|39| Why, what (harm) would fall upon them, if they believed in God and the Last Day, and spent out of what God has provided for them (purely for the pleasure of God), and God has full knowledge of them (of what they believe in and what they spend)?
4|40| Assuredly, God wrongs (no-one) not even so much as an atom’s weight; while if there is a good deed, He multiplies it (with respect to its outcomes and the reward it will bring), and grants (its doer) a tremendous reward purely from His Presence (beyond what it may have merited).
4|41| How, then, will it be (with people on the Day of Judgment) when We bring forward a witness from every community (to testify against them and that God’s Religion was communicated to them), and bring you (O Messenger) as a witness against all those (whom your Message may have reached)?
4|42| On that Day those who disbelieved (in this life and died in unbelief) and disobeyed the Messenger wish that the earth might be leveled with them (so as to leave no trace or record of them); but they will not be able to conceal from God any telling (of what they said or did).
4|43| O you who believe! Do not come forward to (stand in) the Prayer while you are in (any sort of) state of drunkenness until you know what you are saying, nor while you are in the state of ritual impurity (requiring the total ablution) – save when you are on a journey (and then unable to bathe) – until you have bathed (done the total ablution). But if you are ill, or on a journey, or if any of you has just satisfied a call of nature, or you have had contact with women, and can find no water, then betake yourselves to pure earth, passing with it lightly over your face and hands (and forearms up to and including the elbows). Assuredly God is One Who grants remission, All-Forgiving.
4|44| Do you not see and reflect upon those who were given a portion from the Book? They are occupied with buying straying, and desire that you too should stray from the (right) way.
4|45| (O believers!) God knows best who your enemies are; and God suffices as Guardian and Protecting Friend, and God suffices as Helper.
4|46| Among those who have become Jews (Judaized) are some who alter the words from their context to distort their meanings, and say: "We have heard and we disobey," and, "Do hear us, may you turn dumb," (while pretending to say: "Will you hearken to us, O respected one!"), and "Listen to us! May you become deaf, O shepherd!" (while pretending to say: "Attend to us!") – thus making a malicious play with their tongues and seeking to revile the (True) Religion. Had they but said, "We have heard and we obey," and "Listen to us," and "Favor us with your attention!", it would indeed have been for their own good, and more upright. But God has excluded them from His mercy because of their (willful, persistent) unbelief, and, but for a few, scarcely do they believe.
4|47| O you who were given the Book (before)! Believe (sincerely) in (the whole of) what We have been sending down (on Muhammad), confirming what (of the truth) you already possess, before We obliterate faces so as to deprive them of seeing, hearing, speaking and smelling, or exclude them from Our mercy as We excluded the Sabbath-breakers. (Bear in mind that) God’s command is always executed.
4|48| Assuredly God does not forgive that partners be associated with Him; less than that He forgives to whomever He wills (whomever He has guided to repentance and righteousness either out of His pure grace or as a result of the person’s choosing repentance and righteousness by his free will). Whoever associates any partner with God has indeed fabricated a most heinous sin.
4|49| Do you (O Messenger) not consider those who regard themselves pure and sanctified? No! Rather, it is God Who makes pure and sanctifies whomever He wills (considering the free will of each), and none is wronged even by as much as a tiny hair.
4|50| Look! how they fabricate falsehood in attribution to God; and that suffices for a flagrant sin (to lead them to their perdition.)
4|51| Do you not consider those who were given a portion of the Book, how they believe in any false deity and all manner of powers of evil (who institute patterns of faith and rule in defiance of God), and say about those (idolaters) who disbelieve that they are more rightly guided (in the way they follow) than those who believe?
4|52| Such are the ones whom God has excluded from His mercy, and he whom God excludes from His mercy, you shall never find one to help and save him.
4|53| Or do they have a share in the sovereignty (ownership and dominion of the heavens and the earth, so that they claim some privileged position in God’s sight and a right to guidance, Prophethood, and rule on the earth)? If that were so, they would not give people even as much as (would fill) the groove of a date-stone.
4|54| Or do they envy others for what God granted them out of His grace and bounty? Yet We did grant the Family of Abraham (including the progeny of Ishmael proceeding from him, as well as that of Isaac) the Book and the Wisdom, and We granted them a mighty kingdom (in both the material and spiritual realm).
4|55| Among them (those belonging to Abraham’s progeny) have been and are such as truly believe in him (and therefore they believe in Muhammad who has the best claim to a relationship with Abraham, and believe in the Qur’an revealed to him), and among them are such as bar people from him (like some from among those who were given the Book before). (For the latter) Hell suffices for a blaze.
4|56| Those who (knowingly) conceal and reject Our Revelations, We will land them in a Fire to roast there. Every time their skins are burnt off, We will replace them with other skins, that they may taste the punishment. Assuredly, God is All-Glorious with irresistible might, and All-Wise.
4|57| But those who believe and do good, righteous deeds, We will admit them into the Gardens through which rivers flow, therein abiding for ever. Therein for them will be spouses purified, and We will admit them to an all-protecting shade (ease and contentment).
4|58| God commands you to deliver trusts (including public and professional duties of service) to those entitled to them; and when you judge between people, to judge with justice. How excellent is what God exhorts you to do; assuredly, God is All-Hearing, All-Seeing.
4|59| O you who believe! Obey God and obey the Messenger, and those from among you who are invested with authority; and if you are to dispute among yourselves about anything, refer it to God and the Messenger, if indeed you believe in God and the Last Day. This is the best (for you) and fairest in the end.
4|60| Do you not consider those who assert that they believe in what has been sent down to you and what was sent before you, and yet desire to go for judgment in their disputes to (the rule of) the powers of evil (who institute patterns of rule in defiance of God), when they were expressly commanded to reject it. Truly, Satan desires to lead them far astray.
4|61| When they were told: "Come to that which God has sent down and to the Messenger (and submit to God’s judgment)," you see the hypocrites turn away from you with disgust.
4|62| But how then, when a disaster befalls them because of what they have forwarded with their own hands (to their future), they come to you, swearing by God and say: "We intended only goodwill and conciliation!"
4|63| Such are the ones – God knows what is in their hearts; so withdraw from them (do not care what they say and do), and (continue to) admonish them, and say to them profound words touching their very souls.
4|64| (Everyone should know well that) We have never sent a Messenger but that he should be obeyed by God’s leave. If, when they wronged themselves (by committing a sin), they but came to you and implored God to forgive them – with the Messenger praying to God for their forgiveness – they would find that God is One Who returns the repentance of His servants with liberal forgiveness and additional reward, and All-Compassionate.
4|65| But no! By your Lord, they do not (truly) believe unless they make you the judge regarding any dispute between them, and then find not the least vexation within themselves over what you have decided, and surrender in full submission.
4|66| If We were to ordain for them, "Lay down your lives (in God’s cause so that you may be purified of your sins)" or "Leave your habitations (that you have contaminated with your sins and emigrate to another land in God’s cause)," they would not do that save a few of them. But if they had done what was urged upon them (before things had come to this point) – if only they would do it from now on – it would indeed have been (and would be) for their own good and (more apt for them) to be more securely established (in the land).
4|67| And then We would surely have granted them from Our Presence a tremendous reward;
4|68| And indeed guided them to a straight path (in belief, thought, feeling and action).
4|69| Whoever obeys God and the Messenger (as they must be obeyed), then those are (and in the Hereafter will be, in Paradise) in the company of those whom God has favored (with the perfect guidance) – the Prophets, and the truthful ones (loyal to God’s cause and truthful in whatever they do and say), and the witnesses (those who see the hidden Divine truths and testify thereto with their lives), and the righteous ones (in all their deeds and sayings and dedicated to setting everything right). How excellent they are for companions!
4|70| Such is the grace that is from God, and God suffices as One All-Knowing (of how great that grace is, who deserves it, and the rank of those favored with it).
4|71| O you who believe! (While such great grace is there) be fully prepared, then (as circumstance demands) either go forward in (small) consolidated groups (on military expeditions) or go forward all together.
4|72| There are indeed among you such as him who lags behind. Then, if a disaster befalls you, he says: "Indeed God bestowed His favor upon me that I was not present with them."
4|73| But if some bounty from God comes to you, he is sure to say – just as if there had never been any tie of affection between you and him, (and therefore as if there had been an obstacle to his going forth with you) – "Oh, if only I had been with them, I would have come by a great gain."
4|74| So let those who trade the life of this world for the Hereafter fight in God’s cause. Whoever fights in God’s cause, whether he is killed or victorious, We will grant him a tremendous reward.
4|75| Why, then, should you not fight in the cause of God and of the oppressed, helpless men, women, and children, who cry out: "O Lord! Bring us out of this land whose people are oppressors, and appoint for us from Your Presence a protector, and appoint for us from Your Presence a helper!"
4|76| Those who (truly) believe fight in God’s cause, while those who disbelieve fight in the way of taghut (powers of evil who institute patterns of rule in defiance of God). So (O believers) fight against the friends and allies of Satan. Assuredly, Satan’s guile is ever feeble.
4|77| Do you not consider those who were told, "Restrain your hands (from war and similar endeavor), and do the Prayer in conformity with all its conditions, and pay the Prescribed Purifying Alms (at which time they insistently asked you when they would be allowed to fight). But as the time has come and fighting has been ordained for them, a party among them fear people as one should fear God, or with even greater fear, and say: "O Lord! Why have you ordained fighting for us? If only You had granted us a little more respite!" Say (to them, O Messenger): "The enjoyment of the world is short-lived, whereas the Hereafter is the best for him who keeps from disobedience to God in reverence for Him and piety, and you will not be wronged by so much as a tiny hair."
4|78| Wherever you may be, death will overtake you, even though you be in towers built up strong and high. Yet, when some good happens to them, they say: "This is from God;" and when an evil befalls them, they say: "This is because of you." Say: "All is from God." But how is it with these people that they do not grasp the truth of anything said (or anything that has happened)!
4|79| (O human being!) Whatever good happens to you, it is from God; and whatever evil befalls you, it is from yourself. We have sent you (O Messenger) to humankind as a Messenger, and God suffices for a witness.
4|80| He who obeys the Messenger (thereby) obeys God, and he who turns away from him (and his way), (do not be grieved, O Messenger, for) We have not sent you as a keeper and watcher over them (to prevent their misdeeds and be accountable for them).
4|81| They say (when in your presence, to every command of yours), "By all means!" But when they leave your presence, a party of them make secret plans against what you say. God records whatever secret plans they make. So withdraw from them, and put your trust in God. God suffices as the One to be relied on, to Whom affairs should be referred.
4|82| Do they not contemplate the Qur’an (so that they may be convinced that it is from God)? Had it been from any other than God, they would surely have found in it much (incoherence or) inconsistency.
4|83| Whenever any news comes to them, related to (public) security or alarm, they go about spreading it (without ascertaining if the news is true or not and without thinking about whether it is beneficial or harmful to spread it). Whereas if they would but refer it to the Messenger and to those among them (in the community) who are entrusted with authority, those from among them who are competent to investigate it would bring to light what it is really about. (O believers!) Save for God’s grace and mercy upon you (in illuminating your way and guiding you with Revelation and His Messenger, and protecting you against your enemies and wrong ways), all but a few (of you) would have been (deceived by the hypocrites and) following Satan.
4|84| Fight (therefore, O Messenger) in God’s cause – for (in the same way that every individual is responsible for himself) you are (first of all) responsible for none except yourself. (Even left by yourself alone, fulfill your responsibility) – and urge on the believers (to take their responsibility). It may be that God will (thereby) restrain the force of those who disbelieve. Indeed God is strongest in might and strongest in repressing and punishing.
4|85| Whoever intercedes, mediates and helps for a good cause will have a share in its blessings, and whoever intercedes, mediates and helps for an evil cause shares in its burden. God has full watch over all things.
4|86| When (whether traveling or at home, or in war or at peace) you are greeted with a greeting (of peace and goodwill), answer with one better, or (at least) with the same. Surely God keeps account of all things.
4|87| God, there is no deity but He. He will gather you all together on the Day of Resurrection, about (the coming of) which there is no doubt. Who can be truer in statement than God?
4|88| (O believers!) How is it with you that you are in two groups regarding the hypocrites (from Makkah and other tribes who claim to be Muslims yet take part in the hostile machinations of their people against you), seeing that God has thrown them back (to unbelief) on account of what they have earned (by their sins)? Do you seek to guide him whom God has led astray? Whoever God has led astray, for him you cannot find a (safe) way (to follow).
4|89| They yearn that you should disbelieve just as they disbelieved so that you might be all alike. Do not, therefore, take from among them confidants and allies until they emigrate (to Madinah and join you) in God’s cause. But if they turn away (from this call and continue their hostility against you), seize them and kill them wherever you find them; and do not take to yourselves any of them as confidant, nor as helper.
4|90| Except those who seek refuge in a people between whom and you there is a treaty (of peace or alliance), or (those who) come to you with hearts shrinking from fighting against you as well as fighting against their own people. Had God willed, He would certainly have given them power over you and they would have fought against you. If they withdraw from you and do not fight against you, and offer you peace, then God allows you no way (to war) against them.
4|91| You will find others who wish to be secure from you (by signing treaty with you) and to be secure from their people (by breaking their treaty with you and joining them): every time they are called back to conspiracy and hostility against you, they plunge into it headlong. Hence, if they do not withdraw from you, nor offer you peace, nor restrain their hands (from hurting you), then seize them and kill them wherever you come upon them. It is against such that We have given you a clear sanction.
4|92| Yet (be circumspect), it is not for a believer to kill another believer unless it be by mistake. He who has killed a believer by mistake must set free a believing slave, and pay blood-money to his family (legal heirs), unless they forgo it as a freewill offering. If he (the victim), while himself a believer, belonged to a people hostile to you (between whom and you there is no treaty), then (the expiation is to) set free a believing slave. If he (the victim) belonged to a (non-Muslim) people between whom and you there is a treaty, then (the expiation is to) pay blood-money to his heirs, and to set free a believing slave. But he who has no means (to make such expiation), must fast for two consecutive months – a penance from God (a way of repentance). God is All-Knowing (of everything including what is in your bosoms), All-Wise.
4|93| Whoever kills a believer intentionally, his recompense (in the Hereafter) is Hell, therein to abide; and God has utterly condemned him, excluded him from His mercy, and prepared for him a tremendous punishment.
4|94| O you who believe! When you go forth (to war) in God’s cause, investigate with care until the situation becomes fully clear to you, and do not say to anyone who offers you (the greeting of) peace (thereby indicating his being a Muslim), "You are not a believer," seeking the fleeting gains of the present, worldly life; for with God are gains abundant. Even thus (as he now is) were you before (ignorant of faith and what being a Muslim is, and you too entered Islam with a similar word); but God has since then been gracious to you. So investigate with care until the situation becomes fully clear to you. Surely God is fully aware of all that you do.
4|95| Not equal are those of the believers who (when not all believers are required to mobilize for God’s cause) sit still without justifiable excuse (and without doing any harm to God’s cause) and those who strive (and fight) in God’s cause with their wealth and their persons. God has exalted in rank those who strive with their wealth and their persons over those who sit still. To each God has promised the best reward (Paradise), and yet God has exalted those who strive over those who sit still by a tremendous reward.
4|96| For them are ranks from Him (differing according to the degree of the sincerity and striving of each), and forgiveness and mercy (to bring unforeseen blessings). God is All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate.
4|97| As to those whose souls the angels (charged with taking the souls of people) take in the state of wronging themselves (by continuing to live in unbelief without suffering to emigrate to a land where they would be able to attain faith): They (the angels) ask them: "What situation were you in (so that you were not with the believers)?" They say: "We were under such oppression in this land that we could not find way to faith." They (the angels) say: "Was God’s earth not wide enough for you to emigrate in it?" Such are those whose refuge is Hell: how evil a destination to arrive at!
4|98| Except those truly oppressed among the men, and the women, and the children altogether without means and not guided to a way (to emigrate, and including those who, in their lifetime, have not had a means to be guided to faith).
4|99| For those (while their circumstances are unchanged, it is expected that) God will not hold them accountable and will excuse them. Assuredly God is One Who excuses much, All-Forgiving.
4|100| Whoever emigrates in God’s cause will find on the earth enough room for refuge and plentiful resources. He who leaves his home as an emigrant to God and His Messenger and whom death overtakes (while still on the way), his reward is due and sure with God. Assuredly, God is All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate.
4|101| (O believers!) When you go forth on the earth, there is no blame on you that you shorten the (Prescribed) Prayers, if you fear that those who disbelieve might cause you harm (by attacking you). Assuredly, the unbelievers are a manifest enemy to you.
4|102| When you (O Messenger) are among the believers (who are on an expedition and in fear that the unbelievers might harm them) and stand (to lead) the Prayer for them, let a party of them stand in Prayer with you and retain their arms with them (while the other party maintain their positions against the enemy). When the first party have done the prostrations (finished the rak‘ah), let them go to the rear of your company (and there hold positions against the enemy), and let the other party who have not prayed come forward and pray with you, being fully prepared against danger and retaining their arms. Those who disbelieve wish that you should be heedless of your weapons and your equipment, so that they might swoop upon you in a single (surprise) attack. But there will be no blame on you if you lay aside your arms (during Prayer) if you are troubled by rain (and the ground impedes your movement), or if you are ill; however, be fully prepared against danger. Surely God has prepared for the unbelievers a shameful, humiliating punishment.
4|103| When you have finished the Prayer (especially considering you have shortened your Prayers when journeying and in the state of fear), remember and mention God (with your tongues and hearts), standing and sitting and lying down on your sides (and even while at war). Then when you are once again secure, do the Prayer in conformity with all its conditions (and do the Prayers you had to omit just at the time of actual fighting). (Know that) the Prayer (being the most important kind of worship) is prescribed for the believers at fixed times.
4|104| Do not be faint of purpose in pursuing these people (who fight with you, and keep them under pressure as long as the state of war continues between you and them). If you are suffering (having to endure hardships), they too are suffering just as you are, but you hope (to receive) from God what they cannot hope for. God is indeed All-Knowing (of the states and conditions of all things), All-Wise.
4|105| Surely We have sent down to you the Book with the truth (embodying it, with nothing false in it), so that you should judge between people according to how God has shown you. So do not be a pleader on behalf of those who betray their trust.
4|106| Pray God for forgiveness. Assuredly God is All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate.
4|107| And do not plead on behalf of those who betray themselves (by lying to conceal the truth of the matter brought before you). Assuredly, God does not love whoever betrays trust and persists in sin.
4|108| They strive to hide (their evil deeds) from people but they do not strive to hide from God, whereas He is always with them when they hold night counsels displeasing to Him. God indeed encompasses (with His Knowledge, Seeing, Hearing and Power) all that they do.
4|109| Ah! You (O believers) might well plead on their behalf in the life of this world, but who will plead with God on their behalf on the Day of Resurrection, or who will then be their defender and guardian?
4|110| Yet whoever does an evil or wrongs himself (by committing sins to harm himself spiritually), and then implores God for forgiveness, will find God All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate.
4|111| Whereas whoever earns a sin (failing to seek forgiveness for it), earns it only against himself (to his own loss only). And God is All-Knowing, All-Wise.
4|112| And he who earns a wrong or sin and then throws the blame on an innocent person, has thereby laid upon himself (the additional burden of) a calumny and a flagrant sin.
4|113| But for God’s grace and favor upon you and His mercy, one party of them determined to mislead you, yet they mislead none but themselves, and cannot harm you in any way. (How could they do so, seeing that) God has sent down on you the Book and the Wisdom, and taught you what you did not know. God’s grace and favor upon you is tremendous indeed.
4|114| No good is there in most of their secret counsels except for him who exhorts to a deed of charity, or kind equitable dealings and honest affairs, or setting things right between people. Whoever does that seeking God’s good pleasure, We will grant to him a tremendous reward.
4|115| While whoever cuts himself off from the Messenger after the guidance (to what is truest and best in thought, belief, and conduct) has become clear to him, and follows a way other than that of the believers (for whom it is impossible to agree unanimously on a way that leads to error), We leave him (to himself) on the way he has turned to, and land him in Hell to roast there: how evil a destination to arrive at!
4|116| Indeed God does not forgive that partners be associated with Him; less than that He forgives to whomever He wills (whomever He has guided to repentance and righteousness as a result of his choosing repentance and righteousness by his free will). Whoever associates partners with God has indeed strayed far away (from the Straight Path).
4|117| In His stead, they invoke female deities – (in so doing) they in fact invoke none but a haughty, rebellious Satan,
4|118| One who is accursed by God (excluded from His mercy). Once he said: "Of Your servants I will surely take a share to be assigned to me (by their following me).
4|119| I will surely lead them astray and surely engross them in vain desires (superstitious fancies and false conceptions); and I will surely command them, and they will surely slit the ears of cattle (to mark them out as meant for their idols and as forbidden to themselves to eat, thus making a lawful thing unlawful); and also I will surely command them and they will surely alter God’s creation." Whoever takes Satan for a confidant and guardian instead of God has indeed suffered a manifest loss.
4|120| (In reality, however, Satan has no authority over people against God.) He makes promises to them and fills them with vain desires (superstitious fancies and false conceptions), and what he promises them is nothing but delusion.
4|121| Such (as those deluded by Satan): their shelter is Hell, and they will find no way to escape from it.
4|122| As for those who believe and do good, righteous deeds, We will admit them into the Gardens beneath (the places and through the trees of) which rivers flow, therein abiding for ever. This is God’s promise in truth. Who can be truer than God in speech?
4|123| It is not according to your fancies, nor according to the fancies of the People of the Book. (No one has a privilege in God’s sight by virtue of being nominally a Muslim or Jew or Christian. Rather, the truth is this:) Whoever does an evil will be recompensed for it, and he will not find for himself, apart from God, a guardian or a helper (to guard or help him against the consequence of that evil).
4|124| And whoever does deeds of righteousness, whether male or female, and is a (true) believer – such will enter Paradise, and they will not be wronged by even so little as (would fill) the groove of a date-stone.
4|125| Who is better in religion than he who has submitted his whole being to God (seeking only His good pleasure, as one devoted to) doing good, aware that God is seeing him, and who follows the way (millah) of Abraham being of pure faith (free of unbelief, of associating partners with God and of hypocrisy). God accepted Abraham as a friend (one close and trusted).
4|126| To God belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth, and God encompasses everything (with His Knowledge and Power).
4|127| (O Messenger!) They ask you to pronounce laws concerning women. Answer them: "God pronounces to you the laws concerning them and it is recited to you in this Book concerning female orphans, to whom you do not give what has been ordained for them (as bridal-due or for their maintenance), and yet desire to marry them (out of greed to get their charms or wealth for yourself, or by refusing to let them marry to continue benefiting from their wealth); and also concerning the weak, helpless children (whose rights should be protected), and that you must be assiduous in observing the rights of orphans." Whatever good you do – surely God has full knowledge of it.
4|128| If a woman fears from her husband ill-treatment or (such breach of marital obligations as) his turning away in aversion, then there will be no blame on them to set things right peacefully between them; peaceful settlement is better. (Bear in mind that) human souls are prone to selfish avarice, so (O husbands) if you do good in consciousness of God and act in reverence for Him and piety (in observing the rights of women), then surely God is fully aware of what you do.
4|129| You will never be able to deal between your wives with absolute equality (in respect of love and emotional attachment), however much you may desire to do so. But do not turn away altogether (from any one of them), so as to leave her in a dangling state (uncertain if she has or does not have a husband). If you act righteously (between them) and act in piety (fearful of doing any deliberate wrong to any of them), then surely God is All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate.
4|130| If (despite every effort to reconcile them, it is no longer possible to sustain marriage, and) the couple do separate, (let neither fear to become poor and helpless, for) God suffices all by His abundance. God is All-Embracing (in His bounty), All-Wise.
4|131| And to God belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth. And assuredly We commanded those who were given the Book before you, and (We command) you (O Muslims) to act in piety and reverence for God, fearful of disobedience to Him (in all matters including especially observing your mutual rights). Yet if you disbelieve (and despite this admonishment act with ingratitude to Him, then bear in mind that) to God belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth: (if you believe in Him and thank Him, this adds nothing to Him, or if you disbelieve in Him and become ungrateful to Him, this does not diminish anything from Him. For) God is All-Wealthy and Self-Sufficient (absolutely independent of all His creatures), All-Praiseworthy (as your Lord, Who provides for you and all other beings and meets all your needs).
4|132| (Again, know that) to God belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth; and God suffices as One on Whom to rely and to Whom all affairs should be referred.
4|133| If He wills, He can remove you, O humankind, and bring in others in your place. God is entirely Able to do that.
4|134| If one desires the reward of this world, (let him know that) with God is the reward of this world and the Hereafter. God is indeed All-Hearing, All-Seeing.
4|135| O you who believe! Be upholders and standard-bearers of justice, bearing witness to the truth for God’s sake, even though it be against your own selves, or parents or kindred. Whether the person concerned be rich or poor, (bear in mind that) God is nearer to them (than you are and more concerned with their well-being). So do not (in expectation of some gain from the rich or out of misplaced compassion for the poor) follow your own desires lest you swerve from justice. If you distort (the truth) or decline (to bear truthful witness), then know that God is fully aware of all that you do.
4|136| O you who believe! Believe in God and His Messenger (Muhammad) and the Book He has been sending down on His Messenger in parts and the (Divine) Books He sent down before. Whoever disbelieves in God and His angels and His Books and His Messengers and the Last Day, has indeed gone far astray.
4|137| Those who have believed and then disbelieved, then believed, and again disbelieved, and thereafter grown more intense in unbelief, God will never forgive them, nor will He guide them to a way (leading to the ultimate triumph and salvation).
4|138| To the hypocrites (who are as just described) give glad tidings that for them is a painful punishment.
4|139| (The hypocrites are) those who take unbelievers for confidants, guardians and allies in preference to the believers: do they seek might and glory in being together with them? (If so, let them know that) might and glory belong altogether to God.
4|140| He has already revealed to you in the Book that when you hear the Revelations of God being rejected and mocked, no longer sit with them (show your disagreement) until they engage in some other talk, or else you will surely become like them. Assuredly, God will gather the hypocrites and the unbelievers all together in Hell.
4|141| (The hypocrites are) those who wait to see what befalls you: thus if a victory comes to you from God, they say, "Were we not with you?" but if the unbelievers meet with a success, they say (to them:) "Did we not gain leverage over you (by not joining the believers and weakening them from within) and did we not defend you from the believers?" God will judge between you (and them) on the Day of Resurrection, and never will God allow the unbelievers to find a way (to triumph) over the (true) believers.
4|142| The hypocrites would trick God, whereas it is God who "tricks" them (by causing them to fall into their own traps). When they rise to do the Prayer, they rise lazily, and to be seen by people (to show them that they are Muslims); and they do not remember God (within or outside the Prayer) save a little.
4|143| Vacillating between (the believers) and (the unbelievers), neither with these, nor with those. Whoever God leads astray, for him you can never find a sound way (to follow).
4|144| O you who believe! Do not take the unbelievers for guardians and confidants in preference to the believers; or do you want to offer God a manifest proof against yourselves (of being hypocrites and so incur His punishment)?
4|145| Assuredly, the hypocrites will be in the lowest depth of the Fire; and you will never find for them any helper (against the Fire).
4|146| Except those who repent and mend their ways and hold fast to God and practice their Religion purely and sincerely for God’s sake: those (who repent) are counted with the believers, and in time God will grant to the believers a tremendous reward.
4|147| What should God punish you if you are grateful (to Him) and believe (in Him)? God is Ever-Responsive to gratitude, All-Knowing.
4|148| God does not like any harsh speech to be uttered save by one who has been wronged (and therefore has the right to express that in appropriate language). God is indeed All-Hearing, All-Knowing.
4|149| Whether you do some good openly or do it in secret, or pardon an evil (done to you, even though you have the right to legal retaliation, know that) God is All-Pardoning, Ever-Able (to punish or forgive).
4|150| Those (deserving punishment) are they who disbelieve in God (not recognizing Him at all or not as He should be) and His Messengers (denying Messengership altogether or denying some of the Messengers), and who seek to make distinction between God and His Messengers (by claiming belief in God but denying Messengership or denying some of the Messengers), and say, "We believe in some and deny others," seeking to take a way in between.
4|151| Such are in truth unbelievers, and We have prepared for the unbelievers a shameful, humiliating punishment.
4|152| But as for those who believe in God and His Messengers and make no distinction between them (between God and His Messengers or between the Messengers themselves), to them God will grant their rewards (in full). God is indeed All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate.
4|153| The People of the Book ask you to cause a Book to be sent down on them from heaven. (O Messenger, let this not shock you, for) they asked an even greater thing than this of Moses, when they said, "Show God to us openly," and the thunderbolt seized them for their wrong-doing. Then they adopted the (golden) calf as deity – and this after the (miracles and other) clear proofs of the truth had come to them. Yet We (accepted their atonement and) pardoned them that; and We granted Moses (the Book and the Criterion, and thereby) a clear proof and authority.
4|154| (Moreover) We raised the Mount to tower above them to secure their promise (to hold firmly to the Book), and (on another occasion when We guided them to a town) We commanded them, "Go into it through its gate prostrating (humbly in utmost submission to God)"; and again We once commanded them, "Do not exceed the bounds with respect to the Sabbath," and We took from them a most solemn pledge.
4|155| And so because of their breaking their pledge, and their intentional ignoring of God’s signs (in the universe and in themselves) and their rejection of His Revelations, and their killing certain Prophets against all right, and their saying, "Our hearts have become callous (no longer having any ability to believe)." No! Rather, God has set a seal on their hearts because of their persistent unbelief, so that, with the exception of few, scarcely do they believe.
4|156| And because of their (persistence in) unbelief and speaking against Mary a tremendous calumny;
4|157| And their saying "We killed the Messiah, Jesus son of Mary, the Messenger of God " – whereas they did not kill him, nor did they crucify him, but the matter was made dubious to them. Those who differ about this matter and about Jesus are indeed confused; they have no definite knowledge thereof, following mere conjecture; and they killed him not of a certainty.
4|158| But God raised him to Himself. God is All-Glorious with irresistible might, All-Wise.
4|159| Yet there is none of the People of the Book but will, before the moment of his death, (grasp the truth about Jesus and) believe in him (though that belief will be of no benefit to them then); and on the Day of Resurrection he will be a witness against them.
4|160| So, because of the wrong committed by the Jews We made unlawful for them many pure, wholesome things which had (hitherto) been lawful for them, and because of their barring many from God’s way;
4|161| And because of their taking interest although it had been forbidden to them, and consuming the wealth of people in wrongful ways (such as usury, theft, usurpation, bribery, gambling, and selling God’s Revelations); and We have prepared for the unbelievers among them (those who persisted in unbelief despite all the many warnings) a painful punishment.
4|162| But those of them firmly rooted in Knowledge, and the (true) believers believe in what has been sent down to you (O Messenger) and what was sent down before you; and especially those who do the Prayer in conformity with all its conditions, and those who pay the Prescribed Purifying Alms, and the believers in God and the Last Day (as both must be believed in): to them will We will grant a tremendous reward.
4|163| We have revealed to you (O Messenger) as We revealed to Noah and the Prophets after him; and We revealed to Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob and the Prophets who were raised in the tribes, and Jesus, Job, Jonah, Aaron, and Solomon; and We gave David the Psalms.
4|164| And Messengers We have already told you of (with respect to their mission) before, and Messengers We have not told you of; and God spoke to Moses in a particular way.
4|165| Messengers (have been sent as) bearers of glad tidings and warners, so that people might have no argument against God after the Messengers (had come to them). And God is All-Glorious with irresistible might, All-Wise.
4|166| (Whether people believe or not) God bears witness to (the truth of) what He has sent down to you. And He has sent it down from, based on and together with, His Knowledge. And the angels also bear witness (to it) though God suffices for a witness.
4|167| Surely those who (in defiance of that testimony) disbelieve and bar (people) from God’s way, have indeed gone far astray.
4|168| Surely those who disbelieve and do wrong (to people by barring them from God’s way, and to God and His Messengers and angels, and to all believers and all creatures bearing witness to the truth, and to their own conscience, by accusing them of lying and deception) – God will indeed not forgive them nor will He guide them to a road
4|169| Except the road of Hell, to abide therein for ever; and that is easy for God.
4|170| O humankind! The Messenger has come to you with the truth from your Lord: believe, then, for your own good. And if you disbelieve, then (know that your unbelief will in no way harm Him, for) to God belongs whatever is in the heavens and on the earth. And God is All-Knowing, All-Wise.
4|171| O People of the Book! Do not go beyond the bounds in your religion, and do not say anything of God but the truth. The Messiah, Jesus son of Mary, was but a Messenger of God, and a Word of His (Power) which He conveyed to Mary, and a spirit from Him. So believe in God (as the One, Unique God), and His Messengers (including Jesus, as Messenger); and do not say: (God is one of) a trinity. Give up (this assertion) – (it is) for your own good (to do so). God is but One God; All-Glorified He is in that He is absolutely above having a son. To Him belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth. And God suffices as the One to be relied on, to Whom affairs should be referred.
4|172| The Messiah never disdains to be a servant to God, nor do the angels near-stationed to Him. Whoever disdains to worship God as a servant and feels his pride (puffed up by arrogance, should know that) God will gather them all to Himself (and call them to account).
4|173| To those who believe and do good, righteous deeds He will grant their rewards in full, and will give them yet more out of His bounty; but as to those who are disdainful and arrogant, He will punish them with a painful punishment, and they will not find for them, against God, a guardian and protector, nor a helper.
4|174| O humankind! Now a Proof has come to you from your Lord, and We have sent down to you a clear Light (to illuminate your way and show you everything clearly).
4|175| So those who believe in God (as taught by this proof and light), and hold fast to Him – He will admit them into a (great) mercy from His Presence, and a bounty, and guide them direct to Him on a straight path.
4|176| They ask you (O Messenger) to pronounce a ruling. Say (to them): God pronounces to you the ruling concerning inheritance from those who have left behind no lineal heirs (kalalah): should a man die childless but have a sister, for her is the half of what he has left behind; and the brother will inherit from her if the sister dies childless. If the heirs are two sisters, for them is two-thirds of what he has left behind. And if the heirs are brothers and sisters, then for the male is the equivalent of the portion of two females. God makes (His commandments) clear to you lest you go astray. God has full knowledge of everything.
5|1| O you who believe! Fulfill the bonds (you have entered into with God and with people). Lawful for you is the flesh of cattle (grazing beasts of the flock), save what is mentioned to you (herewith), and unlawful (for you is) hunted game when you are in the state of pilgrim sanctity. Assuredly, God decrees as He wills.
5|2| O you who believe! Do not violate the sanctity of the public symbols (of Islam) set up by God (such as Jumu‘ah and ‘Id Prayers, the call to the Prayer, the Sacrifice and attendant rites of the Pilgrimage), nor of the Sacred Months (during which fighting is forbidden except when you are attacked), nor of the animals (brought to the Sacred House for sacrifice), nor of the collars (put on the animals marked for sacrifice), nor of those who have set out for the Sacred House seeking from their Lord bounty and His good pleasure. But once you leave your pilgrim sanctity (and the sacred precincts around the City), you are free to hunt. And never let your detestation for a people, because they barred you from the Sacred Mosque, move you to commit violations (acts of aggression or injustice). Rather, help one another in goodness and piety, and do not help one another in sinful, iniquitous acts and hostility; (in all your actions) keep from disobedience to God in reverence for Him and piety. Surely God is severe in retribution.
5|3| Unlawful to you (for food) are carrion, and blood, and the flesh of swine, and that (the animal) which is offered in the name of any other than God, and the animal strangled, and the animal beaten down, and the animal fallen to death, and the animal gored, and that devoured by wild beasts – save that which you make lawful (by slaughtering properly while it was still alive) – and that which has been sacrificed to anything serving the function of idols and at the places consecrated for offerings to other than God. And (also unlawful is) that divided and obtained through divining arrows (and the like, such as lotteries and throwing dice). (Eating of any of) that (just mentioned) is transgression. – This day those who disbelieve have lost all hope of (preventing the establishment of) your religion, so do not hold them in awe, but be in awe of Me. This day I have perfected for you your Religion (with all its rules, commandments and universality), completed My favor upon you, and have been pleased to assign for you Islam as religion. – Then, whoever is constrained by dire necessity (and driven to what is forbidden), without purposely inclining to sin – surely God is All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate.
5|4| They ask you (O Messenger) what is lawful for them (including in particular the game caught by trained hunting animals). Say: Lawful for you are (all) pure, wholesome things; and (as for) such hunting animals as you have trained as hounds teaching them from what God has taught you: you may eat of what they have caught for you (and brought to you dead or alive without themselves having eaten thereof). And pronounce God’s Name (while dispatching them to hunt for you). Keep from disobedience to God in reverence for Him and piety. Surely God is swift at reckoning.
5|5| This day (all) pure, wholesome things have been made lawful for you. And the food of those who were given the Book before (including the animals they slaughter unless, of course, they invoke the name of any other than God) is lawful for you, just as your food (including the animals you slaughter) is lawful for them. And (lawful for you in marriage) are chaste women from among the believers and chaste women from among those who were given the Book before, provided that you give them their bridal-due, taking them in honest wedlock, and not in debauchery, nor as secret love-companions. (That is the ordinance regarding your relations with the People of the Book in this world. But know this:) Whoever rejects (the true) faith (and rejects following God’s way as required by faith), all his works are in vain, and in the Hereafter he will be among the losers.
5|6| O you who believe! When you rise up for the Prayer, (if you have no ablution) wash your faces and your hands up to (and including) the elbows, and lightly rub your heads (with water) and (wash) your feet up to (and including) the ankles. And if you are in the state of major ritual impurity (requiring total ablution), purify yourselves (by taking a bath). But if you are ill, or on a journey, or if any of you has just satisfied a want of nature, or you have had contact with women, and can find no water, then betake yourselves to pure earth, passing with it lightly over your face and your hands (and forearms up to and including the elbows). God does not will to impose any hardship upon you, but wills to purify you (of any kind of material and spiritual filth), and to complete His favor upon you, so that you may give thanks (from the heart and in speech, and in action by fulfilling His commandments).
5|7| And remember God’s favor upon you and the pledge by which He bound you when you said: "We have heard and we obey." Keep from disobedience to God in reverence for Him and piety. Surely God has full knowledge of what lies hidden in the bosoms.
5|8| O you who believe! Be upholders and standard-bearers of right for God’s sake, being witnesses for (the establishment of) absolute justice. And by no means let your detestation for a people (or their detestation for you) move you to (commit the sin of) deviating from justice. Be just: this is nearer and more suited to righteousness and piety. Seek righteousness and piety and always act in reverence for God. Surely God is fully aware of all that you do.
5|9| God has promised those who believe and do good, righteous deeds that for them is forgiveness and a tremendous reward.
5|10| Whereas those who deny Our Revelations (to come as verses of the Book establishing the pillars of faith), as well as Our signs (both in their inner world and in the outer world) – such are companions of the Blazing Flame.
5|11| O you who believe! Remember God’s favor upon you: when a people were minded to stretch out their hands against you but He restrained their hands from you. Revere God and keep from disobedience to Him so as to always deserve His protection. And in God the believers should place their trust.
5|12| And, indeed, God took a solemn pledge from the Children of Israel and raised up from among them twelve leaders and representatives (one from each tribe, to look after their affairs and as spiritual mentors). God said: "Surely I am with you: if indeed you establish the Prayer in conformity with all its conditions, and pay the Prescribed Purifying Alms, and believe in all of My Messengers, and honor and support them, and lend God a good loan (by spending out of your wealth in God’s cause), I will surely blot out from you your evil deeds and will certainly admit you into Gardens through which rivers flow. But whoever among you disbelieves after this and is ungrateful has surely strayed from the right, even way.
5|13| Then, because of their breaking their pledge, We cursed them (excluding them from Our mercy and exposing them to many disasters), and caused their hearts to harden. They alter words from their context (in order to distort their meanings), and they have forgotten a (most important) portion of what they were admonished about. You will not cease to light upon some act of treachery from them, except a few of them. Yet pardon them, and overlook (their misdeeds). Assuredly, God loves those devoted to doing good deeds, aware that God is seeing them.
5|14| And from those who said, "We are Helpers," We also took a solemn pledge, but they have forgotten a (most important) portion of what they were admonished about. So We have stirred up among them enmity and hatred till the Day of Resurrection; then God will cause them to understand what they have been contriving.
5|15| O People of the Book! Now there has indeed come to you Our Messenger, making clear to you many things you have been concealing of the Book (the Bible), and passing over many things (in order not to put you to further shame). Assuredly, there has come to you from God a light (which enlightens your minds and hearts, and illuminates your way), and a Book manifest in itself and manifesting the truth,
5|16| Whereby God guides whoever strives after His good pleasure (by acting in the way He approves) to the ways of peace, salvation, and safety. And He leads them by His leave out of all kinds of (intellectual, spiritual, social, economic, and political) darkness into light, and guides them to a straight path (in belief, thought, and action).
5|17| They have indeed disbelieved who declare: God is the Messiah, son of Mary. Say: "Who then has the least power against God, if He had willed to destroy the Messiah, son of Mary, and his mother, and all those who are on the earth?" To God belongs the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them. He creates whatever He wills. God has full power over everything.
5|18| The Jews and Christians assert, "We are God’s children and His beloved ones." Say: "Why, then, does He punish you for your sins? No. You are but mortals that (just like others) He has created. He forgives whom He wills, and He punishes whom He wills. To God belongs the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them, and to Him is the homecoming.
5|19| O People of the Book! Now, after a long interlude during which no Messengers have appeared, there has indeed come to you Our Messenger, making the whole truth clear to you, lest you should say, "There has not come to us any bearer of good tidings, nor any warner." Indeed, there has come to you a bearer of good tidings and a warner. And God has full power over everything.
5|20| And (remember) when Moses warned his people, saying: "O my people! Remember God’s favor upon you, for He appointed among you Prophets, and appointed (among you) rulers (while in Egypt; and made you free to manage your own affairs), and He granted to you favors such as He had not granted to anyone else in the worlds.
5|21| "O my people! Enter the holy land which God has prescribed for you and commanded you to enter; and do not turn back (from faith to your previous state), for then you will turn about as losers (in both this world and the Hereafter)."
5|22| They said: "Moses, therein live a people of exceeding strength: we cannot enter it unless they depart from it; so if they depart from it, then we will surely enter it."
5|23| Said two men from among those who feared (God’s punishment for disobedience to Him), and whom God had favored (with faith, sagacity, and devotion): "Enter upon them through the gate (by frontal attack). For once you have entered it, you will surely be the victors. And in God you must place your trust if you are truly believers."
5|24| They said: "O Moses! By no means will we enter it as long as they are there. Go forth, then, you and your Lord, and fight, both of you. (As for ourselves) we will be sitting just here!"
5|25| He (Moses) said (turning to His Lord with entreaty): "O my Lord! I have power over none except my own self and my brother (Aaron) only; so You judge and separate between us and this transgressing people!"
5|26| He (God) said (passing this judgment): "Then, this (land) shall now be forbidden to them for forty years, while they shall wander about on earth, bewildered. Do not grieve over that transgressing people."
5|27| Narrate to them (O Messenger) in truth the exemplary experience of the two sons of Adam, when they each offered a sacrifice, and it was accepted from one of them, and not accepted from the other. "I will surely kill you," said (he whose sacrifice was not accepted). "God accepts only from the sincere and truly pious," said the other.
5|28| "Yet if you stretch out your hand against me to kill me, I will not stretch out my hand against you to kill you. Surely I fear God, the Lord of the worlds.
5|29| "(In refusing to fight you and remembering to fear God) I desire indeed (to warn you) that you will bear the burden of my sin (were I to take part in fighting you) and your own sin (for seeking to kill me) and so you will be among the companions of the Fire. For that is the recompense of wrongdoers."
5|30| (This warning served only to fuel the other’s passion:) His carnal, evil-commanding soul prompted him to kill his brother, and he killed him, thus becoming among the losers.
5|31| (He did not know what to do with the dead body of his brother.) Then God sent forth a raven, scratching in the earth, to show him how he might cover the corpse of his brother. (So seeing) he cried: "Oh, alas for me! Am I then unable even to be like this raven, and so find a way to cover the corpse of my brother?" And he became distraught with remorse.
5|32| It is because of this that We ordained for (all humankind, but particularly for) the Children of Israel: He who kills a soul unless it be (in legal punishment) for murder or for causing disorder and corruption on the earth will be as if he had killed all humankind; and he who saves a life will be as if he had saved the lives of all humankind. Assuredly there came to them Our Messengers (one after the other) with clear proofs of the truth (so that they might be revived both individually and as a people). Then (in spite of all this), many of them go on committing excesses on the earth.
5|33| The recompense of those who fight against God and His Messenger, and hasten about the earth causing disorder and corruption: they shall (according to the nature of their crime) either be executed, or crucified, or have their hands and feet cut off alternately, or be banished from the land. Such is their disgrace in the world, and for them is a mighty punishment in the Hereafter.
5|34| Except for those who repent (and desist from their crimes against order) before you have overpowered them, (although the judgment as to specific crimes against individuals is left to those individuals or to their heirs). Know that God surely is All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate (especially toward His servants who turn to Him in repentance).
5|35| O you who believe! Keep from disobedience to God in reverence for Him and piety, and seek the means to come closer to Him, and strive in His way, so that you may prosper (in both worlds).
5|36| As to those who insist on unbelief: even if they owned the whole of what is on the earth, and the like with it, to offer as ransom from the punishment on the Day of Resurrection, it would not be accepted from them. For them is a painful punishment.
5|37| They will wish to come out of the Fire, but they shall not come out of it; theirs is a punishment enduring.
5|38| And for the thief, male or female: cut off their hands as a recompense for what they have earned, and an exemplary deterrent punishment from God. God is All-Glorious with irresistible might, All-Wise.
5|39| But he who repents after having done wrong, and mends his ways, surely God accepts His repentance. For God is All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate.
5|40| Do you not know that surely to God belongs the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth? He punishes whom He wills and forgives whom He wills. He has full power over everything.
5|41| O Messenger! Let them not grieve you who would rush in unbelief, as if competing with one another in a race, such of them as say with their mouths, "We believe," but their hearts do not believe, and those of them who are Jews. They are eagerly listening out for falsehoods (especially about you) and eagerly listening out (spying) on behalf of other people who have never come to you (even to learn the essence of your Message); altering any words (whether pertaining to God or not) from their contexts to distort their meanings. They say (about matters referred to you for judgment): "If such and such judgment is given to you, accept it; but if it is not given to you, then beware!" Whoever God has willed to put to a trial (to prove his nature, and has failed in this trial), you have no power in anything on his behalf against God. Such are those whose hearts (because of their rushing in unbelief) God does not will to purify. For them is disgrace in the world, and in the Hereafter a tremendous punishment.
5|42| Listening out for lies and falsehood eagerly, and consuming unlawful earnings greedily! If they come to you (for judgment), you may either judge between them or turn away from them (and decline to give judgment). If you turn away from them, they cannot harm you in any way. But if you judge, judge between them with equity and justice. Surely God loves the scrupulously equitable.
5|43| But how is it that they ask you for judgment when they have the Torah, in which there is God’s judgment (concerning murder), and still thereafter turn away (from that and from your judgment)? The fact is: those are not believers.
5|44| Surely We did send down the Torah, in which there was guidance and a light (to illuminate people’s minds, hearts and ways of life). Thereby did the Prophets, who were fully submitted to God, judge for the Jews; and so did the masters (self-dedicated to God and educating people) and the rabbis (teachers of law), as they had been entrusted to keep and observe the part of God’s Book (revealed up to their time); and they were all witnesses to its truth. (Concerning judging by God’s Book and observing It, We warned them saying): Do not hold people in awe, but stand in awe of Me; and do not sell My Revelations for a trifling price. Whoever (declines to confirm and) does not judge by what God has sent down, those are indeed unbelievers.
5|45| And We prescribed for them in it (concerning murder): A life for a life, and an eye for an eye, and a nose for a nose, and an ear for an ear, and a tooth for a tooth, and a (like) retaliation for all wounds (the exact retaliation of which is possible). But whoever remits (the retaliation), it will be an act of expiation for him. Whoever does not judge by what God has sent down, those are indeed wrongdoers.
5|46| And in the footsteps of those (earlier Prophets) We sent Jesus son of Mary, confirming (the truth of) the Torah revealed before him, and We granted to him the Gospel, in which there was guidance and a light (to illuminate people’s minds, hearts and ways of life), confirming what was revealed before it in the Torah (except for a few unlawful things that it made lawful), (and serving as) a guidance and an instruction for the God-revering, pious.
5|47| (And We commanded:) Let the People of the Gospel judge by what God sent down therein; and whoever does not judge by what God has sent down, those are indeed the transgressors.
5|48| We have sent down to you (O Messenger) the Book with the truth (embodying it, and with nothing false in it), confirming (the Divine authorship of and the truths that are still contained by) whatever of the Book was revealed before it, and guarding over (all the true teachings in) it. Judge, then, between them by what God has sent down (to you), and do not follow their desires and caprices away from the truth that has come to you. For each (community to which a Messenger was sent with a Book) have We appointed a clear way of life and a comprehensive system (containing the principles of that way and how to follow it). And if God had so willed, He would surely have made you a single community (following the same way of life and system surrounded by the same conditions throughout all history); but (He willed it otherwise) in order to test you by what He granted to you (and thereby made you subject to a law of progress). Strive, then, together as if competing in good works. To God is the return of all of you, and He will then make you understand (the truth) about what you have differed on.
5|49| (Thus did We command you:) Judge between them with what God has sent down and do not follow their desires and caprices, and beware of them lest they tempt you away from any part of what God has sent down to you. If they turn away, then know that God wills only to afflict them for some of their sins. And many among human beings are indeed transgressors.
5|50| Or is it the law of the (pagan) Ignorance that they seek (to be judged and ruled by)? Who is better than God as law-giver and judge for a people seeking certainty (and authoritative knowledge)?
5|51| O you who believe! Take not the Jews and Christians for guardians and confidants (in their Judaism and Christianity). Some among them are guardians and confidants to some others. Whoever among you takes them for guardians and confidants will eventually become one of them (and be counted among them in the Hereafter). Surely God does not guide such wrongdoers.
5|52| Yet you (O Messenger) see those, in whose hearts there is a sickness (that dries up the source of their spiritual life, extinguishes their power of understanding and corrupts their character), hastening towards them (to get their friendship and patronage) as if competing with one another, saying, "We fear lest a turn of fortune should befall us." But it may be that God will bring about (for the believers) victory or some other outcome of His own will (to punish those hypocrites or the wrongdoers whose friendship and patronage they seek). And then they will find themselves utterly regretful for the secrets they (as hypocrites) sought to keep hidden in their selves.
5|53| And those who believe will say (to each other): "Are those the self-same people who swore by God their most solemn oaths that they were indeed with you?" Their works have gone to waste and they have become losers.
5|54| O you who believe! Whoever of you turns away from his Religion, (know that) in time God will raise up a people whom He loves, and who love Him, most humble towards the believers, dignified and commanding in the face of the unbelievers, striving (continuously and in solidarity) in God’s cause, and fearing not the censure of any who censure. That is God’s grace and bounty, which He grants to whom He wills. God is All-Embracing (with His profound grace), All-Knowing.
5|55| Your guardian and confidant is none but God, and His Messenger, and those who, having believed, establish the Prayer in conformity with all its conditions, and pay the Prescribed Purifying Alms (the Zakah), and they bow (in humility and submission to Him).
5|56| Whoever takes God and His Messenger and those who believe for guardian and confidant, then surely the party of God (that they constitute), they are the victors.
5|57| O you who believe! Do not take for guardians and confidants such of those who were given the Book before as make a mockery and sport of your Religion, and the unbelievers (who reject the Messenger, Divine Revelation, and the Last Day). Keep from disobedience to God in reverence for Him and piety, if you are truly believers.
5|58| When you recite the call to the Prayer, they take it for a mockery and sport – that is because they are a people who do not use their reason to understand.
5|59| Say: "O People of the Book! Is it not that you begrudge us only because we believe in God and what has been sent down to us and what was sent down before, and because most of you are transgressors?"
5|60| Say: "Shall I tell you of a case the worst of all for recompense with God? Those whom God has cursed (excluded from His mercy), and whom He has utterly condemned, and some of whom He turned into apes, and swine, and servants of false powers (who institute patterns of rule in defiance of God) – they are worse situated and further astray from the right, even way."
5|61| Whenever those (of the same character and life-pattern and the hypocrites following in their footsteps) come to you, they declare (hypocritically), "We believe," whereas in fact they enter with unbelief (in their hearts), and so they depart with it. God knows very well what (unbelief and hypocrisy) they have been concealing.
5|62| You see many among them rushing as if competing in sinful, iniquitous acts, and enmity, and consuming unlawful earnings. How evil indeed is what they have been doing!
5|63| Why is it that the masters self-dedicated to God and educating people, and the rabbis (teachers of law) do not forbid them from sinful utterances and consuming unlawful earnings? How evil indeed is what they have been contriving!
5|64| The Jews say: "God’s Hand is fettered" (thus attributing their humiliation and misery to Him). Be their hands fettered and be they excluded from His mercy for saying so! No indeed! both His Hands are spread out wide in bounty, bestowing as He wills. And (the Revelation and bounties) that are sent down to you from your Lord indeed increase many of them in rebellion and unbelief. However (according to the laws We established for human life in the world), We have cast enmity and hateful rancor among them to last until the Day of Resurrection: as often as they kindle a fire of war (to overcome Islam and put it off), God extinguishes it (without allowing them to attain to their goal). They hasten about the earth causing disorder and corruption, and God does not love those who cause disorder and corruption.
5|65| If only the People of the Book would believe (in the Prophet Muhammad and what is revealed to him), and keep from disobedience to God in piety so as to deserve His protection, We would certainly blot out from them their (previous) evil deeds and admit them for sure into Gardens of bounty and blessings.
5|66| If only they had truly observed the Torah and the Gospel, and all that was sent down to them from their Lord (faithfully, without introducing distortions therein, and therefore would believe in Muhammad and follow his way), they would have been fed from above them and from beneath their feet (as God would have poured forth His blessings upon them from both heaven and earth). Among them there are just, moderate people who hold to the right course, but many of them – evil indeed is what they do!
5|67| O Messenger (you who convey and embody the Message in the best way)! Convey and make known in the clearest way all that has been sent down to you from your Lord. For, if you do not, you have not conveyed His Message and fulfilled the task of His Messengership. And God will certainly protect you from the people. God will surely not guide the disbelieving people (to attain their goal of harming or defeating you).
5|68| Say: "O People of the Book! You do not stand on anything valid (in God’s sight) unless you truly observe the Torah and the Gospel, and all that has been sent down to you from your Lord, (and doing that you would believe in me and the Qur’an, and follow my way)." However, what is sent down to you from your Lord surely increases many of them in rebellion and unbelief. But grieve not for the disbelieving people.
5|69| Surely be they of those who declare faith (the Community of Muhammad) and be they of those who are the Jews or the Sabaeans, or the Christians (or of another faith) – whoever truly and sincerely believes in God and the Last Day and does good, righteous deeds – they will have no fear, nor will they grieve.
5|70| We did indeed make a covenant with the Children of Israel and (accordingly) We sent them Messengers (one after the other). But whenever a Messenger came to them with what did not suit (the desires of) their souls – some they would deny and some they would kill.
5|71| They calculated that there would be no trial (of them as a result of what they did), and so became as if blind and deaf (to truth and all Divine admonitions). Then God (having guided them to waken their consciences, and turn to Him in repentance so that they could reform themselves) relented towards them (in gracious forgiveness). Then (again, in spite of that) many of them became as if blind and deaf. And God sees well all that they do.
5|72| Assuredly they have disbelieved who say: God is the Messiah, son of Mary, whereas the Messiah himself proclaimed: "O Children of Israel! Worship God, my Lord and your Lord." Whoever associates partners with God, God has surely made Paradise forbidden to him, and his refuge is the Fire. And the wrongdoers will have no helpers.
5|73| Assuredly they also have disbelieved who say: God is the third of the Three, whereas there is no deity save the One God. If they desist not from their saying so, there shall touch those of them who disbelieve a painful punishment.
5|74| Will they not turn to God in repentance and (being resolved never again to commit the same wrong) ask Him for forgiveness? God is All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate.
5|75| The Messiah, son of Mary, was but a Messenger; Messengers had passed away before him; and his mother was an upright one wholly devoted to God; both of them ate food (as do all mortals). Look, how We make the truths clear to them, then look how they are turned away from the truth and make false claims!
5|76| Say (to them, O Messenger): "Do you worship, apart from God, that which (in and of itself) has no power either to harm or to benefit you – when God is He Who is the All-Hearing, the All-Knowing?"
5|77| Say: "O People of the Book! Do not go beyond the bounds in your religion, (straying towards) other than the truth, and do not follow the lusts and fancies of a people who went astray before, and led many others astray, and they strayed (as again others do now) from the right, even way."
5|78| Those of the Children of Israel who disbelieved were cursed by the tongue of David and Jesus, son of Mary. That was because they disobeyed and kept on exceeding the bounds (of the Law).
5|79| They would not restrain one another from doing the evil they did: indeed evil was what they used to do.
5|80| You see many of them (the Jews) taking those who disbelieve as allies and friends (instead of allying with the Messenger and the believers). Evil indeed is what they themselves send ahead for themselves (for their future and for the life hereafter), so that God will condemn them, and they will abide in the punishment.
5|81| Had they truly believed in God and the (most illustrious) Prophet (Muhammad) and what has been sent down to him, they would not have taken them (the unbelievers) for allies and friends; but many of them are transgressors.
5|82| You will most certainly find that, of the people (of unbelief), the most violent in enmity toward the believers (the Muslims) are the Jews and those who associate partners with God. And you will most certainly find that the nearest of them in affection to the believers (the Muslims) are those who say: "We are Christians." This is because there are among them (the Christians) hermits (who devote themselves to worshipping God, especially at night) and monks (who struggle with their carnal selves, ever fearful of God’s punishment), and because they are not arrogant.
5|83| When they hear what has been sent down to the Messenger, you see their eyes brimming over with tears because they know something of its truth (from their own Books); and they say: "Our Lord! We do believe (in Muhammad and the Qur’an); so inscribe us among the witnesses (of the truth in the company of his community).
5|84| "Why should we not believe in God and what has come to us of the truth? And we fervently desire that our Lord enter us among the righteous people."
5|85| So God (judged that He would) reward them for their saying so with Gardens through which rivers flow, therein to abide. Such is the reward of those who are devoted to doing good, aware that God is seeing them.
5|86| As to those who disbelieve and deny Our signs and Revelations, those are companions of the Blazing Flame.
5|87| O you who believe! Do not hold as unlawful the pure, wholesome things that God has made lawful to you, and do not exceed the bounds (either by making forbidden what is lawful, or by over-indulgence in the lawful). God does not love those who exceed the bounds.
5|88| Eat (as lawful, pure and wholesome) from that which God has provided for you; and keep from disobedience to God, in Whom you have faith.
5|89| God does not take you to task for a slip (or blunder of speech) in your oaths, but He takes you to task for what you have concluded by solemn, deliberate oaths. The expiation (for breaking such oaths) is to feed ten destitute persons (or one person for ten days) with the average of the food you serve to your families, or to clothe them, or to set free a slave. If anyone does not find (the means to do that), let him fast for three days. That is the expiation for your oaths when you have sworn (and broken them). But be mindful of your oaths (do not make them lightly, and when you have sworn them, fulfill them). Thus God makes clear to you His Revelations (the lights of His way), that you may give thanks (from the heart and in speech, and in action by fulfilling His commandments).
5|90| O you who believe! Intoxicants, games of chance, sacrifices to (anything serving the function of) idols (and at places consecrated for offerings to other than God), and (the pagan practice of) divination by arrows (and similar practices) are a loathsome evil of Satan’s doing; so turn wholly away from it so that you may prosper (in both worlds).
5|91| Satan only seeks to provoke enmity and hatred among you by means of intoxicants and games of chance, and to bar you from the remembrance of God and from Prayer. So, then, will you abstain?
5|92| Obey God and obey the Messenger, (whose commands are based on Divine Revelation), and be on the alert (against opposing them). If you turn away (from obedience to them), then know that what rests with Our Messenger is only to convey the Message fully and clearly.
5|93| There is no sin on those who believe and do good, righteous deeds for what they might have partaken (in their pre-Islamic past), provided (henceforth) they fear (the end of their previous creeds and misdeeds) and come to faith and do good, righteous deeds, then keep from disobedience to God in reverence for Him and piety and believe (more profoundly), then be more meticulous in obeying God in greater reverence for Him and piety and be devoted to doing good: God loves those who are devoted to doing good, aware that God is seeing them.
5|94| O you who believe! Something of the game that you take by your hands or your lances (while you are on the Pilgrimage) is God’s testing of you so that He may prove those who fear Him (though) unseen. Whoever, after that, exceeds the bounds, for him is a painful punishment.
5|95| O you who believe! Do not kill game while you are in the state of pilgrim sanctity or in the sacred precincts of Makkah. Whoever of you kills it, then its recompense is the like of what he has killed, from livestock, to be judged by two men among you of equity and probity, and to be brought to the Ka‘bah as an offering; or (there shall be) an expiation by way of giving (as much) food to the destitute (as the value of the game killed), or fasting (a number of days) equivalent (to the number of the persons to be fed or the shares assigned for them). (That is ordained) so that he may taste the evil consequences of his deed. God has pardoned what is past; but for one who re-offends, God will take retribution from him. And God is All-Glorious with irresistible might, Ever-Able to requite (wrong).
5|96| (To hunt and eat) the game in the sea, its (fish and other) edibles are lawful for you, a provision for you and for travelers (whom you want to feed). However, while you are in the state of pilgrim sanctity, you are forbidden to hunt on land (or slaughter and eat of animals that you get others to hunt for you). Keep from disobedience to God in due reverence for Him, to Whom you will be gathered.
5|97| God has made the Ka‘bah, the Sacred House, a standard and maintenance for the people, and also the Sacred Months (during which fighting is forbidden), and the animals for sacrificial offering, and the (camels wearing the sacrificial) collars. That is so that you may know that God knows whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth, and that God has full knowledge of everything.
5|98| Know (also) that God is severe in punishment, and that God is All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate.
5|99| Nothing rests with the Messenger but to convey the Message fully. (It is your responsibility to act in accordance therewith) and God knows whatever you reveal and do openly and whatever you conceal (in your bosoms) and do secretly.
5|100| Say (O Messenger): "The bad and the good are not alike," even though the abundance of the bad (the sheer quantity of the corrupt) amazes you. So keep from disobedience to God in reverence for Him and piety, O people of discernment (so that you may rightly distinguish quality and quantity and so) that you may prosper (in the next world and in this).
5|101| O you who believe! (Practice as you are admonished to practice, and) do not ask about things which, if made manifest to you, would give you trouble (and make the practice of religion difficult for you). Even so, if you ask about them while the Qur’an is being sent down, they (what is necessary to be made manifest) will be made manifest to you (to the extent that God wills). (Many things that you have either asked or want to ask about, but which God has left unspoken) God has absolved you thereof: God is All-Forgiving, All-Clement.
5|102| Indeed a people before you used to ask such questions (and demanded from their Prophet such things as particular miracles), and thereafter they fell into unbelief (through not carrying out the commandments given in answer to their questions or through willfully disbelieving in their Prophet despite the miracles worked).
5|103| God has not ordained anything (in the nature) of a bahirah, nor a sa’ibah, nor a wasilah, nor ham. But those who disbelieve fabricate falsehoods against God – most of them do not reason and indeed are devoid of sense.
5|104| When it is said to them, "Come (in obedience) to what God has sent down and to the Messenger (to whom the Qur’an is being revealed), they (refuse to think, and instead) say: "Enough for us (are the ways) that we found our forefathers on." What, even if their forefathers knew nothing and were not guided (and so did not follow a right way)?
5|105| O you who believe! (Do not busy yourselves with those who follow different ways!) Your responsibility is your selves (so consider how you are faring along your own way). Those who go astray can do you no harm if you yourselves are guided (and so know the right way and then follow it without deviation). To God is the return of all of you, and He will make you understand all that you were doing (and call you to account for it).
5|106| O you who believe! Let there be witnesses among you when death approaches you, at the time of making bequests – two straightforward and trustworthy persons from among your own people (the Muslim community), or two other persons from among people other than your own (from among the People of the Book) if you are on a journey (and there are no Muslims) when the affliction of death befalls you. Then if any doubt arises (concerning their testimony), have the two of them stay (in the mosque) after the Prayer, and they shall swear by God: "We will not sell our testimony for any price, even if it concerns one near of kin, nor will we conceal the testimony of God (namely, the truth), for then we would surely be among the sinful.
5|107| Then if it is discovered later that the two (witnesses) have been guilty of (that very) sin (of not giving true testimony), then have two others stand in their place from among those (rightful heirs of the deceased) whom the first two have deprived of their right, and these shall swear by God: "Our testimony is truer than the testimony of the other two, and we have not exceeded the bounds (of what is right, nor violated the rights of any others), for then we would indeed be among the wrongdoers."
5|108| That (way) it is more likely that people will offer correct testimony or else they will (at least) fear that their oaths will be rebutted by other oaths. Keep from disobedience to God in reverence for Him and piety and pay heed (to His commandments). God does not guide people of transgression.
5|109| The day when God will gather the Messengers and ask them: "What was the response you received (from the people to whom you were appointed to convey My Message)?" They say: "We have no knowledge; You and You alone have knowledge of the Unseen (of all that lies beyond the reach of any created being’s perception)."
5|110| When God says: "O Jesus, son of Mary! Remember My favor upon you and upon your mother, when I confirmed you with the Spirit of Holiness so that you talked to people in the cradle and in manhood; and when I taught you of the Book and Wisdom, and the Torah and the Gospel; and when you fashioned out of clay something in the shape of a bird by My leave, then you breathed into it, and it became a bird by My leave, and you healed the blind from birth and the leper by My leave; and when you raised the dead by My leave; and when I restrained the Children of Israel from you when you came to them with clear proofs (truths and miracles demonstrating Your Messengership), and those of them who disbelieved said: ‘This is clearly nothing but sorcery.’
5|111| "And when I revealed to the disciples (through you, and inspired in their hearts), ‘Believe in Me and My Messenger!’, they said: ‘We believe, and bear witness that we are (Muslims) submitted exclusively to Him.’ "
5|112| And once the disciples said: "Jesus, son of Mary, is your Lord able to send down on us a table (of food) from heaven?" (Jesus) answered: "Fear God (as He should be feared, and so desist from making such demands lest He punish you) if you are (truly) believers."
5|113| They said: "We desire to eat thereof and that our hearts might be set at rest (with certainty of God’s being our Lord and of your being His Messenger), and so that we might know that you speak the truth to us, and so that we might be among the witnesses (to the meaning and truth of what is demonstrated to us)."
5|114| Jesus, son of Mary, said (in entreaty to his Lord): "O God, our Lord! Send down on us a table (of food) from heaven, that shall be an ever-recurring (religious) festival for us – for the first and the last of us – and a sign from You; and provide us sustenance, for You are the Best to be sought as provider with the ultimate rank of providing."
5|115| God said: "I send it down on you. Then if any of you should henceforth disbelieve, surely I inflict on him a punishment that I never inflict on anyone in the worlds."
5|116| And (remember) when God will say: "Jesus, son of Mary, is it you who said to people: ‘Take me and my mother for deities beside God?" and he will answer: "All-Glorified You are (in that You are absolutely above having a partner, as having any need or deficiency whatever)! It is not for me to say what I had no right to! Had I said it, You would already have known it. You know all that is within myself, whereas I do not know what is within Yourself. Surely You and You alone have knowledge of the Unseen (of all that lies beyond the reach of any created being’s perception).
5|117| "I did not say to them except what You commanded me to (say): ‘Worship God, my Lord and your Lord.’ I was a witness over them so long as I remained among them; and when You took me back, You were Yourself the Watcher over them. Indeed, You are Witness over everything.
5|118| "If You punish them, they are Your servants; and if You forgive them, You are the All-Glorious with irresistible might, the All-Wise."
5|119| God will say: "This is the Day when their truthfulness (faithfulness and steadfastness) will benefit all who were true to their word (to God). For them are Gardens through which rivers flow, therein to abide for ever. God is well-pleased with them, and they are well-pleased with Him. That is the supreme triumph."
5|120| To God belongs the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth and all that is in them. And He has full power over everything.
6|1| All praise and gratitude are for God, Who has created the heavens and the earth, and (as a dimension of their existence and result of their movement) brought into being veils of darkness and the light. Yet those who disbelieve ascribe equals to their Lord (Who raises, sustains, and maintains them such things as idols, certain celestial bodies, and certain people).
6|2| He it is Who has created you from clay (in the beginning, and the material origin of every one of you is clay), and then decreed a term (of life for you), and there is with Him another unchanging term determined by and known to Him. Yet, you are in doubt (concerning these manifest truths, some of which you experience and some others you can deduce).
6|3| He is (the One, True) God (executing His absolute sovereignty and manifesting His Attributes and Names) both in the heavens and on the earth. He knows what you keep concealed and what you declare (and do) openly, and He knows what you earn (of good or bad – what you are doing in your life).
6|4| Yet whenever any of their Lord’s signs and Revelations comes to them, they turn away from it in aversion.
6|5| And so they willfully deny the truth (embodied by the Qur’an) when it has come to them (and mock the truths, warnings, and especially the tidings of the Resurrection). Even so, they will come to understand what it was they were mocking.
6|6| Do they not see (even though they pass by the ruins on their journeys) how many a generation We have destroyed before them, whom We established on the earth more firmly than We ever established you (We gave them means and possibilities such as We have not given you), and upon whom We showered blessings from heaven (above them), and from beneath them We made rivers flow. And yet We destroyed them for their sins, and after them We raised up another generation.
6|7| Had We sent down on you (O Messenger) a book on parchment such that they touched it with their hands, yet those who insist on their unbelief would indeed have said: "This is clearly nothing but sorcery."
6|8| "Why has not an angel been sent down on him?" they say. Yet, had We sent down an angel (i.e. one they could see, as We did to some of the previous peoples such as those of Lot), then the matter would surely have long been decided and they would have been allowed no respite (since angels coming in this way heralds the destruction).
6|9| Had We appointed an angel (as Our Messenger) We would surely have made him (since he would have to guide humankind in all aspects of life, in the form of) a man, and thus We would have confused for them what they themselves are confusing.
6|10| Messengers indeed were mocked before you (O Messenger), but what they used to mock overwhelmed those who scoffed (at the Messengers to humiliate them).
6|11| Say: "Go about on the earth and look: how was the outcome for those who denied (God’s signs and Messengers)?
6|12| Say: "To whom belongs all that is in the heavens and on the earth?", and say: "To God." He has bound Himself to mercy (so that, despite the errors and false beliefs of His servants, He sustains all that is in the heavens and the earth by His Mercy. He does not leave anybody to their own devices and, as a requirement of His Mercy) He will assuredly gather you together on the Day of Resurrection, about (the coming of) which there is no doubt: yet those who ruin their own selves (by misusing and corrupting their primordial nature, sound reasoning and the capacity to believe, which are their capital share in God’s Mercy) – they do not believe.
6|13| And His is whatsoever dwells in the night and the day; and He is the All-Hearing, the All-Knowing.
6|14| Say: "Shall I take for guardian and confidant anyone other than God, the Originator of the heavens and the earth each with particular features, and He Who feeds and Himself never needs to be fed?" Say: "Moreover, I have surely been ordered to be the foremost in submitting to Him wholly, and (I have been warned): ‘Do not be among those who associate partners with Him’."
6|15| Say: "Indeed I fear, if I should disobey my Lord, the punishment of an awesome Day."
6|16| Whoever has been spared punishment on that Day, surely God has had mercy on him; and that is the manifest triumph.
6|17| If God touches you with affliction, there is none who can remove it but He; and if He touches you with good – it is He Who has full power over everything.
6|18| He is the All-Omnipotent over His servants; He is the All-Wise, the All-Aware.
6|19| Say: "What is most weighty in testimony?" Say: "God: a witness between me and you; and to me is being revealed this Qur’an so that I may warn you thereby, and whomever it may reach." (O you who associate partners with God:) Do you truly testify that there are deities besides God? Say (to them): "I give no such testimony." Say: "He is only One God, and surely I am absolutely free from your association of partners with Him and from whatever you associate with Him as partners."
6|20| Those who were given the Book (before) know him (the Messenger with all his distinguishing attributes) as they know their own sons; yet those who ruin their own selves (by concealing this truth, being overcome by their lusts and worldly interests) – they do not believe.
6|21| Who is more in wrong than he who fabricates falsehood in attribution to God and denies His signs (in the universe and their own selves pointing to Him) and His Revelations. Assuredly, the wrongdoers will not prosper.
6|22| A Day will come when We raise them all from the dead and gather them together, and then ask those who (while they were in the world) associated partners with God: "Where, now, are those of yours whom you asserted to have a part in Divinity?"
6|23| Then they will have no argument except to say: "By God, our Lord, we were not of those who associated partners with God."
6|24| Look! – How they lie against themselves, and (how) what they fabricated as partners (to worship besides God) has failed them!
6|25| There are among them such as could not help but listen to you (reciting the Qur’an), but We have laid veils over their hearts (made by their ill-intention, wrongdoing, and arrogance, which caused them to lose the capacity to believe) so that they do not comprehend it (and so cannot believe), and in their ears, heaviness: even if they see whatever manifest sign (pointing to God’s Unity and other truths of faith), they will not believe in it – so much so that when they come to you (only in order) to dispute with you, they, who have disbelieved, say: "This is nothing but fables of the ancients."
6|26| They bar others from it (the Qur’an), as they themselves keep afar from it; and in doing so, they destroy only their own selves, though they do not perceive it.
6|27| If you (O Messenger) could see them when they are made to stand by the Fire, and (in dread of being thrown into it, as if they forgot that they denied their associating partners with God) they say: "Oh, would that we were brought back (to the world)! Then we would not deny the signs and Revelations of our Lord and would be among the believers!"
6|28| No! Rather, they say this because what they used to hide (the manifest truth, and their own evil intentions, intrigues, and actions in response to it) has become obvious to them; and if they were brought back to the world, they would revert to the very thing they were forbidden: indeed, they are just liars.
6|29| (They always behaved so whenever they got into distress while in the world, but when relieved of it) they would say: "There is no life beyond our present life of the world, and we are not to be raised (from the dead)."
6|30| But if you could see when they are made to stand in their Lord’s Presence: He says: "Is not this (your being raised from the dead and gathered in My Presence) the truth?" They say: "Yes indeed, by our Lord!" He says: "Taste, then, the punishment for what you used to disbelieve."
6|31| Assuredly, those have lost who deny the (truth of the final) meeting with God until, as the Hour comes upon them all of a sudden, they cry, "Alas for us! how negligent we have been in this regard," when they have already loaded their burdens on to their backs . Evil indeed is the burden they are loading themselves with!
6|32| And the present, worldly life is nothing but a play and pastime, and better is the abode of the Hereafter for those who keep from disobedience to God in reverence for Him and piety. Will you not, then, reason and understand?
6|33| (O Messenger!) We know indeed that the things (lies, mockery, and slanders) that they say grieve you: yet, it is not you that they deny (they cannot very well call you a liar since they themselves have called you ‘the trustworthy one’); rather, it is the signs and Revelations of God that the wrongdoers obstinately reject.
6|34| (Do not be grieved at what they do!) Indeed, Messengers before you were denied (regarding the Message they brought), but they endured with patience the charge of falsehood and the hurt done to them, until Our help reached them: there is none that can change God’s words (alter His decrees and His execution of them). And, indeed, some account of those Messengers has already come to you.
6|35| If their recalcitrance is distressful for you, then if you are able seek a way down into the earth or a ladder up to the heavens to bring them a sign (a miracle of the kind that they wrongly think would persuade them to believe) – then know that had God so willed, He could surely have gathered them all to the true guidance (whether by a single miracle or by some other means. Seeing that God wills otherwise: that the truth be set before people with its supporting arguments through Messengers, and people should choose their way by exercise of their free will and judgment, then) do not be among those who act as if ignorant (of this fact).
6|36| Only they who have the ability to hear can respond (to a call); as for the dead, God will raise them to life, and then to Him they will be returned.
6|37| And they say: "Why is not a miraculous sign (of the kind we desire) sent down on him from his Lord?" Say (to them): "Surely God has the power to send down a sign (of any kind)." But most of them have nothing to do with knowledge (so that they would know the nature of the signs, Revelation, and Prophethood, and the purpose for them).
6|38| (Should not those whose ears are closed to the Qur’an look around themselves to see the signs of the truth?) No living creature is there moving on the earth, no bird flying on its two wings, but they are communities like you. We have neglected nothing in the Book (the Qur’an, the Supreme Preserved Tablet, which is the source of all books, and the Book of Creation: We have created everything just in its place and for a purpose, so that the universe is maintained in perfect balance and order). Then, (a Day will come when the universe will be changed into a new one, and) they will be raised from the dead and gathered to their Lord.
6|39| Those who deny Our signs and Revelations are deaf and dumb in veils of darkness. Whomever God wills, He leads astray, and whomever He wills, He sets on a straight path.
6|40| Say (to them): "Do you ever consider: if some punishment of God comes upon you or the Last Hour comes upon you, do you then invoke other than God? (Answer that) if you are truthful (and admit the voice of your conscience)"!
6|41| (No indeed!) Rather, it is Him alone that you invoke – then He may, if He wills, remove that which caused you to invoke Him – and you forget (then) whatever partners you have been associating with Him.
6|42| And We did indeed send Messengers to the communities before you, and We seized those (communities) with trials and tribulations so that they might invoke Us with humility (seeking the truth and forgiveness).
6|43| If only, when Our trial came upon them, they had invoked Us with humility! But their hearts grew hard and Satan decked out whatever they were doing as appealing to them.
6|44| Then, when they forgot (the advice and warnings) that they were reminded of, We opened for them the gates of all things, until, even while they were rejoicing in what they were granted, We seized them suddenly, so then they were plunged into despair.
6|45| And so (in the end) was uprooted that people who had been bent on wrongdoing. All praise be to God, the Lord of the worlds!
6|46| Say: "What do you think, if God should take away your hearing and your sight and set a seal upon your hearts, what deity but God is there that could restore it to you?" Look, how We set out the Revelations and signs (of God’s Existence and Unity and other truths of faith) in diverse ways, and yet they turn away.
6|47| Say: "What do you think, if God’s punishment comes upon you unawares or perceptibly (so that you see its approach), will any be destroyed but the people of wrongdoing?
6|48| We do not send the Messengers except as bearers of glad tidings (of prosperity in return for faith and righteousness) and warners (against the consequences of misguidance). So, whoever believes and mends his way, they will have no fear, nor will they grieve.
6|49| And as for those who deny Our signs and Revelations, the punishment will touch them on account of their transgressing (the bounds in belief and conduct).
6|50| Say (to them, O Messenger): "(You want me to do miracles. However,) I never tell you that with me are the treasures of God, or that I know the Unseen; nor do I tell you that I am an angel. I only follow what is revealed to me." And say: "Are the blind and the seeing alike? Will you not, then, reflect?"
6|51| Warn with this (Qur’an) those who (whether they already have true belief or not yet) are fearful in their hearts because they will be raised from the dead and gathered to their Lord, that they have, apart from Him, no guardian and confidant, nor intercessor, so that they may keep from disobedience to God in reverence for Him and piety, and be protected against His punishment.
6|52| And do not (in the hope of persuading the chieftains of the unbelievers) drive away any of those (poor believers of humble social standing) who, in the morning and afternoon, invoke their Lord, seeking His "Face" (i.e. the meeting with Him hereafter and His eternal, good pleasure). You are not accountable for them in anything just as they are not accountable for you in anything, that you should drive them away, and so become among the wrongdoers.
6|53| And it is in this way that We try people through one another: so that they (who think that such things as wealth and social status are the means of superiority) say (of the believers who are poor and lacking in recognized social status): "Are these the ones among us on whom God has bestowed His favor?" Does God not know best who are the thankful (who recognize the real source and bestower of every good thing one receives, and act accordingly)?
6|54| When those who believe in all of Our Revelations and signs (whenever they come to them,) come to you, say in welcome: "Peace be upon you! Your Lord has bound Himself to mercy (to treat His servants with mercy) – so that if any of you does a bad deed due to ignorance (an instance of defeat to the evil-commanding soul), and thereafter repents and mends his way and conduct, surely He is All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate."
6|55| Thus We set out in detail the signposts of Our way and the relevant Revelations (included in the Qur’an), and (We do so) so that the path of the disbelieving criminals might become distinct (from that of the righteous believers).
6|56| Say (to those associating partners with God): "I have been forbidden to worship those beings whom you deify and invoke apart from God." Say: "I do not follow your lusts and fancies – or else I would go astray and would not be of those who are rightly guided."
6|57| Say: "I take my stand on clear evidence from my Lord, whereas you deny it. Not within my power is what you (deridingly) ask to be hastened, (saying: ‘If there is a punishment with which you threaten us, let it come immediately’). (In the absolute sense) judgment and authority rest with none but God alone. He always relates the truth, and He is the best judge between truth and falsehood.
6|58| Say: "If it were within my power (to bring) what you ask to be hastened, the matter between me and you would have been decided." God best knows the wrongdoers.
6|59| With Him are the keys to the Unseen; none knows them but He. And He knows whatever is on land and in the sea; and not a leaf falls but He knows it; and neither is there a grain in the dark layers of earth, nor anything green or dry, but is (recorded) in a Manifest Book.
6|60| He it is Who recalls your souls at night (while you sleep, a state comparable to death), and He knows what You already worked in the daytime. Then He raises you to life therein (the next daytime) so that the term appointed by Him is fulfilled. (He causes you to die after the completion of this term, and, just as He raises you again to life each day after sleep, He resurrects you from that death when the appointed time is due.) Your final return is to Him; and then He will make you understand what you were doing (and call you to account for it).
6|61| He is the All-Omnipotent over His servants; and He sends to you (angel) guardians (who watch over, and keep a record of, whatever you do). When death finally approaches any of you, Our envoys (the angels assigned to this duty) take his soul, and they do not neglect (any part of their tasks).
6|62| Then they are restored to God, their All-True Master and Protector. Indeed His alone is the judgment and authority, and He is the most swift in reckoning.
6|63| Say: "Who is it that saves you from the veils of darkness on land and the sea, (when) you call upon Him most humbly and in the secrecy of your hearts: ‘If You but save us from this (distress), we will most certainly be among the thankful (who turn to You in faith and righteousness)’?"
6|64| Say: "God alone saves you from this and from every distress, but then you associate partners with Him (instead of being thankful to Him by believing in and obeying Him)."
6|65| Say: "He it is Who has the power to send punishment upon you from above you or from beneath your feet, or to confound you by splitting you into hostile groups and make you taste the violence of one another. Look, how We set out the signs (of God’s Existence and Unity and other truths of faith) in diverse ways, so that they may ponder and penetrate the essence of matters to grasp the truth.
6|66| And yet, your people (O Messenger) deny the Qur’an, even though it is the truth. Say: "I am not one appointed as a guardian over you to assume your responsibility for you."
6|67| Every tiding (from God) has a term appointed for its fulfillment; and in time you will come to know (the truth).
6|68| When you meet such as indulge in (blasphemous) talk about Our Revelations, turn away from them until they enter into some other discourse. And should Satan cause you to forget, no longer remain, after recollection, in the company of such wrongdoing people.
6|69| Those who keep from disobedience to God in reverence for Him and piety are not accountable for them in anything. But (what rests with them is) to remind and thereby admonish them so that they may fear (the evil of what they do) and avoid it.
6|70| Quit those who take their Religion (the one appointed for them by God) for a play and pastime (and have made play and fun their own religion), and whom the present, worldly life has deluded. But remind them (through the Qur’an) lest any soul should be given up to destruction for what it has earned, for there will neither be any protecting friend nor intercessor apart from God, and even though it may offer any ransom (in return for its unforgivable sins such as unbelief and associating partners with God), it will not be accepted from it. They are those who are given up to destruction for what they have earned; for them is a drink of boiling water and a painful punishment because they were persistently disbelieving.
6|71| Say: "Shall we invoke, apart from God, the things that can neither benefit us (when we invoke them) nor harm us (when we do not invoke them), and (thus) be turned back on our heels, after God has guided us – like the one whom the satans have infatuated on earth so that they blunder about in valleys of misguidance, though he has companions calling him to the Guidance, saying: ‘Come to us!’?" Say: "Surely God’s guidance is the (only true) Guidance, and we have been commanded to submit with all our being to the Lord of the worlds;
6|72| And to establish the Prayer in conformity with all its conditions, and keep from disobedience to Him in reverence for Him and piety." He it is to Whom you will be gathered.
6|73| He it is Who has created the heavens and the earth in truth (meaningfully and for definite purpose, and on solid foundations of truth). Whenever He says "Be!" it is. His word is the truth. And His is the Sovereignty on the day when the Trumpet is blown, the Knower of the Unseen and the witnessed. He is the All-Wise, the All-Aware.
6|74| And (call to mind) when Abraham spoke to his father Azar: "Do you take idols for deities? Indeed, I see you and your people lost in obvious error."
6|75| Thus (he spoke and acted for) We had showed Abraham (the ugliness and irrationality of polytheism and) the inner dimension of (the existence of) the heavens and the earth, and the eternal truth (which this outer, corporeal dimension manifests and depends upon} – this We had done so that he might be one of those who have achieved certainty of faith (that he might attain the final degree in his certainty as a Messenger of God):
6|76| When the night overspread over him, he saw a star; and he exclaimed: "This is my Lord, (is it)?" But when it set (sank from sight), he said: "I love not the things that set."
6|77| And when (on another night), he beheld the full moon rising in splendor, he said: "This is my Lord, (is it)!" But when it set, he said: "Unless my Lord guided me, I would surely be among the people gone astray."
6|78| Then, when he beheld the sun rising in all its splendor, he said: "This is my Lord, (is it)?. This one is the greatest of all!" But when it set, he said: "O my people! Surely I am free from your association of partners with God and from whatever you associate with Him as partners."
6|79| "I have turned my face (my whole being) with pure faith and submission to the One Who has originated the heavens and the earth each with particular features, and I am not one of those associating partners with God."
6|80| His people set out to remonstrate with him. Abraham said: "Do you remonstrate with me concerning God, when He has guided me? I do not fear those that you associate with Him as partners (and that cannot even benefit or harm themselves, so what do I have to fear of your threats?). Whatever my Lord wills happens, and no evil befalls me unless He so wills. My Lord embraces all things in His Knowledge. Will you not, then, reflect and take heed?
6|81| "And how should I fear those that you associate with God as partners when you do not fear to associate partners with Him without His having sent down on you any authority (to do so)? (Tell me,) then, which of the two parties has right to feel secure, if you have anything of knowledge?
6|82| "Those who have believed and not obscured their belief with any wrongdoing (of which, associating partners with God is the most grave, unforgivable kind) – they are the ones for whom there is true security, and they are rightly guided."
6|83| That was Our argument which We granted to Abraham against his people. We raise in degrees whom We will. Your Lord is All-Wise (having many wise purposes for what He does), All-Knowing (whatever He does is based on His absolutely comprehensive Knowledge).
6|84| And later, We bestowed upon him (a son) Isaac and (a grandson) Jacob, and each of them We guided (and distinguished them with Prophethood). Earlier We had guided Noah (and distinguished him with Prophethood). And of Abraham’s descendants (We guided and distinguished with Prophethood) David and Solomon, Job, Joseph, Moses and Aaron. Thus do We reward those devoted to doing good as if seeing God.
6|85| And Zachariah, John, Jesus and Elijah: every one of them was of the righteous.
6|86| And Ishmael, Elisha, Jonah, and Lot: every one of them We favored above all other people.
6|87| And some from among their forefathers, and their descendants, and their brothers: We chose them and guided them to a straight path (which has characteristics particular to each according to his epoch).
6|88| That is God’s guidance with which He guides whomever He wills of His servants. And had they (the ones mentioned above) associated partners with God, then all that they did (of good and the recompense they had earned) would have gone to waste.
6|89| Those are the ones to whom We granted the Book, and authority with sound, wise judgment, and Prophethood. Then if those (people of yours, O Messenger,) disbelieve it (Our guidance which We have sent them with you), then certainly We entrust it to a people who do believe therein.
6|90| Those are the (illustrious) ones whom God guided. Follow, then, their guidance, and say (to your people): "I ask of you no wage for it (for conveying the Message); it is a reminder (an admonition and advice) to all created, conscious beings (humankind and jinn).
6|91| And they (some of the Jews) had no true judgment of God as His right (in being God requires), when they say: "God has not sent anything down on any human being." Say: "Then, who sent down the Book which Moses brought as a light, and guidance for the people (you know), and which you put into, and treat as, mere leaves of paper to make show of, while you conceal much of it, and you have been taught (by it) what neither you knew nor your forefathers?" Say: "God (sent it down)," and then leave them to their game of plunging into vanities.
6|92| And this (the Qur’an) is a (Divine) Book that We send down – blessed and full of blessing, confirming (the Divine authorship of) whatever was revealed before it – so that you may warn (the people of) the Mother of Cities (Makkah) and those around it. Those who believe in the Hereafter do believe in it; and they are ever mindful guardians of their Prayers.
6|93| Who is more in wrong than he who fabricates falsehood in attribution to God, or says, "I receive Revelation from God," when nothing has been revealed to him, and he who claims, "I will produce the like of what God has sent down"? If you could but see how it will be when those wrongdoers find themselves in the agonies of death when the angels (appointed to take their souls), stretching forth their hands (say): "Yield up your souls! Today you will be recompensed with the punishment of humiliation for having continuously and persistently spoken about God other than the truth, and in persistent arrogance scorned His Revelations."
6|94| (God says:) "Now assuredly you (having died and been buried alone) have come to us quite alone, as We created you in the first instance; and you have left behind all that We bestowed upon you (in the world). And We do not see with you any of those intercessors (whom you associated with God as partners, and) of whom you supposed that they had shares in you (i.e. authority to order your life in certain ways). Indeed, all the bonds between you and them have now been severed, and all that you supposed (to be God’s partners in your affairs) has failed you.
6|95| God is He Who splits the grain and the fruit-stone (so that they germinate by His command). He brings forth the living from the dead, and He is One Who brings forth the dead from the living; Such is God: how then are you turned away from the truth and make false claims?
6|96| He it is Who splits the dawn (from the darkness of night). He has made the night for repose, and the sun and the moon a means for reckoning (the divisions of time). This is the ordaining of the All-Glorious with irresistible might, the All-Knowing.
6|97| He it is Who has made for you the stars (in their present conditions and positions) so that you may find your way by them in the darkness of the land and the sea. Assuredly, We have set out in detail the signs and proofs (of the truth) for a people seeking knowledge.
6|98| He it is Who developed you from a single human self, and has appointed (in each station of your journeying from mother’s womb to eternal life) for each of you a lodging-place where, and time-limit during which, you will stay and then be transferred. We have certainly set out in detail the signs and proofs (of the truth) for a people seeking to attain profound understanding.
6|99| He it is Who sends down water from the sky, and therewith We bring forth vegetation of every kind (from their seeds under the soil), and then from it We bring forth a lively shoot, from which We bring forth close-packed and compounded ears of grain, and from the palm-tree – from the spathe of it – dates thick-clustered hanging (ready to the hand), and gardens of vines, and the olive tree, and the pomegranate: alike (in the fundamentals of life and growth) and diverse (in structure, look, taste, and smell). Look at their fruit, when they begin to fruit and as they ripen. Surely in that there are signs for people who will believe and who will deepen in faith (as they see new signs).
6|100| Yet they associate the jinn as partners with God, although He created them, and, devoid of any knowledge, they invent for Him sons and daughters. All-Glorified He is, and absolutely Exalted above what they attribute (to Him).
6|101| The Originator of the heavens and the earth with nothing before Him to imitate. How can He have a child, when there is for Him no consort, and He has created all things (i.e. nothing created can be a consort for Him)? And He has full knowledge of everything.
6|102| Such is God, your Lord; there is no deity but He, the Creator of all things; therefore worship Him alone. He holds all things in His care and control.
6|103| Eyes comprehend Him not, but He comprehends all eyes. He is the All-Subtle (penetrating everything no matter how small), the All-Aware.
6|104| Lights of discernment and insight have come to you from your Lord. Whoever therefore (by choosing to open the eye of his heart and place his eyes in its service) discerns, does so for his own good; and whoever chooses to be blind (to the truth), does so to his own harm. And (O Messenger, say to them): "I am not a keeper and watcher over you."
6|105| Thus do We set out the signs of the truth and Revelations in diverse ways, so that they (who choose blindness) say, "You have learned it (from somebody else);" this We do in order that We may make it (the truth, the Qur’an) clear to a people seeking knowledge.
6|106| Follow (O Messenger) what has been revealed to you from your Lord; there is no deity but He; and withdraw from those who associate partners with God (do not care what they say and do).
6|107| Yet if God had so willed (and not enabled their free choice), they would not have associated partners with Him, (so do not torment yourself to death with grief because they do not believe). And We have not made you a keeper over them, and you are not charged with care and control of them.
6|108| And do not (O believers) revile the things or beings that they have, apart from God, deified and invoke, lest (if you do so) they attempt to revile God out of spite, and in ignorance. Thus have We made their deeds seem fair to every people; then to their (true) Lord is the return of all of them, and He will make them understand what they were doing (and call them to account for it).
6|109| They swear by God with their most solemn oaths that if a miracle (of the kind they desire) is shown to them, they will believe in it. Say: "Miracles are in God’s power alone (His is the sole authority to produce them or not)." (O believers, who think that if such a miracle were produced, the unbelievers would believe:) Are you not aware that even if such a miracle were shown to them, they would not believe?
6|110| Just as they did not believe in it before (despite many evidences sufficient to convince one who really means to believe), and (because of their actions and attitudes preventing them from belief,) We confound their hearts and eyes, and leave them blindly wandering in their rebellion.
6|111| Even if We were to send down angels to them (whenever they wished it), and the dead were to speak to them, and We were to assemble before them, face to face, all the creatures (to bear witness to the truth of the Message you bring), they would still not believe, unless God so willed (and came to their aid out of His pure grace); but most of them are ignorant (they pursue worldly pleasures completely unaware of belief and mindless of their own selves).
6|112| And thus it is that (as a dimension of human earthly life taking place according to Our eternal Will embracing human free will, and according to the wisdom in sending the Religion) We have set against every Prophet a hostile opposition from among the satans of humankind and jinn, whispering and suggesting to one another specious words, by way of delusion. Yet had your Lord willed (and compelled everybody to behave in the way He wills), they would not do it. So leave them alone with what they have been fabricating.
6|113| And the hearts of those who do not believe in the Hereafter incline towards it (their deluding speech) and take pleasure in it, and they continue perpetrating the evils that they have long been perpetrating.
6|114| (Say to them, O Messenger:) "What! shall I seek other than God for judge (to settle the matters between you and me), when it is He Who has sent down to you this (unique, most perfect) Book (in which truth and falsehood, right and wrong are) fully distinguished?" (The scholars among) those to whom We gave the Book before know that it is one being sent down in parts in truth by your Lord. So never be among the doubters (concerning the truth of your way).
6|115| The Word of your Lord (which He sent down in parts in different periods considering the conditions of each period) is perfected (with the Qur’an) as the embodiment of truth (with respect to the essentials of belief, principles of worship and good conduct, the rules to govern human life, and all the tidings it gives considering the past and future including the Hereafter), and of justice (regarding all the commandments it contains): there is no altering of His words (the laws He has established for life, and the operation of the universe; attempting to interfere with them will bring about great disasters, so no one must ever attempt to change His commandments, which are contained in the Book). He is the All-Hearing, the All-Knowing (Who knows every need of every creature, every requirement of every age, just as He knows how you respond to His commandments).
6|116| And if you pay heed to the majority of those on the earth, they will lead you astray from God’s way. They follow only conjecture (not knowledge), and they themselves do nothing but make guesses (they pronounce and act according to their fancies, selfish interests, and personal value judgments).
6|117| Indeed your Lord is He Who knows best who goes astray from His way, and He knows best (those who are) the rightly-guided.
6|118| Eat, then, of (the flesh of) that over which God’s Name has been pronounced, if you are sincere believers in His Revelations.
6|119| And why should you not eat of (the flesh of) that over which God’s Name has been pronounced, seeing that He has clearly spelled out to you what He has made unlawful to you unless you are constrained to it by dire necessity? But, indeed many people lead others astray, driven by their lusts and caprices without any knowledge (from God). Indeed your Lord is He Who knows best those who exceed the bounds.
6|120| Abstain from sinning, whether done in public or secret, (and the intentions and attitudes that accompany either). Indeed, those who record sins to their account will be recompensed for what they have earned.
6|121| And do not eat of that which is slaughtered in the name of other than God and over which God’s Name has not been pronounced (at the time of its slaughtering), for that is indeed a transgression. And the satans do whisper and make suggestions to their confidants to contend with you. If you obey them, you are indeed those who associate partners with God.
6|122| Is he who was dead (in spirit), and We raised him to life, and set for him a light by which he moves (without any deviancy) among people, is he like the one who is as one lost in depths of darkness, from which he cannot get out? (But) thus it is: to the unbelievers are the things they have been doing decked out as appealing.
6|123| And in that way have We set up in every township as leaders its most prominent criminals so that they scheme (against the believers). But they scheme only against their own selves – and they do not perceive it.
6|124| When a Revelation is conveyed to them, they say: "We will not believe unless we are given the like of what God’s Messengers were given." God knows best upon whom to place His Message. Soon will an abasement from God’s Presence befall these criminals and a severe punishment for their scheming.
6|125| Thus, whomever God wills to guide, He expands his breast to Islam, and whomever He wills to lead astray, He causes his breast to become tight and constricted, as if he were climbing towards the heaven. Thus God lays ignominy upon those who do not believe (despite many signs and evidences).
6|126| And this (the way of Islam) is the Straight Path of your Lord. We have assuredly set out in detail the signs (of the right and wrong ways) for a people who reflect and are mindful.
6|127| For them is the Abode of Peace with their Lord (where they will enjoy perfect bliss, peace, and safety), and He is their Guardian because of what they have been doing.
6|128| On the day when He will raise to life and gather them (jinn and humankind, believers and unbelievers) all together, (He says): "O you assembly of the jinn! You have seduced a good many of humankind (and included them in your company)." Their closest fellows from among humankind will (confess and) say: "Our Lord! We enjoyed one another (in self-interested fellowship, serving one another’s selfish ends), and now we have reached the end of our term that You appointed for us." He (God) will say: "The Fire is now your dwelling to abide therein – God decrees however He wills." Indeed your Lord is All-Wise, All-Knowing (Whose every decree and act are based on absolute wisdom and knowledge).
6|129| In this manner We cause the wrongdoers to befriend and help one another (with seduction and sinning) because of what they are engaged in earning.
6|130| "O assembly of the jinn and humankind! Did there never come to you Messengers from among yourselves, relating to you My signs and Revelations, and warning you of encountering this Day of yours?" They say: "We bear witness against ourselves." The life of the world had deluded them, and (just as their speeches and actions in the world testified to their unbelief, so) they have borne witness against themselves that they were unbelievers.
6|131| Clearly it is not the way of your Lord that He would destroy lands unjustly without their people being warned (beforehand of the consequence of their way of life) and therefore unmindful (of the distinctions between right and wrong, truth and falsehood).
6|132| For everyone there are (different) ranks according to what they have done (of right and wrong). Your Lord is not unmindful of what they do.
6|133| Your Lord, having boundless, all-encompassing mercy, is absolutely self-sufficient (with no need of any kind, including His servants’ belief and worship). If He so wills, He can put you away and cause whom He wills to succeed you just as He produced you from the seed of another people.
6|134| What you have been promised (and warned of, concerning your future and the Hereafter), is indeed bound to happen, and you have no power at all to frustrate it.
6|135| Say: "O my people! Do all that lies within your power, indeed I (too) am at work (doing my task). So in time you will come to know to whom the ultimate abode of happiness will belong. Indeed the wrongdoers do not prosper and attain their goals.
6|136| They assign to God, of the produce and cattle that He has created, a portion, and they say: "This is God’s" – so they assert – "and this (the rest) is for our associate-deities." Then (acting in what they deem to their own interest), what is assigned for their "associate-deities" does not reach God, while what is assigned for God reaches their "associate-deities." How evil is what they ordain as laws (and how badly they enforce them)!
6|137| And, in the way they follow, their associate-deities (their association of partners with God or their idol-worshipping, and satans of jinn and humankind they obey) deck out the killing of their children as appealing to many among those who associate partners with God, so as to bring them to ruin and confound them in their religion. If God had so willed (if He had not decreed freedom of will to humankind, thus compelling them to act in a particular way like other beings), they would not be doing all this. So, leave them alone with what they have been fabricating.
6|138| (Putting some of the produce and cattle to one side,) they say: "These animals and crops are taboo; none can eat of them save those whom we will – so they assert – and there are cattle whose backs they declare are forbidden (to bear loads), and cattle over which they do not pronounce God’s Name. (Their attributing these customs to God) is a lie against Him. He will soon recompense them for all that they fabricate in attribution to God.
6|139| They also say (concerning certain other cattle they consecrate): "All that is in the wombs of these cattle is (if they are born alive) exclusively for our males and is unlawful for our wives. If it (the newborn) is born dead or dies soon after birth, all of them (men and women) may share therein." He will soon recompense them for their attributing (these rules falsely to Him). Surely, He is All-Wise (in Whose every act and commandment are many instances of wisdom), All-Knowing (whose every act is based on absolute knowledge).
6|140| Assuredly those are lost who, in folly and without knowledge, kill their children (either in the wombs of their mothers or after birth), and make unlawful (the lawful and pure, wholesome things) that God has provided them as sustenance, falsely attributing that to God. Assuredly, they have gone astray, and have never been able to find the right way.
6|141| (Ever providing you with lawful, pure and wholesome food), He it is Who produces gardens (and vineyards, and orchards) trellised and untrellised, and date-palms, and crops varying in taste, and olives, and pomegranates, resembling one another and yet so different. Eat of their fruits when they come to fruition, and give (to the poor and the needy) the due thereof on harvest day. And do not be wasteful (by over-eating or other unnecessary consumption, or by giving to others so much as to leave in need those whose maintenance is your responsibility); indeed He does not love the wasteful.
6|142| And of the cattle (He has created) some for carrying loads, and some for the sake of their flesh, and skins and fur. Consume from what God has provided for you as sustenance, and do not follow in the footsteps of Satan (by laying down rules other than those of God and adopting ways other than God’s); surely he is a manifest enemy to you.
6|143| Eight in pairs of cattle: two of sheep, two of goats. Say (to them, O Messenger): "Is it the two males that God has made unlawful or the two females, or what the wombs of the two females may contain? Inform me about this with sound, authoritative knowledge, if you are truthful (in your claim that God has made them unlawful)."
6|144| And likewise of camels there are two, and of oxen there are two. Say: "Is it the two males that God has made unlawful or the two females, or what the wombs of the two females may contain? Or were you present there to witness when God laid down this (the commandment you attribute to Him) for you?" Who is more in wrong than he who fabricates falsehood in attribution to God, and thus leads people astray without sound, authoritative knowledge? Indeed, God does not guide wrongdoing people (to the truth and the attainment of their goals).
6|145| Say (O Messenger): "I do not find in what has been revealed to me anything made unlawful to one who would eat except it be carrion or blood outpoured (not that which is left in the veins of such organs as the liver and spleen), or the flesh of swine, which is loathsome and unclean, or that which is profane having been slaughtered in the name of other than God (or without pronouncing God’s Name over it). Yet whoever is constrained by dire necessity (to eat thereof) provided he does not covet nor exceed (the bounds of the necessity): (no sin shall be on him). Your Lord is indeed All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate.
6|146| And for those who are Jews We have made unlawful all beasts with claws, and of oxen and sheep We have made unlawful for them their fat, save that which is in their backs or entrails, or that which is mixed with the bone. Thus did We recompense them for their continuous rebellion. And We are indeed true (in all Our decrees and deeds).
6|147| Then, if they still deny you (O Messenger), say to them: "Your Lord (Who creates, nourishes, and provides you,) has an all-embracing mercy (and so does not immediately punish you for your acts of insolence but gives you respite so that you may repent and ask Him for forgiveness). However, (if you do not mend your ways, know that) His punishment cannot be averted from disbelieving criminals.
6|148| Those who persist in associating partners with God will say: "Had God willed, neither we nor our forefathers would have associated partners with Him, nor would we have declared anything (which God has made lawful) unlawful." Even so did those who lived before them deny (their Prophets with similar false excuses) until they tasted Our mighty punishment. Say (to them): "Do you have any sound, authoritative knowledge (to support your claim)? (If you have) then bring it out for us! In fact you follow only conjecture, and you yourselves are only making false surmises (you pronounce judgments and act only according to your fancies, interests and personal value judgments)."
6|149| Say: "(As against what you argue) God’s is the final, conclusive argument. And had He so willed (and compelled you act in a certain way, rather than letting you associate partners with Him and make unlawful what He has made lawful) He would have guided you all together to the truth.
6|150| Say: "Bring forward your witnesses who could testify that God has made unlawful (what you claim to be forbidden.)" Then if they bear witness (falsely), do not bear witness with them, and do not follow the lusts and fancies of those who deny Our signs and Revelations, who do not believe in the Hereafter, and who (as the main source of their unbelief in other essentials of faith) ascribe equals to their Lord.
6|151| Say: "Come, let me recite what your Lord has made unlawful for you: that you associate nothing with Him; and (do not offend against but, rather) treat your parents in the best way possible; and that you do not kill your children for fear of poverty – it is We Who provide for you as well as for them; and that you do not draw near to any shameful thing (like adultery, fornication, and homosexuality), whether committed openly or secretly; and that you do not kill any soul, which God has made sacred and forbidden, except in just cause. All this He has enjoined upon you, that you may use your reason (and so believe, know right from wrong, and follow His way).
6|152| "And do not draw near to the property of the orphan except in the best way (such as to improve and increase it) until he comes of age. Weigh and balance with full measure and equity." We do not burden any soul beyond its capacity. "And when you speak, be just, even though it be against one near of kin; and fulfill God’s covenant (and the covenants you make with one another in God’s Name). All this He has enjoined upon you, that you may reflect and be mindful.
6|153| "This is my straight path, so follow it, and do not follow other paths, lest they scatter you from His Path. This He has enjoined upon you, that you keep from disobedience to Him in reverence for Him and piety to deserve His protection."
6|154| And once again: We gave Moses the Book, completing Our favor upon those devoted to doing good in the awareness that God sees them, and detailing everything (concerning truth and falsehood, and right and wrong), and as a guidance and mercy, that they may have ever-deepening faith in the (final) meeting with their Lord.
6|155| And likewise, this (Qur’an) is a Book We have sent down, blessed and giving blessing; so follow it and keep from disobedience to it, that you may be shown mercy (to be granted a virtuous life in this world and eternal happiness in the Hereafter).
6|156| (We have sent it down) lest you should say (as an excuse), "The Book was sent down only on the two groups of people before us and indeed we were unaware of what they were taught by it."
6|157| Or lest you should say, "Had the Book been sent down on us, we would surely have been more rightly guided than they are." Now there has come to you a manifest proof from your Lord, and a guidance, and a mercy. Who, then, is greater in doing wrong than he who denies God’s Revelations and turns away from them? We will recompense those who turn away from Our Revelations with an evil punishment for turning away.
6|158| Do they wait only for the angels to come to them (to take their souls or bring them a disaster), or for your Lord to judge them (and bring forth Hell for them), or for some clear signs of your Lord to appear (such as rocks pouring down on them, which they want you to show them, or signs signaling the final destruction of the world)? When some clears signs of your Lord appear, believing will be of no avail to anyone who did not believe before, or who has earned no good through his belief. Say (to them, O Messenger): "Wait on, we too are waiting!"
6|159| Those who have made divisions in their Religion (whereas they must accept it in its totality), and have been divided into different parties – you have nothing to do with them. Their case rests with God, and then He will make them understand what they were doing.
6|160| Whoever comes to God with a good deed will have ten times as much, and whoever comes with an evil deed, will be recompensed with only the like of it; and they will not be wronged.
6|161| Say: "Surely my Lord has guided me to a Straight Path, being an upright Religion leading to prosperity (in both worlds), the way of Abraham based on pure faith (free from unbelief, associating partners with God and hypocrisy). He was never of those associating partners with God."
6|162| Say: "My Prayer, and all my (other) acts and forms of devotion and worship, and my living and my dying are for God alone, the Lord of the worlds.
6|163| "He has no partners; thus have I been commanded, and I am the first and foremost of the Muslims (who have submitted to Him exclusively)."
6|164| Say: "Am I, then, to seek after someone other than God as Lord when He is the Lord of everything?" Every soul earns only to its own account; and no soul, as bearer of burden, bears and is made to bear the burden of another. Then, to your Lord is the return of all of you, and He will then make you understand (the truth) concerning all that on which you have differed.
6|165| He it is Who has appointed you vicegerents over the earth (to improve it and rule over it according to God’s commandments), and has exalted some of you over others in degrees (of intelligence, capacity, and then wealth and status): thus He tries you in what He has granted you. (Always remember that) your Lord is the most swift in retribution (when it is due), and assuredly, He is the All-Forgiving, the All-Compassionate (especially toward those who turn to Him in repentance as His believing servants).
7|1| Alif. Lam. Mim. Sad.
7|2| This is a Book sent down to you (O Messenger) – so let there be no tightness in your breast in respect of it (in conveying it to people and fearing that they may not believe in it) – that thereby you may warn (people against any deviation), and as an admonition and advice to the believers.
7|3| Follow what has been sent down to you (O humankind) from your Lord, and, do not follow as confidants and guardians other than Him. How little you reflect and take heed!
7|4| How many a township We have destroyed (because they did not pay heed to Our warning). Our scourge fell upon them at night or when they were taking their ease in the noontime.
7|5| And there was no appeal from them when Our scourge fell upon them, except for their saying: "Indeed, we have been wrongdoers."
7|6| So We will surely question those to whom Messengers were sent (as to how they responded to them), and We will surely question those sent with Our Message (concerning their duty of conveying it and how their peoples reacted to it).
7|7| Then We will surely narrate to them (the full account of their worldly lives) with (full, accurate) knowledge; We were not absent (while they were doing their deeds and so we have a perfect record).
7|8| The weighing on that Day shall be the truth (complete and accurate), and he whose scales (of good deeds) are heavy – they will be the prosperous.
7|9| And he whose scales are light (because they have no acceptable good deeds) – they will be those who have ruined their own selves because they were unjust to Our Revelations and signs (in both the universe and themselves).
7|10| Indeed, We have established you on the earth (O humankind, endowed you with great potential) and arranged for your livelihood in it. Scarcely do you give thanks!
7|11| We brought you into existence, then We gave you each a form (perfectly suited to your nature), and then We said to the angels (to signify that they affirm the degree of knowledge and superiority of Adam and his deserving vicegerency, and that they will help him to perform his duty on the earth): "Prostrate before Adam!" They all prostrated, but Iblis did not; he was not of those who prostrated.
7|12| He (God) said: "What prevented you from prostrating, when I commanded you to do so?" Iblis said: "I am better than he, for You have created me from fire, and him You have created from clay."
7|13| (God) said: "Then go down from it; it is not for you to act haughtily there! So be gone! Surely you are of the degraded."
7|14| (Iblis) said: "Grant me respite till the Day when they are raised from the dead."
7|15| (God) said: "You shall be among the ones (humankind) granted respite (so long as they remain on the earth)."
7|16| (Iblis) continued: "Now that You have allowed me to rebel and go astray, I will surely lie in wait for them on Your Straight Path (to lure them from it).
7|17| "Then I will come upon them from before them and from behind them, and from their right and from their left. And You will not find most of them thankful."
7|18| He (God) said: "Go away from there, disgraced and disowned! Those of them that follow you, surely I will fill Hell with you all!"
7|19| (To Adam, He said): "O Adam! Dwell, you and your spouse, in the Garden, and eat (of the fruits) thereof where you desire, but do not approach this tree, or you will both be among the wrongdoers."
7|20| Then Satan made an evil suggestion to both of them that he might reveal to them their private parts that had remained hidden from them (and waken their carnal impulses), and he said: "Your Lord has forbidden you this tree only lest you should become sovereigns, or lest you should become immortals."
7|21| And he swore to them: "Truly, I am for you a sincere adviser."
7|22| Thus he led them on by delusion; and when they tasted the tree, their private parts (and all the apparently shameful, evil impulses in their creation) were revealed to them, and both began to cover themselves with leaves from the Garden. And their Lord called out to them: "Did I not prohibit you from that tree, and did I not say to you that Satan is a manifest enemy to you?"
7|23| They said (straightaway): "Our Lord! We have wronged ourselves, and if You do not forgive us and do not have mercy on us, we will surely be among those who have lost!"
7|24| He said: "Go down, (all of you,) (and henceforth you will live a life,) some of you being the enemies of the others. There shall be for you on the earth a habitation and provision until an appointed time."
7|25| He said: "You will live there, and there you will die, and from it you will be brought forth (on the Day of Resurrection)."
7|26| O children of Adam! Assuredly We have sent down on you a garment to cover your private parts, and garments for adornment. However, (remember that) the garment of piety and righteousness – it is the best of all. That is from God’s signs, that they may reflect and be mindful.
7|27| Children of Adam! Never let Satan seduce you (and cause you to fail in similar trials) as he caused your (ancestral) parents to be driven out of the Garden, pulling off from them their garment and revealing to them their private parts (and the carnal impulses ingrained in them). He sees you, he and his host (see you), from where you do not see them. We have made satans the confidants and fellow-criminals of those who do not believe.
7|28| And whenever they commit an indecency, they say (attempting to excuse themselves): "We found our fathers doing that (and follow in their footsteps), and this is what God has enjoined upon us." Say: "Indeed, God does not enjoin indecency. Or is it that you speak about God things you have no knowledge of?"
7|29| Say: "My Lord enjoins right and justice." Turn toward Him your faces (i.e. your whole being) whenever you rise to perform the Prayer, and call upon Him, sincere in your faith in Him and practising the Religion for His sake. As He initiated you (in existence), so to Him you are returning.
7|30| A party He has guided (to the right way), and for another party straying in error is their just due: they have taken satans, rather than God, for confidants, supporters, and guardians, yet they suppose that they are rightly-guided.
7|31| O children of Adam! Dress cleanly and beautifully for every act of worship; and (without making unlawful the things God has made lawful to you) eat and drink, but do not be wasteful (by over-eating or consuming in unnecessary ways): indeed, He does not love the wasteful.
7|32| Say: "Who is there to make unlawful the beautiful things (obtained from plants, animals and minerals) that God has brought forth for His servants, and the pure, wholesome things from among the means of sustenance?" Say: "They are for (the enjoyment of) the believers in the life of the world (without excluding others), and will be exclusively theirs on the Day of Resurrection." Thus We set out in detail Our signs (showing Our way) and Revelations for a people seeking knowledge.
7|33| Say: "My Lord has made unlawful only indecent, shameful deeds (like fornication, adultery, prostitution, and homosexuality), whether those of them that are apparent and committed openly or those that are committed secretly; and any act explicitly sinful; and insolence and offenses (against the Religion, life, personal property, others’ chastity, and mental and bodily health), which is openly unjustified; and (it is also forbidden) that you associate partners with God for which He has sent no authority at all, and that you speak against God the things about which you have no sure knowledge.
7|34| And (know that) for every community there is a term appointed (by God considering their free will); and when the end of the term falls, they can neither delay it by a single moment, nor can they hasten it.
7|35| O children of Adam! (As to your earthly life, the term of which has already been appointed, We have decreed): Whenever there come to you Messengers from among yourselves, relating to you My Revelations, then whoever keeps from disobedience to Me and them so as to deserve My protection and mends his ways, thus acting for the general peace in the community, they will have no fear, nor will they grieve.
7|36| But those who deny Our Revelations and turn arrogantly from them, they are the companions of the Fire, and therein they will abide.
7|37| Who is more in wrong than he who fabricates falsehood in attribution to God and denies His Revelations and signs (in the universe and their selves)? Their full portion of God’s decree (concerning life and providence) will reach them, until Our envoys (angels assigned for this duty) come to them to take their souls, and say: "Where, now, are those beings whom you have deified and invoked apart from God?" They say: "They have failed us," and thus bear witness against themselves that they were (always) unbelievers.
7|38| He (God) says: "Enter in company with the communities of jinn and humankind that went before you into the Fire!" Every time a community enters the Fire, it curses its fellow-community (that went before it) – so much so that, when they all have gathered there one after another, those who came later say of those who came earlier: "Our Lord! Those are the ones who led us astray: give them, therefore, double suffering through fire!" He (God) says: "For each is double (since those who went earlier both strayed themselves and led others astray, and those who came later both strayed themselves and imitated the others blindly), but you do not know."
7|39| Then the preceding ones among them say to the succeeding ones: "You are in no wise superior to us, so taste the punishment for all (the sins) that you were busy earning (through your belief and deeds)!"
7|40| Those who deny Our Revelations and turn arrogantly from them – for them, the gates of Heaven will indeed not be opened (i.e. God will not accept even their good deeds) and they will enter Paradise no further than a camel can pass through the eye of a needle. Thus do We recompense the disbelieving criminals.
7|41| For them is a bed of Hellfire and, over them, is a covering (of the same fire). Thus do We recompense the wrongdoers.
7|42| But those who believe and do good, righteous deeds – We do not burden any soul beyond its capacity – they are the companions of Paradise; and therein they will abide.
7|43| We will strip away whatever is in their bosoms of rancor and any jealousy (they may have felt against other believers while in the world). Rivers flowing beneath them (and themselves overflowing with gratitude), they say: "All praise and gratitude are for God, Who has guided us to this (prosperity as a result of the guidance with which He favored us in the world). If God had not guided us, we would certainly not have found the right way. The Messengers of our Lord did indeed come with the truth." And a voice calls to them: "That is the Paradise that you have been made to inherit in return for what you used to do (in the world)."
7|44| And the companions of Paradise call out to the companions of the Fire: "Now we have found what our Lord promised us to be true. Have you (also) found true what your Lord promised you?" They say, "Yes!" And an announcer announces among them: "God’s curse (rejection and condemnation) is the due of all wrongdoers!"
7|45| (The wrongdoers are) those who bar people from God’s way and seek to make it crooked; and they are persistent unbelievers in the Hereafter.
7|46| And between the two there is a barrier, and on the Heights (between Paradise and Hell) are some men, recognizing each by their countenances. They – not yet entering Paradise, but longing for it – call out to the companions of Paradise: "Peace be upon you!"
7|47| And when their eyes are turned towards the companions of Hell, they say (in dread of that state): "Our Lord! Do not include us among the people of the wrongdoing!"
7|48| The people of the Heights call out to some men (who were the leaders of unbelief in the world, and) whom they recognize by their marks (on their countenances), saying: "(Now you see that) neither your numbers and the wealth you amassed nor your growing arrogance and vanity have availed you!"
7|49| (Pointing to the companions of Paradise, they continue): "Are those not the ones of whom you swore that God would not favor them with mercy?" (For now it is they who have been told:) "Enter Paradise; you will have no fear, nor will you grieve."
7|50| And the companions of the Fire call out to the companions of Paradise: "Pour out some water upon us, or something of what God has provided for you!" They say: "Indeed God has forbidden both to the unbelievers."
7|51| (The unbelievers are) those who took their Religion (the one appointed for them by God) for a play and pastime (and have made play and fun their own religion), and present, worldly life deluded them. So We are oblivious of them today (concerning forgiveness and favoring), as they were oblivious of the encounter of this Day of theirs, and were obstinately rejecting Our Revelations.
7|52| Assuredly We have brought them a Book (the meaning and commandments of) which We set out in detail with knowledge, as guidance and mercy for people who will believe and who have already believed.
7|53| Are they waiting but for the final end of the call to that Book? On the Day when this end comes, those, who until then have been oblivious of it, say: "The Messengers of our Lord assuredly came with the truth (but we did not pay heed.) Have we, then, any intercessors who will now intercede on our behalf? Or can we be returned (to the world) that we might do otherwise than we used to do (when we were in the world)? They have certainly ruined their selves and what they fabricated (of false deities) has failed them.
7|54| Indeed your Lord is God, Who has created the heavens and the earth in six days, then He has established Himself on the Supreme Throne, covering the day with the night, each pursuing the other swiftly, with the sun, the moon, and the stars obedient to His command. Know well that His is the creation and His is the command. Blessed and Supreme is God, the Lord of the worlds.
7|55| Call upon your Lord (O humankind) with humility and in the secrecy of your hearts. Indeed your Lord does not love those who exceed the bounds.
7|56| (Keep within the bounds He has decreed:) Do not cause disorder and corruption on the earth seeing that it has been so well ordered, and call upon Him with fear (of His punishment) and longing (for His forgiveness and mercy). God’s mercy is indeed near to those devoted to doing good, aware that God is seeing them.
7|57| And He it is Who sends forth the merciful winds as glad tidings in advance of His mercy – so that, when they carry heavy clouds, We drive them towards a dead land, then We cause thereby water to descend, and bring forth thereby fruits (crops) of every kind. Even so We make the dead come forth (on Judgment Day), that you may reflect and be mindful.
7|58| And the good, pure land: its vegetation comes forth in abundance by its Lord’s leave, whereas from the bad, corrupt land, it comes forth but poorly (like thorny bushes). Thus do We in diverse ways set out the signs (of God’s Existence and Unity and other truths of faith) for the people who give thanks (from the heart and in speech, and in action by fulfilling God’s commandments).
7|59| Indeed We sent Noah to his people as Messenger (to convey Our message to them), and he said: "O my people! Worship God alone: you have no deity other than Him. Indeed I fear for you the punishment of an awesome day!"
7|60| The leading ones among his people said: "We see that you are surely lost in obvious error."
7|61| He (Noah) said: "O my people! There is no error in me. Rather, I am a Messenger from the Lord of the worlds.
7|62| "I convey to you the messages of my Lord, give you sincere advice, and I know from God that which you do not know.
7|63| "Why, do you deem it strange that a reminder (a message and guidance) from your Lord should have come to you through a man from among yourselves that he may warn you (against the consequences of your way of life), and that you may guard against His punishment, and so that you may be favored with His grace and mercy?"
7|64| And yet they (instead of paying heed to Noah’s warning) denied him. And so We saved him and those who were with him in the Ark, and caused to drown those who denied Our Revelations and signs (of Our Existence and Unity). They were indeed a blind people.
7|65| And to the (people of) ‘Ad We sent their brother Hud. He said: "O my people! Worship God alone: you have no deity other than Him. Will you not, then, keep from disobedience to Him and deserve His protection?"
7|66| The leading ones among his people who were persisting in unbelief said: "We see you to be indeed foolish and weak-minded, and we are certain that you are a liar."
7|67| He (Hud) said: "O my people! There is no folly and weak-mindedness in me, rather I am a Messenger from the Lord of the worlds.
7|68| "I convey to you the messages of my Lord, and I am a trustworthy counselor to you.
7|69| "Why, do you deem it strange that a reminder (a message and guidance) from your Lord should have come to you through a man from among you that he may warn you (against the consequences of your way)? Remember and be mindful that He has made you successors (on the earth) after Noah’s people and increased you in stature and power. Remember and be mindful, then, of God’s bounties, that you may prosper (in both worlds, and attain your goals)."
7|70| They said: "Have you come to us (with the command) that we should worship God alone and forsake what our forefathers used to worship? Then bring about what you have threatened us with, if you are truthful!"
7|71| He (Hud) said: "Already abhorrence and anger (i.e. idol-worship in blind imitation of your forefathers) from your Lord have befallen you. What, do you dispute with me about mere designations which you and your forefathers invented and for which God has not sent down any authority? (If that is the case) then wait, as indeed I too am among those who wait."
7|72| Then, through mercy from Us, We saved him and those who were in his company, while we uprooted those who denied Our signs and Revelations and were not believers.
7|73| And to (the people of) Thamud (We sent) their brother Salih. He said (conveying the same message): "O my people! Worship God alone: you have no deity other than Him. Assuredly a manifest proof has come to you from your Lord: this is a she-camel from God as a sign for you (of the truth of my Messengership). So leave her to pasture on God’s earth, and touch her with no harm lest a painful punishment should seize you.
7|74| "And remember and be mindful that He made you successors of the people of ‘Ad and established you securely on the earth so that you build castles on its plains and hew out dwellings in the mountains. Remember, then, and be mindful of God’s bounties, and do not go about acting wickedly in the land, causing disorder and corruption."
7|75| The leading ones among his people, who were arrogant and oppressed the others, said to those that they scorned, to those among them who were believers: "Do you really know and consider Salih as one sent by His Lord with a message?" They replied: "We do indeed believe in what he has been sent with."
7|76| Those who were arrogant said: "What you have come to believe in we indeed disbelieve."
7|77| Then (without enduring any longer to see her as evidence of the truth of Salih’s message), they cruelly slaughtered the she-camel, and disdainfully disobeyed the command of their Lord, and said: "O Salih! Bring upon us that (punishment) with which you have threatened us, if you are of those sent (by God with the truth)!"
7|78| Then a shocking catastrophe seized them, so that they lay prostrate and lifeless in their very dwellings.
7|79| And Salih left them, saying: "O my people! I conveyed to you the message of my Lord and gave you good counsel; but you have no love for good counselors."
7|80| And (remember) Lot (Lut), when he said to his people : "Do you commit an indecency such as no people in all the world have ever done before you?
7|81| "You come to men with lust in place of women. You are a people committing excesses and wasteful (of your God-given faculties)."
7|82| But his people’s response was only that they said (to one another): "Banish them from your settlement, for they are a few persons who make themselves out to be pure!"
7|83| Then We saved Lot and his household (who left the land upon Our command) except his wife, who was among those who stayed behind.
7|84| And We rained a destructive rain (of stones) upon them (those who stayed behind). Then, look, how was the outcome for the criminals committed to accumulating sins.
7|85| And to (the people of) Midian (We sent) their brother Shu‘ayb as Messenger. He (conveying the same message) said: "O my people! Worship God alone: you have no deity other than Him. A manifest proof has assuredly come to you from your Lord. So give full measure and weight (in all your dealings), and do not wrong people by depriving them of what is rightfully theirs, and do not cause disorder and corruption in the land seeing that it has been so well ordered. That is for your own good, if you are (to be) true believers.
7|86| "And do not lurk in ambush by every pathway, seeking to overawe and bar from God’s way one who believes in Him, and seeking to make it appear crooked. And remember how you were once few (and weak), and then He increased you in number (and strength). And look, how was the outcome for those who cause disorder and corruption (on the earth).
7|87| "If there are a party among you who have come to believe in the message with which I have been sent, while another party do not believe, then persevere and be patient until God judges between us. He is the best in judging."
7|88| The leading ones among his people who were arrogant and oppressed the others said: "We will surely banish you, O Shu‘ayb, and those who believe in your company from our township, or else you will return to our way (of faith and life)." He (Shu‘ayb) said: "What? Even though we abhor it?
7|89| "Should we return to your way after God has saved us from it, then most certainly we would be fabricating lies in attribution to God. It is not for us to turn back to it, unless God, our Lord, should so will. Our Lord embraces all things within His Knowledge. In God do we put our trust. Our Lord! Judge between us and our people, making the truth manifest, for You are the Best in judging to make the truth manifest."
7|90| The leading ones who persisted in unbelief said (so as to put pressure upon the others among his people): "Should you follow Shu‘ayb, you will then surely be the losers!"
7|91| Then a shocking catastrophe seized them, so that they lay prostrate and lifeless in their very dwellings –
7|92| Those who denied Shu‘ayb – as though they had not lived there in abundance – those who denied Shu‘ayb (and threatened the believers with loss and ruin), it was they who were the losers.
7|93| And Shu‘ayb left them, saying: "O my people! I conveyed to you the messages of my Lord and gave you good counsel. How, then, could I mourn for a people ungrateful and persistent in unbelief?"
7|94| And We did not send a Prophet to a township but We seized its people with distress and hardship so that they might (wake from heedlessness and) be humble (invoking Us for forgiveness and turning to the truth.)
7|95| Then (after this phase of trial and training) We changed the affliction into good (ease of life) until they increased (in numbers and wealth, and indulged in comforts) and said (without taking any lesson from it): "Sometimes distress and sometimes happiness visited our forefathers (whereas we are living an easy life". So We seized them all of a sudden without their being aware (of what was coming).
7|96| If the peoples of those townships had but believed and, in order to deserve His protection, had kept from disobedience to God in reverence for Him and piety, We would surely have opened up for them blessings from heaven and earth; but they denied (the Messengers and the Divine Message they brought), and so We seized them for what they habitually earned (through their deeds).
7|97| Did the peoples of the townships feel secure that Our mighty punishment would not come upon them at night while they are sleeping?
7|98| Or did the peoples of the townships feel secure that Our mighty punishment would not come upon them in the daytime while they have indulged in worldly play?
7|99| Or did they feel secure from God’s designing (against them some unexpected affliction)? But none feels secure from God’s designing (against them some unexpected affliction) save the people of loss and self-ruin.
7|100| Has it not, then, become clear to those who have inherited the earth in the wake of former generations that, if We so willed, We could strike them for their sins? But (they are unresponsive to the meaning of events because, in consequence of their wrongdoing, their misguided attitudes and arrogance, and the grave sins they commit) We impress their hearts with a seal so that they cannot hear (the revealed truths and any admonition).
7|101| Those townships – We relate to you some tidings of them by way of exemplary histories (to teach you this): assuredly the Messengers came to them (chosen by God) from among themselves with clear proofs of the truth but they did not believe in that which they used to deny before. Thus does God impress the hearts of the unbelievers with a seal (that shuts them off from the affects of admonition).
7|102| We did not find in most of them any (faithfulness to) covenant; indeed We found most of them to be transgressors.
7|103| Then, after them (those early Messengers) We sent Moses to the Pharaoh and his chiefs with Our Revelations and signs (miracles to support him), but they treated them wrongfully. So look, how was the outcome for those causing disorder and corruption!
7|104| And Moses said: "Pharaoh! I am a Messenger from the Lord of the worlds,
7|105| "Bound in truth to say nothing about God except the truth. I have surely come to you with a clear proof from your Lord (Who creates, nourishes, and sustains you). So, let the Children of Israel go with me!"
7|106| He (the Pharaoh) said: "If you have come with a sign, then bring it forth, if you are truthful!"
7|107| Then he (Moses) threw down his staff, and thereupon it was a serpent manifest (clear for all to see as a sign).
7|108| And he drew forth his (right) hand (from his armpit where he had put it), and thereupon it was shining white to those looking on.
7|109| The chiefs among the people of the Pharaoh said, (discussing the matter among themselves): "This is indeed, (as the Pharaoh says,) a learned, skillful sorcerer,
7|110| "Who seeks to drive you out from your land. Then, what do you advise (to do)?"
7|111| They said (to the Pharaoh): "Put him and his brother off for a while, and (in the meantime) send forth heralds to all cities
7|112| "To bring to your presence every learned, skillful sorcerer."
7|113| The sorcerers came to the Pharaoh and said: "We must surely have a reward, if we are the victors."
7|114| (The Pharaoh) answered: "Yes, and you will indeed be among those near-stationed to me."
7|115| They (the sorcerers) said: "Moses! Either you throw first or we will be the first to throw!"
7|116| He answered: "Throw!" And when they threw (whatever they held in their hands to make spells) they cast a spell upon the people’s eyes (i.e. overawed and deluded them), and produced a mighty sorcery.
7|117| We revealed to Moses: "Throw down your staff!" and behold! it swallowed up their false devices.
7|118| Thus was the truth made victorious and all that they were doing was proved false.
7|119| Thus were they (the Pharaoh and his chiefs) defeated there (in front of everyone’s eyes), and brought low
7|120| And the sorcerers threw themselves down, prostrating,
7|121| And they said: "We have come to believe in the Lord of the worlds,
7|122| "The Lord of Moses and Aaron."
7|123| The Pharaoh said: "What! Do you believe in Him before I give you permission? This is indeed a plot you have contrived in the city that you may drive out its (native) people from it. But you shall come to know!
7|124| "I will certainly have your hands and feet cut off alternately, and then I will certainly have you crucified all together."
7|125| They responded: "Indeed, to our (true and everlasting) Lord are we bound to return.
7|126| "You take vengeance on us only because we have come to believe in our Lord’s Messages when they came to us. "Our Lord! Pour out upon us persevering patience and take our souls to You as Muslims (wholly submitted to You)!"
7|127| The chiefs among the Pharaoh’s people said: "Will you (O Pharaoh) leave Moses and his people to cause disorder and corruption in the country, and forsake you and your deities?" He replied: "We will kill their sons and let live their women (to serve and satisfy our desires). And indeed we hold irresistible sway over them."
7|128| Moses said to his people: "Seek help from God and be patient, persevering. The earth belongs indeed to God, and He makes it an inheritance for whom He wills of His servants. The (final, happy) outcome is in favor of the God-revering, pious."
7|129| They (having been subjected to persecutions by the Pharaoh) said: "We suffered hurt before you came to us, and since you came to us." He (Moses) replied: "It may well be that your Lord is going to destroy your enemy and make you the inheritors of rule in (some part of) the earth: and then He will look to see how you act (when you hold power)."
7|130| And We certainly seized the family (the court and military aristocracy) of the Pharaoh with years of famine and scarcity of corps, so that they might reflect and be mindful.
7|131| But whenever prosperity came their way, they would say: "This is but our due and by our deserving," and whenever evil befell them, they would attribute it to the ill augury (they alleged) of Moses and whoever was in his company. Beware! their auspice (whether evil or good) was decreed by God, but most of them did not know (being ignorant of true knowledge).
7|132| And they would say: "Whatever sign you produce before us to cast a spell on us, we are not going to believe you."
7|133| So, (in order that they might reflect and be mindful) We sent upon them floods and (plagues of) locusts and vermin, and frogs, and (water turning into) blood: distinct signs one after another. Yet they remained arrogant, and they were a criminal people committed to accumulating sins.
7|134| Each time a plague befell them, they would say: "O Moses, pray for us to your Lord for the covenant He has made with you (of servanthood and Messengership with respect to His Lordship): for sure, if you remove this plague from us, we will surely believe in you, and we will surely let the Children of Israel go with you."
7|135| But when We removed the plague from them for a term in which they were to fulfill (what they promised), they then broke their promise.
7|136| So We inflicted Our retribution on them (just as they deserved), and so caused them to drown in the sea, as they denied Our signs (with willful persistence) and were heedless of them.
7|137| And We made the people who had been persecuted and oppressed (for centuries) inherit all the easts and wests (the whole length and breadth) of the land that We had blessed (with benefits for humankind). And your Lord’s gracious word to the Children of Israel was fulfilled, for they had endured patiently; and We obliterated what the Pharaoh and his people had produced (by art or industry), and what they had erected (of castles, palaces, gardens, and the like).
7|138| And We led the Children of Israel across the sea, and then they came upon a people who were devoted to the worship of some idols that they had (particular to themselves). They said: "O Moses! Make for us a deity even as they have deities!" He replied: "You are indeed a people given to ignorance.
7|139| "As for those people – what they are engaged in (by way of religion) is bound to destruction, and false and vain is all they have been doing (by way of worship)".
7|140| He said: "What! shall I seek a deity for you other than God, when He has exalted you above all other people (through faith and the true religion with which He has favored you)?"
7|141| And (remember, O Children of Israel,) when We saved you from clan of the Pharaoh, who were afflicting you with the most evil suffering (by enslaving you to such laborious tasks as construction, transportation and farming), slaughtering your sons and letting live your womenfolk (for further humiliation and suffering). In that was a grievous trial from your Lord.
7|142| And (so that you would be favored with the Torah to order your affairs) We appointed with Moses thirty nights, to which We added ten, so he completed the term of forty nights set by His Lord (for him to spend in devotion). (Before leaving his people in order to come to Our Presence) Moses had said to his brother (Aaron): "Take my place among my people (act to reform them and set things right), and do not follow the way of those who provoke disorder and corruption."
7|143| And when Moses came to Our appointed time, his Lord spoke to him. (Then, in the rapture of nearness to God arising from his being addressed by Him) he said: "My Lord, show me Yourself, so that I may look upon You!" He (God) said: "You cannot see Me (with your eyes in the world). But look at that mountain: if it remains firm in its place, then you will see Me." And the moment his Lord manifested His glorious Majesty to the mountain, He made it crumble to dust, and Moses fell down in a faint (as if struck by lightning). When he awoke, he said: "All-Glorified are You (in that You are absolutely above having any defects and any resemblance with the created)! I turn to You in repentance (for my desire to see You), and I am the first of the (true) believers (who realize that You are beyond any resemblance to any creature and beyond the grasp of any creature’s senses).
7|144| He (God) said: "O Moses! Indeed I have chosen you above people by virtue of My Messages (that I have entrusted to you) and My speaking (to you). So (without aspiring to what is not for you), hold fast to what I have granted you, and (in return, with your every word and action) be of the thankful!"
7|145| (Moses completed the term appointed by his Lord for him to be favored with the Book to order his people’s affairs.) And We recorded for him on the Tablets whatever is necessary as instruction and guidance (to follow the way to God), and as explanation for all matters. And (We said): "Hold fast to them with strength, and command your people to hold fast to the best thereof (fulfill the commandments in the best way possible). I will soon show you the (ultimate) abode of the transgressors.
7|146| I will turn away from My Revelations and signs those who act with haughtiness on the earth against all right. And though they see every sign (of the truth), they do not believe in it; and though they see the way of right guidance, they do not take it as a way to follow. But if they see the way of error and rebellion against the truth, they take it as a way to follow. That is because they deny Our Revelations and are ever heedless of them.
7|147| Those who deny Our Revelations and the meeting of the Hereafter – their works have wasted. Or are they to be recompensed for anything but what they used to do?
7|148| The people of Moses, after he (had left them to meet with his Lord), adopted for worship a calf (in effigy, made) of their ornaments, which gave out a lowing sound. Did they not see that it neither spoke to them nor guided them to a way? They adopted it for worship and so became wrongdoers (acting contrary to all the truths of creation and Divine commandments, and thereby wronging their very selves).
7|149| When they realized in remorse that they earned nothing but ruin, and perceived that they had gone astray, they said: "If our Lord does not have mercy on us and forgive us, we will certainly be among the losers."
7|150| And when Moses (having received the Tablets and learned that his people had adopted a calf to worship) returned to his people, full of wrath and sorrow, he said: "Evil is the course you have followed after me! Have you forsaken your Lord’s commandment so hastily to hasten your destruction?" And he threw down the Tablets (to postpone enforcement of the laws therein until he put an end to this rebellion against faith in God’s absolute Oneness), and laid hold of his brother’s head, dragging him towards himself. He (Aaron) said: "Son of my mother! Indeed the people deemed me weak, and almost killed me. So let not my enemies gloat over me, and do not count me among the wrongdoing people."
7|151| He (Moses) said: "My Lord! Forgive me and my brother, and admit us in Your special Mercy, for You are the Most Compassionate of the Compassionate."
7|152| Those who adopted the calf for worship – a severe punishment and condemnation from their Lord will indeed overtake them, and humiliation in this life of the world. Thus do We recompense those who fabricate falsehood (in attribution to God).
7|153| But as for those who do evil deeds, but later turn to God in repentance and (truly) believe – after that (effort of self-reform) your Lord is assuredly All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate (especially toward His servants who turn to Him).
7|154| And so when the anger subsided from Moses, He took up the Tablets (to put them into force). Inscribed on them was guidance and mercy for those who have awe of their Lord.
7|155| Moses chose of his people seventy men (to represent them) for Our appointment (on the mountain, in order to ask God for forgiveness for the calf-worship of some among them and to renew their covenant with Him). Then, when the shocking catastrophe seized them, Moses said: "My Lord! Had You so willed, You would have destroyed them before, and me (along with them). Will You now destroy us for what the fools among us have done? This is a trial from You whereby You lead whom You will astray, and whom You will You guide. You are Our Guardian (to Whom we entrust our affairs and on Whom we rely), so forgive us and have mercy on us! You are the Best in forgiving.
7|156| "Ordain for us good in this world as well as in the Hereafter, for we have turned to You, following Your way." He (God) said: "My punishment – I afflict with it whom I will (and no one can escape it except that I have mercy on him), and My Mercy embraces all things; and so, (although in the world every being has a share in My Mercy, in the Hereafter) I will ordain it for those who act in reverence for Me and piety and pay their Prescribed Purifying Alms, and they are those who truly believe in all of Our Revelations and signs.
7|157| They follow the (most illustrious) Messenger, the Prophet who neither reads nor writes (and has therefore remained preserved from any traces of the existing written culture and is free from any intellectual and spiritual pollution), whom they find described (with all his distinguishing features) in the Torah and the Gospel (that are) with them. He enjoins upon them what is right and good and forbids them what is evil; he makes pure, wholesome things lawful for them, and bad, corrupt things unlawful. And he relieves them of their burdens (remaining of their own Law) and the restraints that were upon them. So those who believe in him (with all sincerity), honor and support him, and help him, and follow the Light (the Qur’an) which has been sent down with him –they are those who are the prosperous."
7|158| Say (O Messenger to all humankind): "O humankind! Surely I am to you all the Messenger of God, of Him to Whom belongs the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth. There is no deity but He. He gives life and causes to die." Believe, then, in God and His Messenger, the Prophet who neither writes nor reads, who believes in God and His words (all His Books, commandments, and deeds); and follow him so that you may be rightly-guided.
7|159| And of the people of Moses there was a community who guided by the truth (by God’s leave) and dispensed justice by it.
7|160| We divided Moses’ people into twelve tribes, forming them into communities. We revealed to Moses when his people asked him for water (on the occasion that they were left without water in the desert), saying: "Strike the rock with your staff!" And (as soon as he struck) there gushed forth from it twelve springs. Each tribe knew their drinking place. And We caused the cloud to shade them, and sent down upon them manna and quails: "Eat of the pure, wholesome things that We have provided for you." And (by disobeying Our commandments) they wronged not Us, but themselves they used to wrong.
7|161| And when they were told, "Dwell in this town and eat (of the fruits) thereof as you may desire, and say words of imploring forgiveness and loyalty to Him, and enter it (not through different ways with the aim of plundering it and massacring its people, but) through its gate humbly and in utmost submission to God, so that We forgive you your misdeeds." We will increase the reward for those devoted to doing good, aware that God is seeing them.
7|162| But those among them who persisted in wrongdoing changed what had been said to them (regarding humility, imploring forgiveness, submission, and loyalty) for another saying (and acted contrarily to how they had been ordered). So We sent down on them a scourge from heaven because they were persistent in wrongdoing.
7|163| Ask them about the township that was by the sea: how its people were violating the Sabbath when their fish came swimming to them on the day of their Sabbath, but on the day they did not keep Sabbath, they did not come to them. Thus did We test try as they were transgressing (all bounds).
7|164| And when a community of people among them asked (others who tried to restrain the Sabbath-breakers): "Why do you preach to a people whom God will destroy or punish with a severe punishment?" They said: "So as to have an excuse before your Lord and so that they might keep from such disobedience in reverence for God."
7|165| Then, when they became heedless of all that they had been reminded of, We saved those who had tried to prevent the evil-doing, and seized the others who had been doing wrong with an evil punishment for their transgressions.
7|166| Then, when they disdainfully persisted in doing what they had been forbidden to do, We said to them: "Be apes miserably slinking and rejected!"
7|167| And (remember) when your Lord proclaimed that He would, until the Day of Resurrection, send forth against them those who would afflict them with the most evil of suffering. Your Lord is indeed swift in retribution (when it is due), and He is indeed the All-Forgiving, the All-Compassionate (especially toward those who turn to Him in repentance and His believing servants).
7|168| And We have split them up on the earth as separate communities. Among them are those who are righteous, and those who are not; and We have tested them with blessings as well as with afflictions, that they might turn back (to the right way from the misleading paths they follow).
7|169| And there have succeeded after them new generations who inherited the Book, taking the gains of this low life (for which they sell it), and saying: "We will be forgiven." (Although by saying so they recognize what they do as a sin), if there comes to them the same sort of fleeting gains, they are ready to take them (instead of refraining). Was there not taken from them the promise concerning the Book that they should say of God nothing but the truth? and they (are people who) have studied and taught what is therein. But the abode of the Hereafter is better for those who keep from disobedience to God in reverence for Him and piety. Will you not, then, reason and understand?
7|170| And as for those who hold fast to the Book sincerely and establish the Prayer in conformity with its conditions – indeed We do not let waste the reward of those who are ever reforming (themselves and society), and setting things right.
7|171| And (remember) when We shook the Mount above them as if it were a canopy, and they thought that it was going to fall on them. (We said:) Hold firmly to (the Book) that We haven given you and be mindful of (the commands and warnings) that it contains, that you may attain piety and due reverence for God, so deserving His protection (against any kind of deviancy and its consequent punishment in both this world and the Hereafter.)
7|172| And (remember, O Messenger,) when your Lord brought forth from the children of Adam, from their loins, their offspring, and made them bear witness against themselves (asking them:) "Am I not your Lord?" They said: "Yes, we do bear witness." (That covenant was taken) lest you should say on the Day of Resurrection, "We were indeed unaware of this (fact that you are our Lord)."
7|173| Or lest you should say (in trying to excuse yourselves): "Our forefathers used to associate partners with God before us, and we were their offspring just following after them. Will You, then, ruin us for what those did who rejected Your Lordship and invented that false way (of associating partners with You)?"
7|174| And thus We set out in detail the signposts of Our way and the relevant Revelations (included in the Qur’an), so that they may turn back (from their wrong ways to Us).
7|175| Tell them (based on Our Revelation) the story of him whom We made well-informed of Our signs and Revelations, but he cast them off, and Satan overtook him, and he became of those (followers of Satan) who rebel (against God’s way) and go astray.
7|176| If We had willed (to impede the way he chose by his free will), We could indeed have lifted him (toward the perfections enabled by faith) through those signs and Revelations, but (by his own free choice) he clung to the earth and followed his desires. So (in his being surrendered to greed), his likeness is that of a dog: if you move to drive it away, it pants with its tongue lolling out (still hoping to be fed more), or if you leave it, it pants with its tongue lolling out. Such is the likeness of those who deny Our signs and Revelations. So tell them this narrative so that they may (be stirred to) reflect.
7|177| How evil an example are the people who deny Our signs and Revelations, and (in so doing) are ever wronging themselves.
7|178| He whom God guides, he is indeed rightly guided; and he whom He leads astray – they are the losers.
7|179| Surely, among the jinn and humankind are many that We have created (and destined for) Hell (knowing that they would deserve it). They have hearts with which they do not seek the essence of matters to grasp the truth, and they have eyes with which they do not see, and they have ears with which they do not hear. They are like cattle (following only their instincts) – rather, even more astray (from the right way and in need of being led). Those are the unmindful and heedless.
7|180| To God belong the All-Beautiful Names so call and pray to Him by them. And keep aloof from those who blaspheme (and distort the meaning of) His Names. They will be recompensed for what they are doing.
7|181| And of those whom We have created there are people who, (in due recognition of God with His Names,) guide by the truth (by God’s leave) and dispense justice by it.
7|182| Whereas those who deny Our signs and Revelations, (as the consequence of their way,) We will step by step lead them on to perdition in ways they do not know.
7|183| I grant them respite. My designing is firm and irresistible.
7|184| And do they not reflect (by all that they witness in the Messenger and the Revelations coming to him) that there is no madness in their companion (the Prophet Muhammad)? He is but a plain warner.
7|185| And do they never consider the inner dimension of the heavens and the earth and God’s absolute dominion over them, and what things God has created, and that the end of their appointed term may already have approached? In what other discourse than this (warning contained in the Qur’an) will they believe?
7|186| Whomever God leads astray there is no one to guide him; and He leaves them wandering blindly in their rebellion.
7|187| They ask you about the Hour, when it will come to anchor. Say: "It is my Lord alone Who knows it; none will disclose it in its time but He. It weighs heavily on the heavens and the earth. It does not come to you except unawares." They ask you as if you (being a Messenger required or meant that you) were well-informed of it. Say: "It is indeed God alone Who knows it, but most people have no knowledge (of this)."
7|188| Say: ""It is not within my power (to deal benefit and harm so) that unless God wills (and allows me to), I can neither bring benefit to, nor avert harm from, even myself. Had I knowledge of the Unseen, I would always be in profit (with no loss at all), and no adversity would ever touch me. I am only a warner (against the evil consequences of misguidance) and a bearer of glad tidings (of prosperity in return for faith and righteousness) for people who will believe and who have already believed."
7|189| He it is Who created you from a single human self, and made from it its mate, so that he (inclining with love towards woman) may find rest in her. And so, when he has covered her, she conceives a light burden, and continues to bear it. Then, when she grows heavy (with child), both (feel the need to) turn to God, their Lord, with prayer: "If You indeed grant us a righteous child, we will most certainly be among the thankful."
7|190| Then when He grants the couple a righteous child, they begin to associate partners with God in respect of what He has granted them. Absolutely exalted is He above their association of partners with Him and whatever they associate with Him as partners.
7|191| Do they associate as partners with Him those who create nothing and themselves are created,
7|192| And who have no power to give them any help, nor can help themselves?
7|193| And if you call them in the direction of guidance, they do not follow you: It is the same for you whether you call to them or remain silent.
7|194| Those whom you deify and invoke, apart from God, are subservient beings created by God just like yourselves. (If you think and claim otherwise) then call on them and let them answer you, if you are truthful!
7|195| (How can you expect that they will answer:) have they feet on which they could walk; or have they hands with which they could grasp; or have they eyes with which they could see; or have they ears with which they could hear? Say (to them): "Call upon those you associate with God as partners, then scheme against me, and give me no respite!
7|196| "Indeed, my Guardian is God Who sends down the Book in parts, and He befriends and protects the righteous.
7|197| "Whereas those whom you deify and invoke, apart from Him, have no power to help you, nor can they help themselves.
7|198| If you call them to the guidance, they will not hear. And you see them looking at you (and may suppose that they have the power of seeing), but they do not see (having no insight or perceptiveness)."
7|199| (Even so, O Messenger) adopt the way of forbearance and tolerance, and enjoin what is good and right, and withdraw from the ignorant ones (do not care what they say and do).
7|200| And if a prompting from Satan should cause you hurt (as you carry out your mission or during worship or in your everyday life), seek refuge in God. He is All- Hearing, All-Knowing.
7|201| Those who keep from disobedience to God in reverence for Him and piety: when a suggestion from Satan touches them – they are alert and remember God, and then they have clear discernment.
7|202| Whereas their brothers (the brothers of the satans in the form of human beings) – satans draw them deeper into error and do not give over relax in their efforts.
7|203| When you (O Messenger) do not produce for them a sign (a miracle of the kind they desire, or Revelation temporarily ceases), they say, "Were you unable to make one up?" Say: "I only follow whatever is revealed to me from my Lord. This (the Qur’an) is the light of discernment and insight (into the truth) from your Lord, and guidance and mercy for people who will believe and who have already believed."
7|204| And so, when the Qur’an is recited, give ear to it and listen in silence so that you may be shown mercy.
7|205| Remember and mention your Lord within yourself (in the depths of your heart), most humbly and in awe, not loud of voice, at morning and evening. And do not be among the neglectful.
7|206| Those (angels) who are in your Lord’s Presence never turn away from His service out of pride, and they glorify Him, and prostrate before Him.
8|1| They (the believers) ask you about the war-gains. Say: "The war-gains belong to God and the Messenger (and they distribute them as they will)." So keep from disobedience to God in reverence for Him and piety, and set things right among yourselves to allow no discord; and obey God and His Messenger if you are true believers.
8|2| The true believers are only those who, when God is mentioned, their hearts tremble with awe, and when His Revelations are recited to them, it strengthens them in faith, and they put their trust in their Lord.
8|3| They establish the Prayer in conformity with its conditions, and out of whatever We have provided for them (of wealth, knowledge, power, etc.,) they spend (to provide sustenance for the needy, and in God’s cause, purely for the good pleasure of God and without placing others under obligation.)
8|4| Those (illustrious ones) are they who are truly believers. For them are ranks with their Lord (to be granted one after the other), and forgiveness (to bring unforeseen blessings), and generous, honorable provision.
8|5| Just so, your Lord caused you to go forth from your home for a true cause (which He had already determined would be realized); and yet a group from among the believers were averse (to the direction that events took).
8|6| They argued with you concerning the truth (of the matter which God had already decided would be realized) even after it (the direction that developments would take) had been manifest, as if they were being driven toward death with their eyes wide open.
8|7| Even when God had promised you that one of the two hosts (the trade caravan and the Makkan army approaching) would fall to you, you still wished that other than the powerful, armed one should fall into your hands – whereas God willed to prove the truth to be true by His decrees and make it triumphant, and uproot the unbelievers (by causing their leaders to die).
8|8| (He willed it so) so as to prove the truth to be true and make it triumphant, and the falsehood to be false, however hateful this might be to the disbelieving criminals.
8|9| When you were imploring your Lord for help (as a special mercy), and He responded to you: "I will help you with a thousand angels, coming host after host."
8|10| God did that only as glad tidings (of your imminent victory), and that your hearts thereby might be at rest. For help and victory come from God alone. Surely God is All-Glorious with irresistible might, All-Wise.
8|11| When (at the time that you most needed courage), He caused a slumber to enfold you as a reassurance from Him, and sent down water upon you from the sky, that thereby He might cleanse you (of all actual or ritual impurities, by enabling you to do the minor and major ablution), and take away from you the polluting whisperings of Satan, and through it make your hearts strong, and your steps steady.
8|12| When (in the meantime) your Lord revealed to the angels: "I am certainly with you, so make firm the feet of those who believe. I will cast fear into the hearts of those who disbelieve. So strike at their necks and strike at every finger (which holds a sword or bow).
8|13| "Do so because they defied God and His Messenger." Whoever defies God and His Messenger: (let everyone know that) God is severe in retribution.
8|14| That is (by your deserving, O enemies of God), so taste it, and (let everyone know that) for the unbelievers there is also the punishment of the Fire.
8|15| O you who believe! When you encounter in battle those who disbelieve, do not turn your backs on them in flight.
8|16| For whoever turns his back on them on the day of such an engagement – except that it be tactical maneuvering to fight again or joining another troop of believers (or taking up a position against another enemy host) – has indeed incurred God’s condemnation, and his final refuge is the Fire; how evil a destination to arrive at!
8|17| You (O believers) did not kill them (by yourselves in the battle), but God killed them; and when you (O Messenger) threw (dust at them at the start of the battle), it was not you who threw but God threw. (He did all this) so that He might put the believers to a test by a fair testing from Him (so that could attain to their goal and should know that victory is from God). Surely, God is All-Hearing, All-Knowing.
8|18| That is (how He treats you) and (let everyone know that) God it is Who undermines the schemes of the unbelievers.
8|19| If you (O unbelievers) sought a judgment (through battle to see which party is in the right), then surely a judgment has come to you. If you cease (hostilities towards the believers), it is what will be to your good. But if you revert (to hostilities), We will also revert (to what We did to you in that battle). And never will your being a great host be of any avail to you, however numerous it be, and (let everyone know) that God is with the believers.
8|20| O you who believe! Obey God and His Messenger, and do not turn away from him when you are hearing (from him God’s Revelations).
8|21| And do not be like those who say, "We hear," but in truth they do not hear.
8|22| Indeed the worst kind of all living creatures in God’s sight are the deaf and dumb, who do not reason and understand.
8|23| And had God seen any good in them, He would certainly have made them hear, but (being as they are) even if He made them hear, they would surely turn away in aversion.
8|24| O you who believe! Respond to God and to the Messenger when the Messenger calls you (in the Name of God) to that which gives you life; and know well that surely God "intervenes" between a person and his heart (to cause his heart to swerve); and that He it is to Whom you will be gathered.
8|25| And beware and guard yourselves against a trial that will surely not smite exclusively those among you who are engaged in wrongdoing; and know that God is severe in retribution.
8|26| And remember (with gratitude) when you were few and deemed weak in the land (and oppressed), fearing that people would snatch you away, how He provided you with refuge, and strengthened you with His help, and provided for you sustenance out of the pure, wholesome things, that you might give thanks (to Him from the heart and in speech, and in action by fulfilling His commandments).
8|27| O you who believe! Do not betray God and His Messenger, that you should not betray the trusts in your keeping while you know (what doing so means).
8|28| Know that your possessions and your children are but a trial and temptation, and God is He with Whom there is a tremendous reward.
8|29| O you who believe! If you keep from disobedience to God in reverence for Him and piety to deserve His protection, He will make a criterion for you (in your hearts to distinguish between truth and falsehood, and right and wrong), and blot out from you your evil deeds, and forgive you. God is of tremendous grace and bounty.
8|30| And (recall, O Messenger,) how those who disbelieve schemed against you to take you captive, or kill you, or drive you away (from Makkah). Thus were they scheming, but God put His will into effect (and brought their scheme to nothing). God wills what is the best (for His believing servants) and makes His will prevail.
8|31| When Our Revelations are recited to them, they say: "We have heard (the like of this before many times); if we wish, we can speak the like of this; this is nothing but fables of the ancients."
8|32| And when they said (even this): "O God! If this is indeed the truth from You, then rain down upon us stones from the sky or bring upon us another painful punishment!"
8|33| But God would not punish them so long as you were among them; and God is not to punish them (or other people) while they implore Him for forgiveness for their sins.
8|34| What plea do they have that God should not punish them, seeing that they bar (the believers) from the Sacred Mosque, although they are not qualified to own and guard it? Its qualified, rightful guardians are only the pious who keep from disobedience to God in reverence for Him, but most of them (those unbelievers) do not know.
8|35| Their Prayer at the House (in the Sacred Mosque) is nothing but whistling and hand-clapping. Then, taste the punishment because you persistently disbelieve.
8|36| Those who are persistent in unbelief spend their wealth in order that they may bar from God’s way. They will continue to spend it so until it becomes for them a source of sighs and anguish, and then they will be vanquished. Those who are persistent in unbelief will finally be gathered into Hell.
8|37| Thus does God separate the corrupt from the pure, and make all those who are corrupt into a pile one upon another, and then place them in Hell. Those are indeed the losers.
8|38| Tell those persistent in unbelief that if they cease (to disbelieve themselves and prevent others from entering the fold of Islam), what is past will be forgiven them; but if they revert (to their hostilities), then it is manifest by what happened to the people of old times (what their fate must be).
8|39| And (if they still persist in unbelief and hostilities), fight against them until there is no longer disorder and oppresssion rooted in rebellion against God, and the whole of religion (the full authority to order the way of life is recognized) for God exclusively. If they cease (to persist in unbelief and continue hostilities toward the believers), then surely God sees well all that they do.
8|40| If they still follow their own way, know that God is your Owner and Guardian. How excellent a Guardian and an Owner He is, how excellent a Helper.
8|41| And know that whatever you take as gains of war, to God belongs one fifth of it, and to the Messenger, and the near kinsfolk, and orphans, and the destitute, and the wayfarer (one devoid of sufficient means of journeying). (This you must observe) if you truly believe in God and what We sent down on our Servant on the day when the truth and falsehood were distinguished from each other, the day when the two hosts met in battle. God has full power over everything.
8|42| (Remember the day) when you were at the nearer end of the valley (of Badr on the Madinah side) and they were at the farther end and the caravan below you (on the coastal plain). If you had mutually made an appointment to meet for battle in such circumstances, indeed you would not have been able to hold to the appointment. But (God caused you to meet for battle in such circumstances) so that God might accomplish a thing that He had already decreed in order that he who was to perish should perish by a clear evidence (of his deserving perishing because he followed falsehood), and he who survived might survive by a clear evidence (of his deserving survival because of his devotion to the truth). Surely God is All-Hearing, All-Knowing.
8|43| (And recall, O Messenger) when God showed them to you in your dream as few. If He had showed them to you as numerous (as they really were), you (O believers) would surely have lost heart, and would surely have disagreed with one another about the matter. But God saved (you from that). God surely has full knowledge of what lies hidden in the bosoms.
8|44| And when He made them appear as few in your eyes when you met them in the battle just as He lessened you in their eyes, so that God might accomplish a thing that He had already decreed. And to God are all affairs ultimately referred, (and whatever He wills occurs).
8|45| O you who believe! When you meet a host in battle, stand firm and remember and mention God much, that you may triumph.
8|46| And obey God and His Messenger, and do not dispute with one another, or else you may lose heart and your power and energy desert you; and remain steadfast. Surely, God is with those who remain steadfast.
8|47| Be not like those (unbelievers) who went forth from their habitations swaggering boastfully and to show off to people, and bar (others) from God’s way. And God fully encompasses (with His Knowledge and Power) all that they do.
8|48| Satan decked out their deeds to be appealing to them, and said: "Today no power among humankind can overcome you, and for sure I am your supporter." But when the two hosts came within sight of each other, he turned on his heels to run away and said: "Indeed I am quit of you; surely I see that which you do not see. Indeed, I fear God." And God is severe in retribution.
8|49| And (remember) when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts there is a sickness (that dries up the source of their spiritual life) were saying (of the believers): "Their religion has deluded those (people)." But whoever puts his trust in God, truly God is All-Glorious with irresistible might, All-Wise.
8|50| If you could but see how it will be when the angels take the souls of those who disbelieve, striking them on the faces and the backs, and (saying): "Taste the punishment of the scorching Fire!
8|51| This is because of (the evil deeds) that you forwarded with your own hands, for never does God do the least wrong to the servants."
8|52| Just as that which happened to the clan (the court and military aristocracy) of the Pharaoh, and those before them: they disbelieved in God’s Revelations, and so God seized them for their sins. Surely God is All-Strong, severe in retribution.
8|53| That (happened so) because God never changes a favor that He has bestowed upon a people unless they change what is in themselves (their belief, life-style, world-view, and devotion to God’s laws embodied in religion and in the creation, life and operation of the universe). And God is indeed All-Hearing, All-Knowing.
8|54| Just as that which happened to the court and military aristocracy of the Pharaoh, and those before them: they denied the Revelations of their Lord, and so We destroyed them for their sins, and We caused the court and military aristocracy of the Pharaoh to drown. All of those peoples (destroyed in the past) were wrongdoers (in that they rebelled against their Lord, oppressed people, and so wronged themselves).
8|55| Indeed the worst kind of living creatures in God’s sight are those who are so rooted in unbelief that they cannot believe.
8|56| Those of them with whom you have made a treaty, and who break their treaty on every occasion without fearing God.
8|57| If you meet them in war, deal with them in such a manner as to deter those behind them (who follow them and those who will come after them), so that they may reflect and be mindful.
8|58| If you have strong reason to fear treachery from a people (with whom you have a treaty), return it to them (i.e. publicly declare to them, before embarking on any action against them, that you have dissolved the treaty) so that both parties should be informed of its termination. Surely God does not love the treacherous.
8|59| And let not those who disbelieve ever think that they can outdo the believers or otherwise escape Our punishment. They can never frustrate Our will.
8|60| (Believers:) make ready against them whatever you can of force and horses assigned (for war), that thereby you may dismay the enemies of God and your enemies and others besides them, of whom (and the nature of whose enmity) you may be unaware. God is aware of them (and of the nature of their enmity). Whatever you spend in God’s cause will be repaid to you in full, and you will not be wronged.
8|61| And if they (the enemies) incline to peace, incline to it also, and put your trust in God. Surely, He is the All-Hearing, the All-Knowing.
8|62| And if they seek (thereby only) to deceive you (O Messenger), surely God is sufficient for you. He it is Who has strengthened you with His help and with the believers.
8|63| He has attuned their (the believers’) hearts. If you had spent all that is on the earth, you could not have attuned their hearts, but God has attuned them. Surely He is All-Glorious with irresistible might, All-Wise.
8|64| O (most illustrious) Prophet! God is sufficient for you and the believers who follow you.
8|65| O (most illustrious) Prophet! Rouse the believers to fighting. If there be twenty of you who are steadfast, they will vanquish two hundred; and if there be of you a hundred, they will vanquish a thousand of those who disbelieve, for they (the disbelievers) are a people who do not ponder and seek to penetrate the essence of matters in order to grasp the truth.
8|66| For now (while you lack in necessary equipment and training), God has lightened your burden, for He knows that there is weakness in you. So if there be a hundred of you who are strong-willed and steadfast, they will vanquish two hundred; and if there be a thousand of you, they will vanquish two thousand by God’s leave. God is with those who are steadfast.
8|67| It is not for a Prophet to have captives until he has widely exhausted the enemies in the land. You (O believers) seek the fleeting gains of the present, worldly life, but God wills that the Hereafter will be yours. God is All-Glorious with irresistible might, All-Wise.
8|68| Had there not been a previous decree from God (concerning that gains of war are lawful and captives can be released in return for ransom), a tremendous punishment would surely have touched you because of what you took (the gains of war, and the captives taken in expectation of ransom, before the enemies’ power in the land had been sufficiently suppressed and exhausted).
8|69| (But since such a decree has already come) now enjoy as lawful and pure and wholesome of what you have obtained (as gains of war and ransom); and keep from disobedience to God in all your actions. Surely God is All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate (especially toward His believing, pious servants).
8|70| O (most illustrious) Prophet! Say to the captives in your hands: "If God knows any good in your hearts (any readiness to believe in and surrender to God), He will grant you something better than what has been taken from you, and He will forgive you." God is All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate (especially towards His servants who return to Him in repentance).
8|71| But if they seek to betray you (O Messenger) – well, they were treacherous to God before (and the outcome thereof is plain to see): God has given you power over them. God is All-Knowing, All-Wise.
8|72| Those who have believed and emigrated (to the home of Islam) and striven hard with their wealth and persons in God’s cause, and those who give refuge (to them) and help (them) – those (illustrious ones) are friends and protectors of one another, and can inherit from one another. But those who believe but have not emigrated – you have no duty of protection towards them until they emigrate and inheritance is not permissible between them and you. Yet, if they ask you for help in the matter of religion, it is your duty to provide help except against a people between whom and you there is a treaty. God sees well all that you do.
8|73| Those who disbelieve – they are friends and protectors of one another (especially against you). Unless you do it also (i.e. maintain solidarity among the believers) there will be unrest on the earth and great corruption.
8|74| Those who have believed and emigrated (to the home of Islam) and striven (with their wealth and persons) in God’s cause, and those who give refuge (to them) and help (them) – those (illustrious ones) are the believers in truth. For them is forgiveness (to bring unforeseen blessings) and honorable, generous provision.
8|75| And those who believe after (the Prophet’s emigration) and emigrate and strive hard alongside you, they also belong to you. And those related by blood are nearer to one another according to God’s ordinance (with respect to inheritance). Surely God has full knowledge of every thing.
9|1| This is an ultimatum from God and His Messenger to those who associate partners with God with whom you have made a treaty.
9|2| (O you polytheists who always break the treaties you have entered into!) You may go about freely in the land for four months (making whatever war preparations you wish). But know that you can never escape (the Power of God, nor frustrate His will), and that God will bring disgrace upon the unbelievers.
9|3| And a proclamation from God and His Messenger to all people on this day of the Major Pilgrimage: that God disavows those who associate partners with Him (and break their treaty), and His Messenger likewise (disavows them). But if you repent and give up hostilities, this will be for your good; but if you turn away again, know that you will never be able to escape God and frustrate His will in any way. Give glad tidings (O Messenger) of a painful punishment to those who insist on unbelief.
9|4| Excepting those among the people who associate partners with God with whom you made a treaty, and who have not thereafter failed to fulfill their obligations towards you (required by the treaty), nor have backed anyone against you. Observe, then, your treaty with them until the end of the term (that you agreed with them). Surely God loves the God-revering, pious (who keep their duties to Him).
9|5| Then, when the (four) sacred months (of respite, during which fighting with those who associate partners with God and violate their treaties was prohibited to you,) are over, then (declare war on them and) kill them wherever you may come upon them, and seize them, and confine them, and lie in wait for them at every conceivable place. Yet if they repent and (mending their ways) establish the Prescribed Prayer and pay the Prescribed Purifying Alms, let them go their way. Surely God is All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate.
9|6| And if any of those who associate partners with God seeks asylum of you (O Messenger), grant him asylum, so that he may hear the Word of God, and then convey him to his place of security. That (is how you should act) because they are a people who have no knowledge (of the truth about Islam).
9|7| How could there be a covenant with those who associate partners with God (and recognize no laws and treaty) on the part of God and His Messenger? – excepting those with whom you made a treaty in the vicinity of the Sacred Mosque: (as for the latter) so long as they remain true to you, be true to them. Surely God loves the God-revering, pious (who keep their duties to Him).
9|8| How (could there be a covenant with the others) when, if they were to prevail against you, they would observe towards you neither any bond, nor law, nor agreement, they seek to please you with their mouths but in their hearts they are averse; and most of them are transgressors (who habitually disregard all bounds of equity).
9|9| (As well as breaking their treaties) they have sold God’s Revelations (concerning treaties) for a trifling price and they barred people from His way. How evil is what they do!
9|10| They observe neither any bond, nor law, nor agreement towards the believers. They are those who exceed all bounds.
9|11| Yet if they repent so as to mend their ways and establish the Prescribed Prayer and pay the Prescribed Purifying Alms, they are your brothers in religion. Thus We set out in detail Our Revelations (the signposts of Our way, included in the Qur’an) for a people seeking knowledge.
9|12| But if they break their pledges after their treaty (with you) and assail your religion, then fight with those leaders of unbelief – surely they have no trustworthy pledges – so that they may desist (from aggression).
9|13| Will you not fight against the people who have broken their pledges and have done all they could to drive the Messenger (from where he chooses to dwell), and initiated hostilities against you? Do you hold them in awe? But, assuredly God has greater right to be held in awe, if you are sincere believers.
9|14| Fight against them: God will punish them by your hands and humiliate them, and (know) that He will help you to victory over them, and soothe the bosoms of the believing people (oppressed and suffering at their hands as well as at the hands of other oppressors).
9|15| And He will remove the wrath in their hearts (by making right and justice prevail). And God guides whomever He wills to turn to Him in repentance. God is All-Knowing (with full knowledge of him who deserves guidance), All-Wise (in Whose every decree and act there are many instances of wisdom).
9|16| Or did you think that you would be left (without being tried through suffering and hardship) unless God marks out those among you who really strive (in His way), and who take none as intimate friend other than God and His Messenger and the believers to seek help and solidarity? God is fully aware of all that you do.
9|17| It is not for those who associate partners with God to maintain God’s houses of worship while they are witnesses against themselves of unbelief (and do not worship God in those houses of worship). They are those whose works have been wasted, and they will abide in the Fire.
9|18| Only he will maintain God’s houses of worship (using them for the purposes for which they are built) who believes in God and the Last Day, and establishes the Prescribed Prayer, and pays the Prescribed Purifying Alms, and stands in awe of none but God. It is hoped that such (illustrious) persons will be among the ones guided to achieve their expectations (especially in the Hereafter).
9|19| Do you consider providing water to the pilgrims and tending the Sacred Mosque as equal in value to one who believes in God and the Last Day, and strives in God’s cause? They are not equal in God’s sight. And God does not guide (to truth) the wrongdoing folk (whose measure and judgment are wrong).
9|20| Those who believe and have emigrated (to the home of Islam in God’s cause), and strive in God’s cause with their wealth and persons are greater in rank in God’s sight, and those are the ones who are the triumphant.
9|21| Their Lord gives them glad tidings of mercy from Him (to bring unforeseen blessings), and His being pleased with them, and of Gardens wherein is everlasting bounty for them;
9|22| Therein to dwell forever. Surely, with God is a tremendous reward.
9|23| O you who believe! Do not take your fathers and your brothers for confidants and guardians (to whom you can entrust your affairs), if they choose unbelief in preference to belief. Whoever of you takes them for confidants and guardians, those are wrongdoers (who have wronged themselves by committing a great error).
9|24| Say: "If your fathers, and your children, and your brothers and sisters, and your spouses, and your kindred and clan, and the wealth you have acquired, and the commerce you fear may slacken, and the dwellings that you love to live in, are dearer to you than God and His Messenger and striving in His way, then wait until God brings about His decree. God does not guide the transgressing people (who prefer worldly things to Him, His Messenger and striving in His way, to truth and true happiness in both the world and the Hereafter).
9|25| God has already helped you on many fields, and on the day of Hunayn, when your multitude was pleasing to you, but it availed you nothing, and the earth, for all its vastness, was too narrow for you, and you turned back, retreating.
9|26| Then God sent down His gift of inner peace and reassurance on His Messenger and the believers, and sent (to your aid) hosts that you did not see, and punished those who disbelieved. Such is the recompense of unbelievers.
9|27| Then after all this, God guides whom He wills to repentance (turning to Islam from unbelief). God is All-Forgiving, all Compassionate (especially to His servants who turn to Him in repentance).
9|28| O you who believe! Those who associate partners with God are (nothing) but impure. So, after the expiry of this year, let them not approach the Sacred Mosque. And should you fear poverty (because of the possible reduction in your income due to their not coming to Makkah in the season of the Hajj), God will enrich you out of His bounty if He so wills. Surely, God is All-Knowing, All-Wise.
9|29| Fight against those from among the People of the Book who (despite being People of the Book) do not believe in God and the Last Day (as they should be believed in), and do not hold as unlawful that which God and His Messenger have decreed to be unlawful, and do not adopt and follow the Religion of truth, until they pay the jizyah (tax of protection and exemption from military service) with a willing hand in a state of submission.
9|30| And those Jews (who came to you) say (as did some Jews who lived before): "Ezra (‘Uzayr) is God’s son;" and (as a general assertion) the Christians say: "The Messiah is God’s son." Such are merely their verbal assertions in imitation of the utterances of some unbelievers who preceded them. May God destroy them! How can they be turned away from the truth and make such assertions?
9|31| The Jews take their rabbis (teachers of law), and the Christians take their monks, as well as the Messiah, son of Mary, for Lords besides God (by holding as lawful or unlawful what the teachers of law and monks decree to be lawful or unlawful, as against God’s decree), whereas they were commanded to worship none but the One God. There is no deity but He. All-Glorified He is in that He is absolutely above their association of partners with Him.
9|32| They seek (with renewed plans and stratagems) to extinguish God’s light (His favor of Islam, as if by the breath issuing) from their mouths. Whereas God refuses but to complete His light, however hateful this may be to the unbelievers.
9|33| He it is Who has sent His Messenger with the guidance and the Religion of truth that He may make it prevail over all religions, however hateful this may be to those who associate partners with God.
9|34| O you who believe! Many among the rabbis and monks do indeed consume the wealth of people in legally invalid, wrongful ways (such as changing the Book’s commandments in return for worldly benefit, bribery, and using religion as a means of worldly gain) and bar them from God’s way. Those who hoard up gold and silver and do not spend it in God’s cause (to exalt His cause and help the poor and needy): give them (O Messenger) the glad tidings of a painful punishment.
9|35| On that day, it (that hoarded wealth) will be heated in the fire of Hell and therewith their foreheads and their sides and their backs will be branded (and they will hear): "This is the treasure which you hoarded up for yourselves; taste now what you were busy hoarding!"
9|36| The number of the months, in God’s sight, is twelve as determined and decreed by God on the day when He created the heavens and the earth (and set them moving in the present conditions). Four of them are sacred (in that fighting is forbidden during them). This is the upright, ever-true Religion (the order that God has established for the operation of the universe and life of humanity). Do not, therefore, wrong yourselves with respect to these months. Nevertheless, fight all together against those who associate partners with God just as they fight against you all together; and know well that God is with the God-revering, pious who keep their duties to Him.
9|37| The postponement of a sacred month, and therefore making changes (for such aims as to make fighting in the Sacred Months lawful and cause the season of the Pilgrimage to fall in the period of the year they wish) is but an increase in unbelief (for it means making the unlawful lawful and changing the nature of many lawful and unlawful acts done in those months and therefore recognizing no law). By doing so, those who disbelieve are (further) misled, declaring it (the month they postpone) permitted in one year and forbidden in another, in order that they may conform to the number of the months that God has declared as sacred, (without caring) that they thereby make lawful what God has made unlawful. The evil of their deeds is decked out to be appealing to them. God does not guide the disbelieving people (to truth and to the attainment of their aims).
9|38| O you who believe! What excuse do you have that when it is said to you: "Mobilize (for the campaign of Tabuk) in God’s cause!" you cling heavily to the earth? Are you content with the present, worldly life, rather than the Hereafter? Yet slight is the enjoyment of the worldly life as compared with the Hereafter.
9|39| If you do not mobilize (as you are commanded), He will punish you grievously, and instead of you He will substitute another people, and you will in no way harm Him. God has full power over everything.
9|40| If you do not help him (the Messenger), yet for certain God helped him when those who disbelieve drove him out (of his home during the Hijrah), the second of the two when they were in the cave (with those in pursuit of them having reached the mouth of the cave), and he said to his companion (with utmost trust in God and no worry at all): "Do not grieve. God is surely with us." Then God sent down His gift of inner peace and reassurance on him, supported him with hosts you cannot see, and brought the word (the cause) of the unbelievers utterly low. And God’s word (His cause) is (always and inherently) supreme. God is All-Glorious with irresistible might, All-Wise.
9|41| Mobilize whether you are equipped lightly or heavily (and whether it be easy or difficult for you); and strive with your wealth and persons in God’s cause. Doing so is what is for your good, if you but know it.
9|42| Had there been an immediate gain, and an easy journey, those (who stayed behind because of hypocrisy) would surely have followed you, but the difficult journey was too distant for them. Yet they will swear by God: "If only we had been able to, we would surely have gone forth with you." They destroy their own selves, for God knows that they are truly liars.
9|43| May God give you grace! Why did you give them leave to stay behind until it became clear to you who was speaking the truth and you came to know the liars.
9|44| Those who believe in God and the Last Day do not ask you for leave to be excused from striving in God’s cause with their wealth and persons. God has full knowledge of the God-revering, pious who keep their duty to Him.
9|45| Only they ask you for leave who do not truly believe in God and the Last Day and whose hearts are doubting, so that in their doubting they waver between one thing and another.
9|46| Had they truly meant to go forth for war, they would surely have made certain preparation (demonstrating their intent). But God was averse to their rising to fight (unwillingly and without sincerity of purpose), and so He caused them to hold back, and it was decreed for them: "Stay at home with the stay-at-homes (women and children)."
9|47| If they had gone forth among you, they would have brought no addition to you except trouble, and would have run about in your midst seeking to stir up sedition among you. Among you were some who were prone to heed them. God has full knowledge of the wrongdoers.
9|48| Assuredly they sought to stir up sedition before, and tried to turn things upside down to frustrate you, until the truth came and God’s decree was made evident, however hateful this was to them.
9|49| Among them is one who says: "Give me leave (not to participate in this campaign) and do not expose me to temptation." Oh, but surely, they have already fallen into temptation (because of their hypocrisy and transgressions)! And surely Hell encompasses the unbelievers.
9|50| If something good comes to you (O Messenger), this grieves them; and if a disaster befalls you, they say, "We have taken due care of our affairs in good time," and turn away, exultant.
9|51| Say: "Nothing befalls us except what God has decreed for us; He is our Guardian and Owner; and in God let the believers put all their trust.
9|52| Say (to the hypocrites): "Or else are you are expecting for us other than one of the two best things (namely, victory or martyrdom in God’s cause)? But what we expect for you is that God will inflict punishment upon you from Himself or by our hands! Wait, then, and we too are waiting with you."
9|53| (Respond to their unwilling donation and) say: "Whether you give willingly or unwillingly, (pretending that you give in God’s cause), it will never be acceptable (to God) from you. Surely, you are a transgressing people."
9|54| Nothing hinders their offerings being accepted from them, except that they disbelieve in God and His Messenger, and whenever they come to the Prescribed Prayer they do so indolently (i.e. with reluctance), and they do not offer contributions except as averse (to doing so).
9|55| Let neither their wealth nor their children impress you. God only wills thereby to punish them in the life of this world and that their souls will depart while they are unbelievers.
9|56| They swear by God that they are indeed of you (belonging with the believers), yet they are not of you. They are only a people ridden by fear (and thereby pretending to be of you).
9|57| If they could but find a place of refuge, or any cavern, or any place to creep into to hide, they would turn about and make a bolt for it.
9|58| Among them is one who finds fault with you concerning (the distribution of) alms. If they are given something thereof, they are pleased; but if they are not given anything, they are consumed with rage.
9|59| If only they were content with what God and His Messenger give them and would say, "God is sufficient for us! God will give us more out of His grace and bounty, and so will His Messenger. Surely we are supplicants before God (seeking His good pleasure, with no right or cause of complaint)."
9|60| The Prescribed Purifying Alms (the Zakah) are meant only for the poor, and the destitute (albeit, out of self-respect, they do not give the impression that they are in need), and those in charge of collecting (and administering) them, and those whose hearts are to be won over (for support of God’s cause, including those whose hostility is to be prevented), and to free those in bondage (slavery and captivity), and to help those over-burdened with debt, and in God’s cause (to exalt God’s word, to provide for the warriors and students, and to help the pilgrims), and for the wayfarer (in need of help). This is an ordinance from God. God is All-Knowing, All-Wise.
9|61| Among them (the hypocrites) are those who hurt the Prophet and say (of him): "He is all ear (listening to everyone and disposed to believe them)." Say: "Yes, he is all ear, listening to what is best for you; he believes in God, and trusts the believers, and a great mercy for those among you who believe." Those who hurt God’s Messenger – for them is a painful punishment.
9|62| They swear to you by God (O believers) so that you may be pleased with them, while it is God and His Messenger whose pleasure they should seek, if indeed they are believers.
9|63| Do they not know that whoever opposes God and His Messenger, for him is the fire of Hell to abide therein. That is the tremendous disgrace.
9|64| The hypocrites are afraid lest a surah should be sent down against them making plainly known what is in their hearts (while they do not hold back from mocking the Messenger and the believers). Say (to them, O Messenger): "Go on mocking. God will surely bring to light that (whose disclosure) you dread."
9|65| If you ask them (about what they were saying), they will say: "We were merely jesting and being playful." Say: "Was it God and His Revelations and His Messenger that you were mocking?"
9|66| Do not make excuses now! You have indeed disbelieved after your (declaration of) faith. Even if We pardon a section of you (those whose idle talk was not intended to mock God and His Messenger), We will surely punish another section of you for they have been criminals.
9|67| The hypocrites, both men and women, are all of a kind: enjoining and promoting what is evil and forbidding and trying to prevent what is right and good, and they withhold their hands (from doing good and spending in God’s cause). They are oblivious of God (with respect to faith and worship and serving in His cause), and so He is oblivious of them (with respect to rewarding). Assuredly, the hypocrites are those who are the transgressors.
9|68| God has promised the hypocrites, both men and women, and the unbelievers, the fire of Hell, therein to abide: it is (recompense) to suffice them. God has excluded them from His mercy, and for them is a lasting punishment.
9|69| Just like the peoples before you (O hypocrites and unbelievers) who were greater than you in power and more abundant in wealth and children. They enjoyed their lot (in the world) for a while; and you have been enjoying your lot just as those who preceded you enjoyed their lot, and you have plunged in self-indulgence as others who plunged. Such (hypocrites and unbelievers) are those whose works have been wasted in both this world and the Hereafter, and those – they are the losers.
9|70| Have there not reached them the exemplary histories of those who lived before them – the people of Noah, the Ad, the Thamud, and the people of Abraham, and the dwellers of Madyan (Midian), and the overthrown cities (of Sodom and Gomorrah)? Their Messengers came to them with the clear proofs (of the truth, in which they would not believe.) It was not, then, God who wronged them but they wronged their own selves.
9|71| The believers, both men and women, they are guardians, confidants, and helpers of one another. They enjoin and promote what is right and good and forbid and try to prevent the evil, and they establish the Prescribed Prayer in conformity with its conditions, and pay the Prescribed Purifying Alms. They obey God and His Messenger. They are the ones whom God will treat with mercy. Surely God is All-Glorious with irresistible might, All-Wise.
9|72| God has promised the believers, both men and women, Gardens through which rivers flow, therein to abide, and blessed dwellings in Gardens of perpetual bliss; and greater (than those) is God’s being pleased with them. That indeed is the supreme triumph.
9|73| O (most illustrious) Prophet! Strive against the unbelievers and the hypocrites (in the way required by time and conditions), and be stern against them. Their final refuge is Hell: how evil a destination to arrive at!
9|74| They swear by God that they have said nothing (blasphemous), whereas they certainly did utter blasphemies (the word of unbelief), and they fell into unbelief after having entered the fold of Islam, and they purposed and attempted what they could not achieve. They are spiteful against (Islam and the Messenger) for no other reason than that God enriched them and (caused) His Messenger (to enrich them) out of His grace and bounty! Even so, if they repent, it will be to their good; but if they still turn away, God will punish them painfully in the world and the Hereafter. They have on earth no protecting guardian nor helper (against God’s punishment).
9|75| Among them are some who vowed to God: "Surely, if God grants us out of His grace and bounty, we will most certainly (pay the Prescribed Alms and) spend in alms for His sake, and we will most certainly be among the righteous."
9|76| Then God granted them out of His grace and bounty, but they clung to it in niggardly fashion and turned about, swerving away (from what they had vowed).
9|77| So as a consequence He has caused hypocrisy to be in their hearts (and to remain rooted therein) until the day when they will meet Him (at death), because they have broken their word to God that they promised Him, and because they were lying habitually.
9|78| Do they not know that God knows what they keep concealed and their private counsels and gossips, and that God has full knowledge of the whole of the Unseen (all that lies beyond the reach of any created being’s perception).
9|79| They taunt the believers, who give for God’s sake more than they are duty-bound to give, as well as those who can find nothing to give except (what they earn through) their hard toil, and they scoff at them. God causes their scoffing to rebound on themselves, and for them is a painful punishment.
9|80| Whether you (O Messenger) pray for their forgiveness or do not pray for their forgiveness, even if you pray for their forgiveness seventy times, God will not forgive them. That is because they disbelieve in God and His Messenger. God will not guide the transgressing people.
9|81| Those who were left behind in opposition to God’s Messenger rejoiced at staying at home, and abhorred striving with their wealth and persons in God’s cause. And they said: "Do not go forth to war in this heat." Say (O Messenger): "The fire of Hell is fiercer in heat." If only they had been able to ponder and penetrate the essence of matters to grasp the truth!
9|82| So let them laugh little and weep much, in recompense for what they have been earning.
9|83| If God brings you back (from the Campaign) and a party of them ask your leave to go forth to war with you, say to them: "Never will you go forth with me any more, nor will you fight an enemy in my company. You were content to stay at home on that first occasion, so continue to stay at home with those who are (naturally) bound to remain behind!"
9|84| And never do the funeral Prayer over any of them who dies, nor stand by his grave to pray for him. They surely disbelieved in God and His Messenger and died transgressors.
9|85| Let neither their wealth nor their children impress you; God only wills thereby to punish them in this world and that their souls should depart while they are unbelievers.
9|86| (Indeed they are unbelievers, and never want to go forth to war in God’s cause.) Whenever a surah is sent down (calling them): "Believe in God and strive in God’s cause in the company of His Messenger," (even) those of them who are well able (to go to war) ask you to excuse them, saying: "Leave us to be with those who are to stay at home."
9|87| They are well-pleased to be with those (women and children) bound to stay behind, and a seal has been set upon their hearts, so they cannot ponder and penetrate the essence of matters to grasp the truth.
9|88| But the Messenger and those who believe in his company have striven in God’s cause with their wealth and persons. They are those for whom is all good, and they are those who are the prosperous.
9|89| God has prepared for them Gardens through which rivers flow, therein to abide. That is the supreme triumph.
9|90| Some among the Bedouin Arabs having true excuses came (to the Messenger) to ask leave to stay behind, whereas those who are false to God and His Messenger (in their covenant and claim of adherence) stayed at home (without taking part in the campaign). A painful punishment will befall those of them who disbelieve.
9|91| There is no blame on those too weak to go forth to war, and the sick, and on those who cannot find the means (with which to equip and maintain themselves if they go forth), provided that they are true to God and His Messenger. There can be no way (of blame) against those who are devoted to doing good, aware that God is seeing them. God is All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate.
9|92| Nor (can there be any way to blame) those who, when they came to you to provide them with mounts, and you said, "I cannot find anything whereon to mount you," they returned, their eyes overflowing with tears for sorrow that they could not find anything to spend (to prepare themselves for the campaign).
9|93| The way (of blame) is open only against those who sought leave to stay behind even though they are wealthy (well able to equip themselves for the campaign). They were well-pleased to be with those (women and children) bound to stay behind. God has set a seal on their hearts, so that they do not know (the truth and what is really beneficial to them).
9|94| They will offer excuses to you (O believers) when you return to them. Say (to them, O Messenger): "Do not offer excuses: we will never believe you. God has informed us (of the truth) about you. And God will observe your (future) conduct, and so will His Messenger, and then you will be brought back to the Knower of the Unseen and the witnessed, and He will make you understand what you used to do (and call you to account).
9|95| When you return to them, they will (out of fear of punishment) swear to you in the Name of God, (repeating their excuses) so that you may leave them be. So leave them be and withdraw from them. They are loathsome, and their final refuge is Hell as a recompense for what they have been earning.
9|96| They will swear to you so that you may be pleased with them. But even should you be pleased with them, God will not be pleased with the transgressing people.
9|97| The Bedouin Arabs are (by nature) more stubborn in unbelief and hypocrisy (than the city-dwellers), and more liable to be unaware of the bounds prescribed by God in what He has sent down on His Messenger. God is All-Knowing (of the nature and state of His servants), All-Wise.
9|98| Among the Bedouin Arabs there are such as take what they spend (as Prescribed Alms and the contributions they are called on to make in God’s cause) as a fine, and wait for some misfortune to befall you; theirs will be the evil turn. God is All-Hearing, All-Knowing.
9|99| Among the Bedouin Arabs there are also those who believe in God and the Last Day, and take what they spend (as Prescribed Alms and the contributions they are called on to make in God’s cause) as a means of drawing them near to God and of the Messenger’s praying (to God for them). Indeed, it is a means for them to draw near to God. God will admit them into His mercy. Surely, God is All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate.
9|100| The first and foremost (to embrace Islam and excel others in virtue) among the Emigrants and the Helpers, and those who follow them in devotion to doing good, aware that God is seeing them – God is well-pleased with them, and they are well-pleased with Him, and He has prepared for them Gardens throughout which rivers flow, therein to abide for ever. That is the supreme triumph.
9|101| Among the Bedouin Arabs who dwell around you there are hypocrites, and among the people of Madinah (too) there are such as have grown more artful and insidious in hypocrisy: you (O Messenger) do not know them (unless We inform you of them). We know them all (and the threat they pose). We will punish them doubly, and then they will be returned to a mighty punishment (in the Hereafter).
9|102| Others (there are who) have admitted their sins: they have mixed a righteous deed with an evil one. It may be that God will return their repentance with forgiveness. Surely God is All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate.
9|103| Take alms (prescribed or voluntary) out of their wealth so that you (O Messenger) may thereby cleanse them and cause them to grow in purity and sincerity, and pray for them. Indeed your prayer is a source of comfort for them. God is All-Hearing, All-Knowing.
9|104| Do they not know that surely God is He Who welcomes His servants’ turning to Him in repentance, and accepts what is offered as charity (prescribed or voluntary ) for His sake, and that surely God is He Who accepts repentance and returns it with liberal forgiveness and additional reward, the All-Compassionate (especially towards His believing servants)?
9|105| Say: "Work, and God will see your work, and so will His Messenger and the true believers; and you will be brought back to the Knower of the Unseen and the witnessed, and He will make you understand all that you were doing (and call you to account for it).
9|106| And yet others (there are, about whom) God’s decree is awaited: whether He will punish them or guide them to repentance to forgive them. God is All-Knowing, All-Wise.
9|107| Some among the hypocrites – who have adopted a mosque out of dissension and unbelief, in order to cause division among the believers, and use as an outpost to collaborate with him who before made war on God and His Messenger – will certainly swear: "We mean nothing but good (in building this mosque)", whereas God bears witness that they are surely liars.
9|108| Do not stand in that mosque to do the Prayer. The mosque that was founded on piety and reverence for God from the very first days (in Madinah) is worthy that you should stand in it for the Prayer. In it are men who love to be purified (of all spiritual and moral blemishes). God loves those who strive to purify themselves.
9|109| Is he better, who founded his building (religion and personal world) on piety and reverence for God, and the aim to please God, or he who founded his building on the edge of a water-worn, crumbling river-bank so that it tumbles with him into the Hell-fire? God does not guide wrongdoing people.
9|110| The building (systems, plans, and life-styles) which the hypocrites have founded will never cease to be doubt and disquiet in their hearts (that are crushed by fear and anxieties) unless their hearts are cut into pieces (and they themselves die). God is All-Knowing (of their states of mind and conspiracies), All-Wise (in Whose every act and decree there are many instances of wisdom).
9|111| God has bought from the believers their selves and wealth because Paradise is for them. They fight in God’s cause, and they kill or are killed. This is a promise with which God has bound Himself in the Torah and in the Gospel and in the Qur’an. Who could be more faithful to his covenant than God? So (O believers) glad tidings to you because of the bargain you have made with Him! That indeed is the supreme triumph.
9|112| Those who return in repentance to God, and those who worship God, and those who praise God, and those who travel (with such aims as conveying God’s Message or studying and making investigations for God’s sake or reflecting on God’s signs), and those who bow down in awe of God, and those who prostrate themselves before God in submission, and those who enjoin and promote what is right and good and forbid and try to prevent evil, and those who keep to the bounds set by God: give glad tidings to the believers.
9|113| It is not for the Prophet and those who believe to ask God for the forgiveness of those who associate partners with God even though they be near of kin, after it has become clear to them that they (died polytheists and therefore) are condemned to the Blazing Flame.
9|114| The prayer of Abraham for the forgiveness of his father was only because of a promise which he had made to him. But when it became clear to him that he was an enemy of God, he (Abraham) dissociated himself from him. Abraham was most tender-hearted, most clement.
9|115| It is not God’s way to lead people astray after He has guided them, without having made clear to them what they should beware of (so as to guard against straying). Surely God has full knowledge of everything.
9|116| God is He to Whom belongs the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth. He gives life and causes to die. And you have, apart from God, neither a guardian (who will protect you and to whom you can entrust your affairs) nor a helper.
9|117| God has assuredly turned in mercy to the Prophet, as well as to the Emigrants and the Helpers who followed him in the time of hardship, when the hearts of a party among them had well-nigh swerved but God turned (also) to them in mercy (and protected against swerving). Surely for them He is All-Pitying, All-Compassionate.
9|118| And (He turned in mercy also) to the three left behind and whose cases had been deferred (because they had not taken part in the campaign of Tabuk): (they felt such remorse that) the earth was too narrow for them despite all its vastness, and their souls became utterly constricted for them, and they came to perceive fully that there is no refuge from God except in Him. Then He turned to them in mercy that they might repent and recover their former state (in Islam). Surely God is the One Who truly returns repentance with liberal forgiveness and additional reward, the All-Compassionate (especially towards His believing servants.)
9|119| O you who believe! Keep from disobedience to God in reverence for Him and piety, and keep the company of the truthful (those who are also faithful to their covenant with God).
9|120| It does not behove the people of Madinah and the Bedouin Arabs around them to fail to follow God’s Messenger and to care for their own selves more than for him. That is because they suffer neither from thirst, nor weariness, nor hunger in God’s cause, nor take a step which enrages the unbelievers, nor win some gain from the enemy, but a righteous deed is thereby recorded for them (to their account). Indeed, God does not leave to waste the reward of those devoted to doing good, aware that God is seeing them.
9|121| Nor do they spend any amount for God’s sake, small or great, nor do they cross a valley (while traveling in God’s cause), but it is recorded for them (to their account) so that God may repay them the best reward for what they used to do .
9|122| And the believers should not go forth to war all together. But why should not a party from every community of them mobilize to acquire profound, correct knowledge and understanding of religion and warn their people when they return to them so that they may beware (of wrongful attitudes)?
9|123| O you who believe! Fight against those unbelievers who are in your vicinity (and pose an immediate threat to you and the preaching of Islam), and let them find in you sternness. Know that God is with the God-revering, pious who keep their duty to Him.
9|124| Whenever a surah is sent down, there are some among them (the hypocrites) who say: "Which of you has this strengthened in his faith?" As for those who believe, it does strengthen them in faith and they rejoice in its being sent down and in the glad tidings (they receive thereby).
9|125| But as for those in whose hearts there is a sickness (that dries up the source of their spiritual life, extinguishes their power of understanding and corrupts their character), it increases them in foulness added to their foulness, and they die while they are unbelievers.
9|126| Do they not see that they are tried time and again every year (by coming face to face with such decisive events and situations as reveal to them their inner world and remind them that they should turn to God in repentance and mend their ways)? Yet they neither repent (and mend their ways) nor take warning (from all that befalls them).
9|127| Whenever a surah is sent down (and the Messenger is reciting it in the presence of the Muslims), they glance at each other (as though saying), "Is there anyone who sees you?" and then they slip away. God has turned their hearts away (from the truth) because they are a people who do not ponder and try to grasp the truth.
9|128| There has come to you (O people) a Messenger from among yourselves; extremely grievous to him is your suffering, full of concern for you is he, and for the believers full of pity and compassion.
9|129| Still, if they turn away from you (O Messenger), say: "God is sufficient for me; there is no deity but He. In Him have I put my trust, and He is the Lord of the Supreme Throne (as the absolute Ruler and Sustainer of the universe and all creation, Who maintains and protects it)."
10|1| Alif. Lam. Ra. These are the Revelations included in the Book full of wisdom.
10|2| Does it seem strange to people that We reveal to a man from among them, saying: "Warn all humankind (of the consequences of the way they follow), and give those who believe the glad tidings that they have a sure footing with their Lord (on account of their belief, faithfulness, and righteous deeds)." (Is it because of this that) the unbelievers say: "This (man) is clearly a sorcerer?"
10|3| Surely your Lord is God, Who has created the heavens and the earth in six days, then He established Himself on the Supreme Throne, directing all affairs (as the sole Ruler of creation). There is none to intercede with God unless after He grants leave. That is God, Your Lord, so worship Him. Will you still not reflect (on this fundamental truth) and be mindful?
10|4| To Him you are all bound to return: a promise from God in truth (therefore certain to happen). He originates creation, then He brings it forth anew (in another world) to the end that He may reward with equity those who believe and do good, righteous deeds. Whereas, for those who disbelieve (and die as unbelievers) there is a drink of boiling water and a painful punishment because they persistently disbelieve.
10|5| He it is Who has made the sun a radiant, illuminating light, and the moon a light reflected, and has determined for it stations, that you might know (how to compute) the number of the years and to measure (time). God has not created that but with truth (for a definite purpose and meaningfully). He sets out in detail the signs (and proofs of the truth) for a people seeking knowledge.
10|6| In the alternation of night and day (with their periods shortening and lengthening), and all that He has created in the heavens and the earth, surely there are signs (manifesting truth) for a people who keep from disobedience to Him in reverence for Him.
10|7| Those who have no expectations to meet Us and are well-pleased with the present, worldly life and (neither looking nor seeing beyond it) are content with it, and those who are heedless of Our Revelations and Our signs (manifested to them in their inner worlds and in the outer world):
10|8| Those are they whose final refuge is the Fire because of what they have been earning.
10|9| Surely for those who believe and do good, righteous deeds, their Lord will guide them by virtue of their belief to a happy end: rivers will flow at their feet in the Gardens of bounty and blessing.
10|10| Therein their invocation will be: "All-Glorified You are, O God! (You are absolutely exalted above having any defects and doing anything wrong.)" And their greeting (to each other and from God and the angels) will be: "Peace!" And their invocation will close with "All praise and gratitude are for God, the Lord of the worlds!"
10|11| If God were to hasten for human beings the ill (which they have earned) in the same manner as they hasten (the coming to them of what they consider to be) the good, their term would indeed have been decreed over for them. But We leave those who do not expect to encounter Us in their rebellion blindly wandering.
10|12| When affliction befalls (such) a person, he invokes Us (in every situation), lying down on his side or sitting or standing; but when We remove his affliction from him, he goes his way as if he had never invoked us for an affliction that befell him. So to those wasteful ones (who have wasted their God-given faculties and committed excesses) are the things they have been doing decked out to be appealing.
10|13| Assuredly We destroyed many generations before you when they committed wrongs (in their deeds, in their measures and judgments, and in their response to the truth): the Messengers raised from among them came to them with the clear proofs of the truth, but it was plain that they would not believe. Thus do We recompense the guilty people committed to accumulating sin.
10|14| Then We made you successors after them on the earth, so that We might behold how you act.
10|15| When Our Revelations, clear as evidence and in meaning are recited (and conveyed) to them, those who have no expectations to meet Us say (in response to Our Messenger): "Either bring a Qur’an other than this or alter it." Say: "It is not for me to alter it of my own accord. I only follow what is revealed to me. Indeed I fear, if I should rebel against my Lord, the punishment of an Awful Day."
10|16| Say (also): "If God had so willed, I would not have recited it to you, nor would He have brought it to your knowledge. I lived among you a whole lifetime before it (began to be revealed to me). Will you not reason and understand?"
10|17| Who is more in the wrong than he who fabricates falsehood in attribution to God or denies His Revelations and His signs (in the universe and in their own selves). Surely the disbelieving criminals will not prosper.
10|18| They worship, apart from God, things or beings that can neither harm nor benefit them, and they say: "These are our intercessors with God." Say: "Would you inform God of something in the heavens or the earth that He does not know? All-Glorified is He, and absolutely exalted above all that they associate with Him."
10|19| Humankind (in the beginning) were but one community following one single way but later they differed and began following different ways. Had it not been for a decree already issued by your Lord (postponing the final, decisive judgment until an appointed term), it would indeed have been judged between them in respect of all that they differ on.
10|20| They say: "Why isn’t a miraculous sign (of a different sort) sent down on him from his Lord?" Say, then: "The Unseen belongs to God alone (He does whatever He wills and only He knows what the future will bring): therefore, wait and see, indeed I too am with you among those who wait."
10|21| Whenever We let the (unbelieving) people taste an act of grace after a hardship which has visited them, they at once contrive some plot against Our Revelations. Say: "God is more swift in enforcing His will (and making any plot rebound on those who conceived it)." Surely Our (heavenly) envoys (angels) are recording what they are devising.
10|22| He it is Who conveys you on the land and the sea. And when you are in the ship, and the ships run with their voyagers with a fair breeze, and they rejoice in it, there comes upon them a tempest, and waves surge towards them from all sides, so that they are sure that they are encompassed (by death with no way out), they call upon God, sincerely believing in Him alone (as the only Deity, Lord, and Sovereign): "If You save us from this, we will most certainly be among the thankful."
10|23| But when He has saved them, they behave rebelliously on earth, offending against all right. O humankind! Your rebellion is only against yourselves. (What you seek and get by all your offenses is only) the enjoyment of the present, worldly life, thereafter to Us is your return, then We will make you understand what you were doing (and call you to account).
10|24| The present, worldly life is like this: We send down water from the sky, and the earth’s vegetation, of which humans and animals eat, mingles with it, until, when the earth has taken on her ornaments and has been embellished, and its inhabitants suppose that they are its masters with a free hand over the earth, Our command comes upon it by night or day unexpectedly, and We cause it to become like a field mown down, as if it had not flourished the previous day. Thus We set out in detail the signs (the signposts of Our way and the relevant commands and guidance included in the Qur’an) for a people who reflect (on them and draw the necessary lesson).
10|25| And God invites to the Abode of Peace (where they will enjoy perfect bliss, peace, and safety,) and He guides whomever He wills to a Straight Path.
10|26| For those who do good, aware that God is seeing them is the best (of the rewards that God has promised for good deeds), and still more. Neither stain nor ignominy will cover their faces. They are the companions of Paradise; they will abide therein.
10|27| And for those who have earned evil deeds, the recompense of an evil deed will be the like of it; and ignominy will cover them – nor will they have anyone to defend them against God – it is as though their faces were veiled with patches of darkest night. Those are the companions of the Fire, they will abide therein.
10|28| On that Day We will raise them all to life and gather them all together, and then We will order those who associated partners with God: "Get to your place, you and your (so-called) associates (of God)!" So did We distinguish between them and the believers, and separate them from their associates. Their associates say to them: "It was not us that you worshipped.
10|29| "God is sufficient as a witness between us and you: we were certainly unaware of your worshipping (us)."
10|30| There every soul will experience what it did before (in the world). They have been returned to God, their true Owner and Master; and those that they fabricated to worship besides God have failed them.
10|31| Say: "Who is it that provides for you from heaven and earth, or Who is it that possesses full power over (your) hearing and eyes, or Who is it that brings forth the living from the dead and brings forth the dead from the living, and Who directs the whole affair (the universe)?" They will say, "It is God." Then, say: "Will you not then keep your duty to him in reverence for Him and in fear of His punishment?"
10|32| That is God (Who does all these), Your rightful Lord, the Absolute Truth and Ever-Constant. What is there, after the truth, but error? Then, how are you turned about (to different ways, removed from the Straight Path)?
10|33| Thus has the word of your Lord proved true with regard to those who transgress: that they will not believe.
10|34| Say: "Is there any of your (so-called) associates (of God) who originates creation and then reproduces it, and will bring it forth anew (in another world)?" Say: "God originates creation and then reproduces it, and He will bring it forth anew. How then are you turned away from the truth and make false claims?
10|35| Say: "Is there any of your (so-called) associates (of God) who guides to the truth?" Say: "God alone guides to the truth. Which, then, is worthy to be followed: He Who guides to the truth or he who cannot find the true way unless he is guided? What, then, is the matter with you, and how do you judge (so wrongly)?"
10|36| Most of them follow only conjecture. Surely conjecture can never substitute for anything of the truth. God surely has full knowledge of all that they do.
10|37| And this Qur’an is not such that it could possibly be fabricated by one in attribution to God, but it is a (Divine Book) confirming (the Divine origin of and the truths that are still contained by) the Revelations prior to it, and an explanation of the Essence of all Divine Books – wherein there is no doubt, from the Lord of the worlds.
10|38| Or do they say that he (the Messenger) has fabricated it? Say: "(If it is possible for a mortal to fabricate it) then produce a surah like it and call for help on anyone you can, apart from God, if you are truthful (in your doubt and the claim you base upon it)."
10|39| No (they are not truthful in their doubt and claim), but they have denied a thing (the Qur’an) whose knowledge they could not encompass and whose exposition (through the fulfillment of its promises and threats) has not reached them. Even so did those who were before them deny (the Books sent to them). So look! how was the outcome for the wrong-doers (who judged and acted wrongly)?
10|40| Among them (the people of Makkah) there are such as have believed and will believe in it, just as among them there are such as have not believed and will not believe in it. Your Lord has full knowledge of those who provoke disorder and corruption.
10|41| If (O Messenger) they continue to deny you (regarding the Message you bring), say: "To me are accounted my deeds, and to you, your deeds. You are quit of all that I do, and I am quit of all that you do."
10|42| Among them are such as come to listen to you, but how can you make the deaf hear, if they do not use their reason (to make sense of it)?
10|43| Among them are such as look towards you, but how can you guide the blind (to the right way), if they are lacking the power of (in)sight?
10|44| Surely God does not wrong humankind in anything, but humankind wrong their own selves.
10|45| On the Day when God will raise to life and gather them together, it will seem to them that they had not tarried in the world but a short while of the day, knowing one another. Assuredly, those who deny (the truth) that they must encounter God have ruined themselves and have never been guided.
10|46| Whether We let you (O Messenger) witness the fulfillment of some of what We have promised them, or We cause you to die (before it befalls them), still to Us is their return. And God is witness to all that they do.
10|47| Every community has its Messenger: when their Messenger comes, (some believe in him and the others not) and it is judged between them with absolute justice, and they are not wronged.
10|48| And they say: "When will this promise be fulfilled if you (O believers) are truthful?"
10|49| Say (O Messenger): "I have no power to harm or benefit myself, except by God’s will. For every community there is an appointed term; and when the end of the term falls in, they can neither delay it by any period of time, however short, nor can they hasten it."
10|50| Say: "Have you ever considered: what (could you do) if God’s punishment should come to you by night (unexpectedly) or by day (and you saw it come)? What do the disbelieving criminals have in prospect that they wish it to be hastened?"
10|51| What! Is it only when it has come to pass that you will believe in it? (That day it will be said to you:) "What? (Do you believe in it) now, after you had (in your contemptuous unbelief) wished it to be hastened?"
10|52| Then it will be said to those who wronged (themselves through unbelief and wrong judgments): "Taste the punishment everlasting! Are you recompensed for anything other than what you used to earn?"
10|53| They ask you, "Is it true?" Say: "Yes, by my Lord, it is surely true; and you cannot evade it."
10|54| If every soul that has committed wrong (through unbelief and thereby wronged itself) possessed all that is on the earth, it would surely offer that as ransom (to be saved from the punishment); and when they see the punishment, they will even be unable to express their remorse. It is judged between them in equity, and they are not wronged.
10|55| Know well that to God belongs all that is in the heavens and on the earth. Know well that God’s promise is surely true, but most of them do not know.
10|56| He gives life and causes to die, and you are on the way to return to Him.
10|57| O humankind! There has come to you an instruction from your Lord, and a cure for what (of sickness or doubt) is in the breasts, and guidance and mercy for the believers.
10|58| Say: "In the grace and bounty of God and in His mercy – in this, then, let them rejoice. That is better than what they amass (of worldly goods and riches)."
10|59| Say: "Have you considered the provision God has sent down on you, and you have (of your own accord, at your own whim) made some of it lawful and some of it unlawful?" Say: "Has God given you leave, or do you (make laws of your own accord and) attribute to God falsely?
10|60| What do those who falsely attribute (their own inventions) to God think will be (their situation) on the Day of Resurrection? Indeed God has grace and bounty for humankind, but most of them do not give thanks.
10|61| Whatever your preoccupation (O Messenger), and whatever discourse from Him in this (Qur’an) you may be reciting, and whatever work you (O people) may be doing, We are certainly witness over you while you are engaged in it. Not an atom’s weight of whatever there is in the earth or in the heaven escapes your Lord, nor is there anything smaller than that, or greater, but it is (recorded) in a Manifest Book.
10|62| Know well that the friends (saintly servants) of God – they will have no fear (both in this world and the next, for they will always find My help and support with them), nor will they grieve.
10|63| They are those who believe and keep from disobedience to God in reverence for Him and piety.
10|64| For them is the glad tiding (of prosperity) in the life of this world and in the Hereafter. No change can there be in God’s decrees. That indeed is the supreme triumph.
10|65| Do not let their sayings grieve you (O Messenger). Might and glory belong to God entirely. He is the All-Hearing, the All-Knowing.
10|66| Know well that to God belongs whoever is in the heavens and whoever is on the earth (His creatures and servants). Those who invoke, apart from God, (do not do so because they really have found deities and lords that can be partners with God in His Divinity and Lordship, and so) follow those partners. They do but follow only conjecture (not authoritative knowledge), and they do nothing except making up suppositions.
10|67| It is He Who has made for you the night so that you may rest in it, and the day, sight-giving (for you to work in). Surely in this are signs (manifesting the truth) for people who hear and pay heed (to God’s Revelations, and view things and events in their light).
10|68| They (the polytheists) assert that God has taken to Himself a child. All-Glorified is He; He is Self-Sufficient (beyond any need of anything). To Him belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is on the earth. You have no authority, nor evidence, for this (assertion). Are you, then, saying things about God that you do not know (anything about)?
10|69| Say: "Surely those who fabricate falsehood in attribution to God will never prosper."
10|70| A brief enjoyment in the world; then to Us is their return, and then We will make them taste the severe punishment because they habitually disbelieved (in whatever truth was conveyed to them in God’s Name).
10|71| Relate to them the exemplary history of Noah when he said to his people: "O my people! If my presence (among you) and my reminding (you) by God’s Revelations are offensive to you – well, in God have I put my trust. So, coming together, decide upon your course of action, and (call to your aid) your (so-called) associates of God, then let not your affair be a worry to you, and then carry out against me (whatever you have decided), and give me no respite!
10|72| "Then if you turn away (from the Message that I convey to you), then (know that it will cause me no loss, just as your accepting it will gain me nothing) I ask you for no wage; my wage is only due from God, and I have been commanded to be of the Muslims (those who have submitted to Him)."
10|73| And yet they denied him, and so We saved him and all who were with him in the Ark, and made them successors (to inherit the earth), while We caused to drown those who denied Our Revelations and all other signs (pointing to Our Existence and Unity).Look, then, how was the outcome for those who were warned (but never paid heed)?
10|74| Then, after him, We sent forth Messengers to their people; and they came to them with the clear signs of the truth but they would not believe in that which they used to deny before. Thus do We impress a seal on the hearts of those who exceed the bounds.
10|75| Then, after them, We sent forth Moses and Aaron to the Pharaoh and his chiefs with Our signs (miracles to support them), but they grew arrogant (in the face of those signs), and (demonstrated that) they were a guilty people committed to accumulating sins.
10|76| When the truth came to them from Us, they said: "Surely this is clearly nothing but sorcery."
10|77| Moses said: "Do you speak of the truth like this when it has come to you? Is this sorcery? But sorcerers do not prosper."
10|78| They said: "Have you come to us to turn us away from what we found our forefathers following, and that high authority in this land may belong to you two? Never will we believe in you two!"
10|79| And the Pharaoh said: "Bring me every learned, skillful sorcerer!"
10|80| When the sorcerers came, Moses said to them: "Throw down what you will throw."
10|81| When they had thrown (whatever they had in their hands and produced a mighty sorcery), Moses said: "What you have brought is but sorcery. Surely God will bring it to nothing and prove it false. God never validates and sets right the work of those who cause disorder and corruption.
10|82| "And God proves by His decrees the truth to be true and makes it triumph, however hateful this is to the criminals."
10|83| None save a young generation among his people believed in Moses for (they were in) fear that the Pharaoh and the chiefs among them (who collaborated with the Pharaoh in order not to lose their wealth) would subject them to persecutions. The Pharaoh was indeed a haughty tyrant in the land and he was indeed one of those who commit excesses.
10|84| And Moses said (in earnest advice to his people): "If you believe in God, then put your trust in Him, if you are Muslims (who have wholly submitted themselves to Him)."
10|85| They invoked (verbally and by their actions): "In God we put our trust. Our Lord! Do not make us a target of persecution for the wrongdoing people!
10|86| "And save us through Your mercy from those unbelieving people!"
10|87| We revealed to Moses and his brother: "Appoint houses for your people in Egypt (as places of refuge and coming together in God’s cause), and (as a whole community) make your homes places to turn to God, and establish the Prescribed Prayer in conformity with its conditions. And (O Moses,) give glad tidings to the believers!"
10|88| Moses prayed to God: "Our Lord! Surely You have granted the Pharaoh and his chiefs splendor and riches in the life of this world, and so, our Lord, they lead people astray from Your way. Our Lord! Destroy their riches, and press upon their hearts, for they do not believe until they see the painful punishment."
10|89| God said: "The prayer of you two (O Moses and Aaron) has indeed been answered; so, (since the realization of your goals is dependent upon your way of conduct,) continue steadfastly on the Straight Path, and do not follow the way of those who have no knowledge (of right and wrong) and act in ignorance."
10|90| And We brought the Children of Israel across the sea, and the Pharaoh and his hosts pursued them with vehement insolence and hostility, until (they were overwhelmed by the waters of the sea opened for Moses and his people to cross,) and when the drowning overtook the Pharaoh, he exclaimed: "I have come to believe that there is no deity save Him in whom the Children of Israel believe, and I am of the Muslims (those who have submitted themselves wholly to Him)."
10|91| Now? – (You surrender now) when before this you always rebelled and were of those engaged in causing disorder and corruption?
10|92| So this day (as a recompense for your belief in the state of despair which will be of no avail to you in the Hereafter), We will save only your body, that you may be a sign for those to come after you. Surely, a good many people among humankind are heedless of Our signs (full of clear warning and lessons).
10|93| And indeed We settled the Children of Israel in a proper place of dwelling, and provided them with pure, wholesome things. They did not suffer discord until after the knowledge came to them (of the way they would have to follow and of what they would meet as a result of what they did). Your Lord will surely judge among them on the Day of Resurrection concerning that on which they used to differ.
10|94| If you are in doubt about the truth of what We have sent down on you (concerning what happened between Moses and the Pharaoh), then ask those who have been reading the Book (which was given to them) before you. Surely the truth has come to you from your Lord, so be not among those who feel doubt.
10|95| And neither be among those who deny God’s signs and Revelations, for then you will be among the losers.
10|96| Those for whom the truth of your Lord’s decree (that they will die unbelievers and go to Hell) has been confirmed – they will not believe,
10|97| Even though every proof should come to them, until they see the painful punishment.
10|98| If only there had been a community that believed (just when God’s decree of punishment was issued) and profited by their belief – there was none except the people of Jonah. When they came to believe We withdrew from them the punishment of disgrace in the life of this world, and We allowed them to enjoy life for a term.
10|99| If your Lord had so willed (and, denying them free will, compelled humankind to believe), all who are on the earth would surely have believed, all of them. Would you, then, force people until they become believers?
10|100| It is not for any person to believe save by God’s leave. God sets those who do not use their reason in a mire of uncleanness.
10|101| Say: "Consider what there is (and what happens) in the heavens and on the earth." But all such signs (of the truth of the essentials of faith) and the warnings cannot avail a people who will not believe.
10|102| For what do they watch and wait but the like of the days of punishment which befell those (unbelievers) who passed away before them? Say: "Then watch and wait, and I will be with you watching and waiting."
10|103| Then We save Our Messengers and those who believe (as We always did before). We have bound Ourselves to save the believers.
10|104| Say: "O humankind! If you are in doubt about my religion, then (know that) I do not worship those whom you worship apart from God, but I worship God alone, Who causes you all to die. I have been commanded to be of the believers.
10|105| "(I have also been commanded:) Set all your being exclusively to the true religion as one with pure faith (free from unbelief and hypocrisy), and never be among those who associate partners with God.
10|106| And do not invoke, apart from God, that which can neither benefit you nor harm you; if you did so, then you would be of the wrongdoers (who wrong themselves by committing the greatest wrong of associating partners with God).
10|107| If God touches you with affliction, there is none who can remove it but He; and if He wills any good for you, then there is none who can hold back His bounty. He causes it to reach whomever He wills of His servants. He is the All-Forgiving, the All-Compassionate."
10|108| Say: "O humankind! Assuredly there has come to you the truth from your Lord. Whoever, therefore, chooses the right way, follows it but for his own good; and whoever chooses to go astray, goes astray but to his own harm. I am not one appointed as a guardian over you to assume your responsibility."
10|109| And follow what is revealed to you, and remain patient and steadfast in your way until God gives His judgment. And He is the best in giving judgment.
11|1| Alif. Lam. Ra. A Book whose Revelations in verses have been made firm (absolutely free of doubt, alteration, or annulment) and full of wisdom, and arranged in sequence and distinctly detailed. It is from One All-Wise, All-Aware.
11|2| So that you worship none but God. (Say, O Messenger:) "Surely I am a warner for you (O people, against the evil consequences of all kinds of misguidance) and a bearer of glad tidings (of prosperity in return for faith and righteousness)."
11|3| And that you ask your Lord for forgiveness (for the sins you have so far committed), then turn to Him repentant and sincerely, so that He may enable for you a good life for a term appointed, and bestow His grace and bounty more abundantly on whoever is more advanced in virtue and devotion. But if you turn away, then, surely I fear for you the punishment of a mighty Day.
11|4| To God is your final return. He has full power over everything.
11|5| Beware! surely they (who associate partners with God) lean over their breasts (as if in respect for you, but in reality they are) seeking to hide (from God the unbelief and hostility) in their hearts. Beware! at the very time that they cover themselves with their garments (or hide themselves in their houses behind shut doors and curtained windows) God knows well all that they keep concealed as well as all that they disclose. Surely God has full knowledge of what lies hidden in the bosoms.
11|6| No living creature is there moving on the earth but its provision depends on God, and He knows its every lodging and disposition (every stage of its life), and the duration of its stay and the moment of its transition therefrom. All is in a Manifest Book.
11|7| He it is Who has created the heavens and the earth in six days – His Supreme Throne was upon the water – that He might make trial of you to manifest which of you is best in conduct. Yet, if you say (to people), "(Your proper abode is the Hereafter, where you will be either in bliss or suffering according to your conduct in the world. That is why) you are bound to be raised after death," those who persist in unbelief will say: "This is clearly nothing but an enchanting delusion."
11|8| Seeing that We postpone the punishment (with which We threaten them) until an appointed term, they are sure to say (in mockery): "What detains it that it does not come?" Beware! on the Day when it befalls them, it will not be averted from them, and that which they have been mocking at will overwhelm them.
11|9| If We let human taste some mercy from Us, and then take it away from him, he becomes hopeless, and thankless (forgetting all Our favors to him).
11|10| And if We let him taste ease and plenty after some hardship has visited him, he says: "Gone is all affliction from me!" Surely he is prone to vain exultation and self-glorifying.
11|11| Except those who are persevering and patient (neither despairing in affliction, nor exultant and self-glorifying in success), and do good, righteous deeds; it is they for whom is forgiveness and a great reward.
11|12| Now it may be that you (O Messenger) are drawn to abandon some part of what is revealed to you (such as the verses concerning your Messengership), and your breast is constricted thereby, on account of their saying: "Why has a treasure not been sent down upon him, or an angel accompanying him (visible to us)?" But you are only a warner. It is God Who has everything in His care and under His control.
11|13| Or they say (about the Messenger): "He fabricates it (the Qur’an)"? Say (to them): "Then produce ten invented surahs like it (in eloquence, meaningfulness and truth), and call to your aid whomever you can, apart from God, if you are truthful (in your claim, not deluded or just making up excuses to justify your unbelief).
11|14| "If they (whom you call to your aid) cannot answer your call, then know that it (the Qur’an) is sent down as based on God’s Knowledge, and that there is no deity save Him. Will you, then, submit to God as Muslims?"
11|15| Whoever desires the present, worldly life and its outward shows, We recompense them for all that they do therein, and they are not deprived of their just due therein.
11|16| It is they for whom there is nothing in the Hereafter but the Fire. All that they produced in it (this world) has come to nothing and all that they were doing is fruitless, vain.
11|17| So, (how can you compare others with) one who stands on a clear evidence from his Lord (the Qur’an), and is supported by a witness guided by Him, and there was (revealed) before it the Book of Moses (confirming it) as a guide and mercy? Those (who make and understand the comparison) believe in it (the Qur’an); while whoever from the diverse parties (belonging to different nations and faiths, knowingly) disbelieves in it – the Fire will be their promised place. And so you should not have the least doubt of it (being revealed by God). Surely, it is the truth from your Lord, though most of the people do not believe.
11|18| Who is greater in doing wrong than he who fabricates falsehood in attribution to God? Such will be brought before their Lord, and the witnesses will say, "Those are they who lied in attribution to God. Surely, it is the due of the wrongdoers that God has excluded them from His mercy."
11|19| The ones who bar people from God’s way and seek to make it crooked (wishing they could distort it); and they, they are those who persistently disbelieve in the Hereafter.
11|20| Those can never frustrate on earth (whatever God wills for it), nor can they find any guardians, apart from God, able to protect them against God. For them the punishment will be doubled (in the Hereafter). (Having wasted the faculties of hearing and seeing that God granted them), they have no longer been able to listen to (the revealed truths), nor have they any longer had sight to see.
11|21| Such are they who have ruined their selves, and all that they fabricated (by way of false deities to worship besides God) have failed them.
11|22| Without doubt, in the Hereafter they will be the greatest losers.
11|23| As for those who believe and do good, righteous deeds, and have humbled themselves before their Lord, they are the companions of Paradise; they will abide therein.
11|24| These two classes of people are like the blind and deaf, and the seeing and hearing. Can they be likened to each other? Will you not, then, reflect and be mindful?
11|25| And assuredly We sent Noah to his people as Messenger (with the same message that he preached): "Surely, I am for you a plain warner (advising you for your good):
11|26| "That you worship none but God. Indeed I fear for you the punishment of a painful Day!"
11|27| The leading ones who disbelieved from among his people said: "We do not see you but as a mortal like ourselves, and we do not see that any follow you save those who are but the lowliest of us, without an opinion worthy of consideration; and we do not see you (and your followers) having any superiority over us; rather, we take the view that you are liars."
11|28| Noah said: "O my people! What do you think – if I stand on a clear evidence from my Lord, and He has granted me a mercy from His Presence to which you have remained blind – can we force you to accept it when you are averse to it?
11|29| "O my people! I ask of you no wealth for it (for conveying the Message to you); my wage is due only from God. I will not drive away those who believe; they are destined to meet their Lord (Who will treat them as they should be treated) – whereas I see you as a people acting in ignorance.
11|30| "O my people! Who could help me against God were I to drive them away? Will you not then reflect and be mindful?
11|31| "And I do not say to you that with me are the treasures of God, nor do I know the Unseen (what is stored in the future), nor do I say that I am an angel, nor do I say of those, whom your eyes hold in contempt, that God will not grant them some good. God knows best whatever is in their bosoms (what kind of people they are in their inner worlds). (If I drove them away or spoke ill of them), then I would indeed be among the wrongdoers."
11|32| They said: "O Noah! You have argued with us, and have prolonged your arguments; so stop arguing with us and, if you are telling the truth, bring upon us what you have been threatening us with!"
11|33| Noah said: "Only God can bring it upon you, if He wills; and you can never be frustrators (of His will).
11|34| "My counsel – much as I would counsel you – will not benefit you, if God has willed that you be and remain misguided. He is your Lord (Who created you, and nurtures, sustains and protects you), and you are on the way to return to Him."
11|35| Do they (the idolaters) say (of you, O Messenger): "He has fabricated it (invented all those stories and the Qur’an containing them)?" Say: "If indeed I fabricate it, then upon me falls my sin, but (as you are slandering me to excuse your own willful persistence in unbelief, know that) I am free of the sins you have been committing."
11|36| And it was revealed to Noah (by Us): "Never will any of your people believe except those who have already believed. Then, do not be distressed because of what they have been doing.
11|37| "Build the Ark (which We have described to you) under Our eyes and in accordance with Our instructions to be revealed (to you), and do not plead with Me for those who have persisted in wrongdoing. They are bound to be drowned."
11|38| And so Noah set to building the Ark. And every time the leading ones among his people passed by him, they mocked at him. He said: "Now you are mocking us, but (a day will come when) we mock you just as you mock us.
11|39| "And so shall you know upon whom will come a punishment which will disgrace him, and upon whom will alight a lasting punishment (in the Hereafter)."
11|40| (And so it went on) until the time when Our command came and the boiler started boiling over. We said (to Noah): "Embark in it a pair of each kind (of living creature), and your family, except those against whom Our sentence has already been passed, and those who believe." And those who believed with him were few.
11|41| Noah said, "Board it!" (and all the people and the pairs of creatures God willed should be saved were settled in the Ark). "In God’s Name be its course and its mooring. Surely my Lord is All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate."
11|42| So the Ark floated with them amid waves like mountains, and Noah cried out to a son of his who was standing apart: "Embark with us, my son, and do not be with the unbelievers!"
11|43| He said: "I will betake myself to a mountain that will protect me from the waters!" He (Noah) said: "Today there is no protection from God’s judgment except for him on whom He has mercy." And the waves came between them, and he (the son) was among the drowned.
11|44| And it was said: "O earth, swallow up your waters! And, O sky, cease (your rain)!" And the waters were made to subside, and (by God’s will) the affair was accomplished. Then the Ark came to rest on al-Judi, and it was said: "Away with the wrongdoing people!"
11|45| Noah called out to his Lord, saying: "O my Lord, my son was of my family (as a believer), and Your promise is surely true (for my believing family members), and You are the Most Just of judges."
11|46| (God) said: "O Noah! he (being an unbeliever) is not of your family. He is one of unrighteous conduct (which embodied his unbelief). So do not ask of Me what you have no knowledge of. I admonish you so that you do not behave as one among the ignorant."
11|47| (Noah) said: "O my Lord! I seek refuge in You, lest I should ask of You what I have no knowledge of. And unless You forgive me and have mercy on me, I will indeed be among the losers."
11|48| He was told: "O Noah! Get you down in peace and safety from Us, and with blessings upon you and upon the communities (of believers) who are with you (and those to descend from you and them). (There will also be other) communities (of unbelievers) – We will provide f or them to enjoy themselves for a term and then there will visit them from Us a painful punishment."
11|49| Those are accounts of some exemplary events of the unseen (a time and realm beyond any created’s perception) that We reveal to you, (O Messenger). Neither you nor your people knew them before this. Then (seeing that there is no substantial difference between the conditions in which the Messengers carried out their missions and the reactions they encountered) be patient (with their reactions and their persistence in unbelief). The (final, happy) outcome is in favor of the God-revering, pious.
11|50| And to (the people of) ‘Ad We sent their brother Hud. He said: "O my people! Worship God alone: you have no deity other than Him. You are only fabricators of falsehood (in attributing partners to Him).
11|51| "O my people! I ask of you no wage for it (for conveying the Message to you); my wage is due from only Him Who originated me with a particular character. Will you not use your reason?
11|52| "O my people! Implore your Lord to forgive you (for the sins you have so far committed) and turn to Him repentant that He may cause the sky to pour down upon you abundant rain, and add strength to your strength. So, do not turn your backs (on this message that I convey to you), as disbelieving criminals!"
11|53| "O Hud!" they said: "You have brought us no clear sign (– a miracle to prove your Messengership). We are not going to forsake our deities on your mere saying so, the more so as we do not believe you.
11|54| "We say only that some of our deities have possessed you with evil." Hud said: "Surely I call God to witness, and you too be witnesses, that I am free of what you associate (with God as partners with Him),
11|55| "Apart from Him (I only take Him as Deity and Lord). So, scheme against me all together, and then give me no respite!
11|56| "I have put my trust in God, my Lord and your Lord. No living creature is there but He holds it by its forelock and keeps it under His complete control. Surely, my Lord is on a straight path (He governs all that exists and carries out His decrees rightly and with absolute justice).
11|57| "If you turn your backs (on the Message I convey to you, know that) I have conveyed to you what I was sent with to you. My Lord will (if you continue in your rejection) cause another people to take your place, whereas you cannot harm Him in the least. Surely, my Lord keeps watch and record of all things."
11|58| And when Our judgment came to pass (because the people of ‘Ad did continue in their rejection), We saved Hud and those who believed with him out of a mercy from Us (because of their faith, righteousness and patience): We saved them from a harsh punishment.
11|59| Such were the ‘Ad. They obstinately rejected the Revelations of their Lord (the signs and miracles proving His Oneness and all other essentials of faith) and they rebelled against His Messengers (by rejecting the Messenger – Hud – sent to them), and followed every stubborn tyrant.
11|60| And a curse was made to pursue them in this world, and on the Day of Resurrection. Beware! The ‘Ad disbelieved in their Lord with ingratitude; so away with the ‘Ad, the people of Hud!
11|61| And to (the people of) Thamud (We sent) their brother Salih (as Messenger to convey the same message): "O my people! Worship God alone: you have no deity other than Him. He has raised you from the earth and settled you in it, enabling your dignity and prosperity. So, ask forgiveness of Him (for the sins you have so far committed) and turn to Him repentant. Assuredly, my Lord is All-Near, All-Responsive (to the call of all beings that call upon Him)."
11|62| They said: "O Salih! Before this, you were a source of hope among us. Would you now seek to prevent us from worshipping what our forefathers used to worship? Indeed we are in real doubt concerning what you call us to."
11|63| He said: "O my people! What do you think – if I stand on a clear evidence from my Lord, and He has granted me a mercy from Himself – who could help me against God were I to disobey Him? You would add to me nothing but ruin.
11|64| "O my people! This is the she-camel from God as a sign for you (of the kind you demand to see before you believe). So leave her alone to pasture on God’s earth, and touch her with no evil lest an imminent punishment should seize you."
11|65| But (unable to bear to see her as an evidence of the truth of Salih’s message) they cruelly slaughtered her. Then he (Salih) said: "Enjoy the life in your habitations three days more, (then will be your ruin). This is a threat that will not be proved false."
11|66| So when Our judgment came to pass, We saved Salih and those who believed with him out of mercy from Us (because of their faith, righteousness, and patience), from the ignominy of that day. Surely your Lord is the All-Powerful, the All-Glorious with irresistible might.
11|67| And the awful blast seized those who committed the greatest wrong (by associating partners with God), so that they lay prostrate lifeless in their very dwellings,
11|68| As though they had never lived there in prosperity. Beware! The Thamud disbelieved in their Lord (and were ungrateful for His favors), so away with the Thamud!
11|69| And Our (heavenly) envoys came (in human form) to Abraham with glad tidings. They said "Peace!", and he (returning the greeting) said "Peace!" Without delay, he brought them a roasted calf.
11|70| But when he saw that their hands did not reach out to it, he was doubtful of them (deeming their conduct strange) and became apprehensive of them. They said: "Do not fear! We have been sent to the people of Lot."
11|71| Meanwhile his (old, infertile) wife, standing by, felt she was menstruating (and smiled); and We gave her the glad tidings of (the birth of) Isaac and, after Isaac, of (his son) Jacob.
11|72| She said: "Oh, woe is me! Shall I bear a child, now that I am an old woman, and this my husband is an old man? That would be a strange thing indeed!"
11|73| They (the envoys) said: "Are you surprised at God’s command? The mercy of God and His blessings be upon you, O people of the house! Surely He is All-Praiseworthy (as the Lord Who meets all needs of His servants), All-Sublime."
11|74| So when the apprehension left Abraham and the glad tiding was conveyed to him, he began to argue with Our envoys to plead with Us on behalf of the people of Lot.
11|75| Abraham was indeed most clement, tender-hearted, ever-turning to God with all his heart.
11|76| "O Abraham! Cease from this! For sure, the command of your Lord has already gone forth; and there is coming upon them a punishment not to be turned back."
11|77| And when Our envoys came to Lot, he was troubled on their account and felt himself powerless to protect them, and he said: "This is a distressful day."
11|78| His people came rushing to him, driven by their perverted desire, as they had before that been committing such abominations. Lot said: "O my people! Here are my daughters; they are utterly clean for you (to satisfy your desires in wedlock). Have fear of God, and do not disgrace me in respect of my guests. Is there not among you one right-minded man?"
11|79| They said: "You know well that we have no claim on your daughters; and you surely know well what we desire."
11|80| He said: "O! would that I had power to resist you, or that I could lean upon some strong support!"
11|81| They (the envoys) said: "O Lot! We are envoys of your Lord. They will not reach you. So, set out with your family in a part of the night, and let no one among you turn round – all save your wife, for that which is to befall them will befall her as well. Their appointed time is the morning. Is the morning not near?"
11|82| So when Our judgment came to pass, We overturned (those sinful towns), and rained down on them stones of baked clay one after another,
11|83| (Each stone) marked out by your Lord (for a particular individual). And they are never far from wrongdoers (in all times and places).
11|84| And (to the people of) Midian (We sent as Messenger) their brother Shu‘ayb. He said (conveying the same message): "O my people! Worship God: you have no deity other than Him. Do not give short measure and weight (in your dealings). Surely I see you affluent (in wealth which you have gained in unlawful ways), and I fear for you the punishment of an all-encompassing Day.
11|85| "O my people! Give full measure and weight, with perfect equity, and do not wrong deprive people by depriving them of what is rightfully theirs, and do not go about acting wickedly in the land, causing disorder and corruption.
11|86| "What God leaves with you (as lawful profit) is better for you, if you are believers. I am not a keeper and watcher over you."
11|87| They said: "O Shu‘ayb! Does your Prayer-rite command you that we should forsake all that our forefathers used to worship, or that we should cease doing whatever we wish with our property? Surely you are one mild-mannered, and the one right-minded."
11|88| He answered: "O my people! What do you think – if I stand on a clear evidence from my Lord, and out of His provision He provides for me? I do not (in hope of worldly gain and provoking disorder) act in opposition to you (myself doing) what I ask you to avoid. What I seek is only to set things right so far as I am able. My success in my task depends on God alone. In Him have I put my trust, and to Him do I always turn with all my heart.
11|89| "O my people! Let your dissent from me not cause you to sin so that there befall you the like of what befell the people of Noah, or the people of Hud, or the people of Salih. And the people of Lot (who were subjected to the same doom) did not live far from you.
11|90| "Implore your Lord to forgive you (for the sins you have so far committed) and turn to Him repentant. Surely my Lord is All-Compassionate (especially towards His servants who turn to Him), All-Loving."
11|91| "O Shu‘ayb!" they said: "We do not understand much of what you say, and we see you indeed as a weak one among us. And, were it not for your tribe (esteemed among us), we would most certainly have stoned you to death. Know well that we do not hold you in esteem as having power over us."
11|92| He replied: "O my people! Do you hold my tribe in greater esteem than God, that you take Him as something to cast behind you and forget? But surely my Lord encompasses (with His Knowledge and Power) all that you do.
11|93| "O my people! Do then all that may be within your power, while I am at work (doing my task). In time you will come to see and know who it is that will be visited by a punishment to disgrace him, and who it is that speaks falsehood and will be contradicted in his speech. Wait and watch, then, and I am watching with you!"
11|94| And so when Our judgment came to pass, We saved Shu‘ayb and those who believed in his company out of a mercy from Us (because of their faith, righteousness and patience), and the awful blast seized those who acted wrongly to their own ruin, so that they lay prostrate lifeless in their own dwellings
11|95| As though they had never lived there in affluence. So, away with the (people of) Midian, just as the Thamud have been done away with!
11|96| And We indeed sent Moses with Our clear signs (miracles to support him), and a manifest authority (from Us),
11|97| To the Pharaoh and his chiefs, but they (his chiefs, his own people, and many among the Children of Israel) followed the rule of the Pharaoh; and the rule of the Pharaoh was by no means a guide right and just (and no tyrant in the mould of the Pharaoh has ever done differently).
11|98| He will go before his people on the Day of Resurrection and lead them to the Fire (as cattle are led to water)! How evil a "watering-place" to be led to!
11|99| And a curse was made to pursue them in this world, and on the Day of Resurrection. How evil is the gift offered!
11|100| That is something of the accounts of some townships (that were destroyed in the past). We relate it to you (O Messenger). Among them are some still standing, and some extinct like a mown field.
11|101| We did not wrong them, but they wronged themselves. When the judgment of your Lord came to pass, their deities which they used to invoke apart from God proved of no avail to them, and they increased them not save in ruin.
11|102| That is how your Lord seizes the townships when He seizes them when they are wrongdoers. His seizing is indeed painful, severe.
11|103| Surely in that is a sign (lesson and warning) for those who fear the punishment of the Hereafter. That is a Day when all humankind will be gathered together, and that is a Day bound to be witnessed (experienced by all living creatures in their whole being).
11|104| We do not postpone it beyond a term already appointed (by Us).
11|105| On the Day when it comes no one will speak unless by His leave. Among those (gathered together) some are wretched and some happy.
11|106| As for those who will be wretched (on that Day, on account of the deeds they have earned), they will be in the Fire, wherein moaning and wailing will be their lot,
11|107| Abiding there so long as the heavens and the earth endure, except as your Lord wills. Surely your Lord is the Sovereign Doer of what He wills.
11|108| And as for those who are happy (having been blessed by God with faith and good deeds), they will be in Paradise, abiding there so long as the heavens and the earth endure, except as your Lord wills – as a gift unceasing.
11|109| So do not be in doubt of anything that those (misguided people) worship. They but worship as their forefathers worshipped in time past; and We will most certainly pay them their due in full, undiminished.
11|110| And, indeed, We granted Moses the Book, and discord arose about it, (just as your people, O Messenger, differ concerning the Book We are revealing to you. So do not be grieved). Had it not been for a decree already issued by your Lord (postponing the final, decisive judgment until an appointed term), it would indeed have been judged between them. They (your people) are surely in serious doubt, truly uncertain, concerning it (the Qur’an).
11|111| And surely for each of them – your Lord will certainly pay them in full for their deeds. He is indeed fully aware of all that they do.
11|112| Pursue, then, what is exactly right (in every matter of the Religion) as you are commanded (by God), and those who, along with you, have turned (to God with faith, repenting their former ways, let them do likewise); and do not rebel against the bounds of the Straight Path (O believers)! He indeed sees well all that you do.
11|113| And do not incline towards those who do wrong (against God by associating partners with Him and against people by violating their rights), or the Fire will touch you. For you have no guardians and true friends apart from God, (but if you should incline towards those who do wrong,) you will not be helped (by Him).
11|114| Establish the Prayer (O Messenger) at the beginning and the end of the day, and in the watches of the night near to the day. Surely good deeds wipe out evil deeds. This is advice and a reminder for the mindful who reflect.
11|115| And be patient, persevering (in doing good, avoiding mistakes, and against all kinds of persecution you are made to suffer in God’s cause), for surely God never leaves to waste the reward of those devoted to doing good, aware that God is seeing them.
11|116| If only there had been among the generations before you (of whom some We destroyed) people with lasting qualities (such as faith, knowledge, virtue, and good deeds, whose goal was what is lasting with God, the eternal life of the Hereafter, and) who would warn against disorder and corruption on earth! Among them only a few, included among those whom We saved, did this. But those who did wrong (against God by associating partners with Him, and against people by violating their rights) were lost in the pursuit of pleasures without scruples, and were criminals committed to accumulating sins.
11|117| And it has never been the way of your Lord to destroy the townships unjustly while their people were righteous, dedicated to continuous self-reform and setting things right in the society.
11|118| If your Lord had so willed (and withheld from humankind free will), He would have made all humankind one single community (with the same faith, worldview, and life-pattern). But (having free choice) they never cease to differ (and follow diverse paths diverging from the Straight Path),
11|119| Save those on whom your Lord has mercy (and guides to the Straight Path because of the merits they have). It is for that He created them. And thus the word of your Lord will have been fulfilled: "I will fill Hell with all those (deserving it) among the jinn and humankind."
11|120| All that We relate to you of the exemplary narrative of (the lives of some of the earlier) Messengers is in order that whereby We make firm your heart. In all these accounts there comes to you the truth, as well as an instruction and a reminder for the believers.
11|121| Say to those who do not believe: "Do all that may be within your power, while we too are doing (our task).
11|122| "And wait on, we too are waiting."
11|123| To God belongs (absolute dominion and full knowledge of) the unseen of the heavens and the earth, and to Him alone is the whole matter referred (for final judgment). So worship Him, and put your trust in Him. Your Lord is by no means unaware and unmindful of what you do.
12|1| Alif. Lam. Ra. These are the Revelations of the Book clear in itself and clearly showing the truth.
12|2| We send it down as a qur’an (discourse) in Arabic so that you may reflect (on both its meaning and wording) and understand.
12|3| We are about to relate to you (O Messenger) the best of narratives (of the past) by Our revealing to you this Qur’an. Before this, indeed you were unaware of it.
12|4| When Joseph said to his father: "O my father! I saw in a dream eleven stars, as well as the sun and the moon: I saw them prostrating themselves before me."
12|5| He (Jacob) said: "O my son! Do not relate your dream to your brothers, lest (out of envy) they devise a scheme against you. For Satan is a manifest enemy to humankind (and can incite them to do such a thing).
12|6| "So will your Lord choose you and impart to you some knowledge of the inner meaning of all happenings (including dreams), and complete His favor upon you and upon the family of Jacob, as He completed it formerly upon your forefathers Abraham and Isaac. Surely, your Lord is All-Knowing, All-Wise.
12|7| Assuredly, in (this account of) Joseph and his brothers there are many signs (messages) for seekers of truth.
12|8| When they (the brothers addressing one another) said: "Joseph and his brother are indeed more loved by our father than we are, even though we are a powerful band (of greater use to him). Surely, our father is manifestly mistaken."
12|9| (One of them said:) "Kill Joseph, or cast him out in some distant land so that your father’s attention should turn only to you, and after that you may again become righteous people."
12|10| Another of them, putting forward his view, said: "Do not kill Joseph, but rather, cast him into the depth of the well (that you know of), that some caravan may pick him up – (do that) if you are seriously intending to take action."
12|11| They said (having agreed on this) to their father: "Our father! Why will you not trust Joseph with us, while we are his sincere well-wishers?
12|12| "Let him go out with us tomorrow, that he may enjoy himself and play; surely we will take good care of him."
12|13| He (Jacob) said: "Indeed, it grieves me that you should take him with you, and I fear lest a wolf should devour him while you are inattentive of him."
12|14| They said: "If a wolf should devour him when we are so strong a company, then we should surely be lost!"
12|15| And so they went away with him, and decided to put Joseph in the depth of the well, (which they did). We revealed to him: "You will most certainly remind them of this deed of theirs while they are unaware (neither knowing nor understanding all that has transpired)."
12|16| And at nightfall they returned to their father, weeping.
12|17| They said: "Our father! We went off racing with one another, and left Joseph behind by our things, then a wolf devoured him. But we know that you will not believe us, even though we speak the truth."
12|18| They had brought his shirt back with false blood on it. Jacob said: "Rather, your (evil-commanding) souls have tempted you to do something evil. So (the proper recourse for me is) a becoming patience (a patience that endures without complaint). God it is Whose help is sought against (the situation) that you have described."
12|19| And there came a caravan, and they sent forth one among them to fetch water. He let down his bucket (into the well). "Good luck!" he exclaimed: "(There is) a youth here!" So they hid and preserved him as merchandise to sell. God had full knowledge of what they were doing.
12|20| And they sold him for a paltry price – a few silver coins – so little did they value him.
12|21| The man who bought him in Egypt said to his wife: "Give him honorable, good lodging. It may be that he will prove useful to us or we may adopt him as a son." Thus did We establish Joseph in the land (Egypt), that We would impart to him knowledge and understanding of the inner meaning of events, including dreams. God always prevails in whatever be His Will, but most people do not know (that it is so).
12|22| When Joseph reached his full manhood, We granted him authority with sound, wise judgment, and special knowledge. Thus do We reward those devoted to doing good as if seeing God.
12|23| And the woman in whose house he was living sought to enjoy herself by him. She bolted the doors and said, "Come, please!" He said: "God forbid! My lord (your husband) has given me honorable, good lodging. Assuredly, wrongdoers never prosper."
12|24| Certainly, she was burning with desire for him; and he would have desired her had it not been that he had already seen the argument and proof of his Lord (concerning chastity and good conduct, and so was anxious only about how to escape her). We did it in that way (We showed to him Our argument and proof) so that We might avert from him an evil and indecency. For he was one of Our servants endowed with perfect sincerity and purity of intention in faith and practicing the Religion.
12|25| So they raced to the door and she tore his shirt from the back, and they met her master (husband) by the door. She cried: "What should be the recompense for him who purposes evil against your household – except imprisonment or a grievous punishment?"
12|26| He (Joseph) said: "She it was who sought to enjoy herself by me." And one of those present, a member of her household, said: "If his shirt has been torn from the front, she is telling the truth, and he is a liar.
12|27| "But if it is torn from the back, then she is lying, and he is truthful."
12|28| So when he (her husband) saw that his shirt was torn from the back, he (turned to his wife and) said: "This is from the guile of you women; for sure your guile is great."
12|29| (To Joseph) he said "Do not mention this (to anyone)." (To his wife) he said: "Ask forgiveness for your sin; for surely you have committed a sin."
12|30| Women (gossiping) in the city said: "The minister’s wife has sought to enjoy herself by her slave-boy. Certainly it (her desire for him) has pierced her heart with love. We see that she has plainly lost her wits and her way."
12|31| When she heard of their sly whispers, she sent for them, and prepared for them a place of reclining for a sumptuous meal. She gave to each one of them a knife and said (to Joseph): "Come out before them!" When they saw him, they were so stricken with admiration of him that they cut their hands, exclaiming: "God save us! This is no human mortal; he is but a noble angel!"
12|32| She said: "This is the one about whom you have been taunting me. And, indeed, I did seek to enjoy myself by him, but he was resolute in his chastity. Yet if he continues to refuse what I command him, he shall certainly be imprisoned, and shall certainly find himself among the humbled!"
12|33| He (imploring God) said: "My Lord! Prison is dearer to me than what they bid me to. If You do not avert their guile from me, I might incline towards them and become one of the ignorant (those who succumb to such temptations)."
12|34| So his Lord answered him and averted from him their guile. Surely He it is Who is the All-Hearing, the All-Knowing.
12|35| It occurred to them (the noblemen and his household), even after they had seen the signs (of Joseph’s innocence), that they should imprison him for a time.
12|36| And there entered the prison with him two young men. One of them said (to Joseph one day): "I dreamed that I was pressing grapes for wine." The other said: "I dreamed that I was carrying bread upon my head, of which birds were eating." "Inform us of their meaning. For sure we see that you are of those endowed with the best qualities."
12|37| He said: "The meal which you are fed (daily) will not come to you but I will have informed you of their meaning before it comes to you. This is of the knowledge that my Lord has taught me. Surely I have left behind me the way of a people who do not have faith in God (as they ought to have faith), and who do not believe in the Hereafter.
12|38| "I have followed the way of my fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. It is not for us to associate anything with God as partner. This (His teaching and calling us to belief in Him without associating any partners with Him) is from God’s grace and bounty on us and on all people, but most people do not give thanks (in return, by believing firmly in His Oneness and worshipping Him alone).
12|39| "O my two fellow-prisoners! Are many diverse lords more reasonable and better (to attribute creation to and believe in and obey), or God, the One, the All-Overwhelming (holding absolute sway over all that exists)?
12|40| "What you worship apart from Him is nothing but names that you and your forefathers made up for them. (In the absolute sense) judgment and authority rest with none but God alone: He has commanded that you worship none but Him alone. This is the upright, ever-true Religion, but most people do not know (and they act from their ignorance).
12|41| "(As for your dreams:) O my fellow-prisoners! One of you will again give his lord (the king) wine to drink. As to the other, he will be hanged, and birds will peck at his head. The matter about which you inquired has already been decided."
12|42| He said to the one of the two whom he deemed would be delivered: "Mention me in the presence of your lord." But Satan caused him to forget to mention him to his lord, and so he (Joseph) remained in prison some more years.
12|43| And the king said one day: "I saw in a dream seven fat cows being devoured by seven lean ones, and seven green ears of grain and another (seven) dry. O you courtiers! Enlighten me about my dream, if you know how to interpret dreams."
12|44| They said: "Jumbles of dream images. And we are not knowledgeable in the interpretation of dream images."
12|45| Now after all that time, of the two (prisoners) the one who had been delivered remembered (what Joseph had asked him to remember) and he said: "I will inform you of its meaning, so send me forth!"
12|46| (Coming to Joseph in the prison, he said): "Joseph, O man of truth! Enlighten us about seven fat cows being devoured by seven lean ones, and seven green ears of grain and another (seven) dry – so that I can return to the people (of the court). And it may be that (after I have told them your interpretation of the dreams) they will come to know (what manner of man you are and the injustice done to you)."
12|47| He said: "You shall sow for seven years as usual, but that which you have harvested, leave it in the ear, all save a little which you eat.
12|48| "Then will come after that seven hard years, which will consume what you have laid up for them, all but a little you should keep in store (to use as seed stock).
12|49| "And thereafter will come a year in which the people will be relieved (with abundance in place of scarcity), and in which they will press (fruit for drink and oil, and milk from their cattle)."
12|50| (Informed of the meaning of his dream,) the king said, "Bring him to me!" When the messenger (of the king) came to him, Joseph said: "Go back to your lord and ask him to find out the facts of the case about the women who cut their hands. For sure my Lord has full knowledge of their guile (and my innocence)."
12|51| (The king had the woman assembled before him and) he said: "What happened (between you and Joseph) when you sought to enjoy yourselves by him?" They said: "God save us! We perceived no evil at all on his part!" And the wife of the minister said: "Now the truth has come to light. It was I who sought to enjoy myself by him. He was indeed truthful (in all he said and true to his lord)."
12|52| (Joseph was informed of the women’s confessions and the declaration of his innocence. He explained why he had asked for the inquiry:) "This was so that he (my former lord) should know that I did not betray him in his absence, and that God never guides the schemes of the treacherous (to success).
12|53| "Yet I do not claim my self free of error, for assuredly the human soul always commands evil, except that my Lord has mercy (which saves us from committing evil acts). Surely my Lord is All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate (especially toward His believing servants)."
12|54| The king said: "Bring him to me, so that I may appoint him to myself (as my personal counselor)." And when he had conversed with him, he said: "From this day you shall be of high standing with us, established and trusted."
12|55| He (Joseph) said: "Place me in charge over the store-houses of the land, for I am a good custodian, a knowledgeable one."
12|56| Thus We established Joseph in the land (of Egypt) with authority. He was fully accepted therein, able to go and execute his authority wherever he willed. We visit with Our mercy whomever We will. We do not leave to waste the reward of those devoted to doing good as if seeing God.
12|57| However, certainly the reward of the Hereafter is better for those who believe and keep from disobedience to God in reverence for Him and piety.
12|58| And (after some years) Joseph’s brothers came to Egypt and presented themselves before him: he knew them (at once), they did not recognize him.
12|59| When he provided them with their provisions, he said: "Bring me (when you come next time) that (step) brother of yours by your father. Do you not see that I fill up the measure and I am the best of hosts?
12|60| "But if you do not bring him, I will no longer have any measure of provisions to give you, and you shall not be given leave to come near me."
12|61| They said: "We will try to win him from his father, indeed we will do our utmost."
12|62| He (Joseph) said to his servants: "Put back their merchandise (with which they had bartered) into their saddlebags, so that they may find it there when they have returned home, and hence will (be more eager to) return."
12|63| So when they went back to their father, they said: "O our father! We will be denied any measure (of provisions unless we take our brother), so send our brother with us that we may obtain our measure. For we will surely take every care of him."
12|64| He said: "Shall I to entrust him to you as I once entrusted his brother to you before? However, God is the Best as protector and He is the Most Merciful of the merciful."
12|65| Then when they opened their packs, they found that their merchandise had been returned to them. "Father," they said, "What more should we ask for? Here is our merchandise returned to us. So we will again be able to get provisions for our family! We will guard our brother and (his being with us) we will have an additional camel-load. That will be an easy gain."
12|66| He said: "Never will I send him with you until you give me a solemn pledge in God’s Name that you will indeed bring him back to me, unless you are (in some insurmountable way) overwhelmed. Then, when they gave him their solemn pledge, he said: "God is witness to and watcher over all that we say (and only on Him can we rely to fulfill our pledges)."
12|67| He said (by way of advice at the time of their departure): "O my sons! Do not enter the city by one gate (in a single company), but enter by different gates. Yet I can be of no avail whatever to you against anything God wills. Judgment and authority rest with none but God alone. In Him have I put my trust, and whoever would entrust themselves should put their trust in Him."
12|68| They entered the city in the manner their father had enjoined on them, although this would have proved of no avail whatever to them against anything God had willed; it was but a need in Jacob’s soul, which he thus satisfied. For he was possessed of knowledge because We had taught it to him, but most people do not know (nor do they act according to the knowledge from God).
12|69| And when they presented themselves before Joseph, he welcomed his brother to himself, and (having taken him aside) said: "Surely it is I – I am your brother, so do not grieve over what they did."
12|70| Then when he had provided them with their provisions, he put the drinking-cup (belonging to him) in his brother’s saddlebag (as a gift). Then, (as they had just departed on their return) a herald called out: "O you people of the caravan! You are surely thieves!"
12|71| They said, turning towards them (the herald and his companions): "What is it that you are missing?"
12|72| They said: "We are missing the king’s goblet, and whoever brings it shall receive a camel-load (as reward)." (And the herald added:) "I have pledged myself to recovering it."
12|73| They (the brothers) said: "By God! Certainly you know well that we did not come to provoke disorder and corruption in this land, and we have never been thieves!"
12|74| They said: "What, then, shall be the penalty for it if you are proved liars?"
12|75| They said: "The penalty for it is: the (freedom of the) one in whose saddlebag it is found is the penalty for it. That is how we recompense the wrongdoers (who steal)."
12|76| (So they were brought back before Joseph to be searched.) He began with their sacks before his brother’s sack; and then he brought the drinking-cup out of his brother’s sack. In this way We made an arrangement for Joseph. Under the king’s law, he could not have detained his brother, had not God so willed. Whomsoever We will, We raise in ranks. Above every owner of knowledge there is (always) one more knowledgeable (until God Who is the All-Knowing).
12|77| They (the other brothers) said: "If he has stolen – well, a brother of his stole before." But Joseph (endured their false accusation in silence and) held it secret in his soul and did not disclose it to them. He said (to himself): "You are indeed in a bad situation. God has full knowledge of (the truth of) what you allege."
12|78| "O minister!" they said: "He has a father, a very old man; so take one of us in his place. We see that you are indeed of those devoted to selfless kindness."
12|79| He said: "God forbid that we take any other but him with whom we found our merchandise; (if we did otherwise) then surely we (too) would be wrongdoers."
12|80| So, when they lost hope of moving him, they withdrew to take counsel among themselves. The eldest of them said: "Do you not know how your father took a solemn pledge from you in God’s Name, and how, before that, you failed with regard to Joseph? Never will I depart from this land, until my father gives me leave, or God judges for me (by ending my life or enabling me to win back my brother). And He is the Best of judges.
12|81| "Return to your father, and say: ‘Our father! Your son stole. We do not testify (to anything) except what we know; and we are not keepers of the Unseen.
12|82| ‘Inquire in the township where we were, and the caravan with whom we traveled hither. We are certainly telling the truth.’ "
12|83| (When they had returned to their father and made that speech to him) he said: "No! Rather, your (evil-commanding) souls have tempted you to something. So (the proper recourse for me now is, again,) a becoming patience (a patience that endures without complaint). It may be that God will bring them back to me all together. He it is Who is the All-Knowing, the All-Wise."
12|84| He turned away from them and said: "Alas, my grief for Joseph!" And his eyes turned white because of the grief. And he was restraining (any resentment toward his other sons, never displaying it to them).
12|85| They said: "By God! You will not cease mentioning Joseph until you are consumed, or you perish!"
12|86| He said: "I only disclose my anguish and sorrow to God, and I know from God what you do not know."
12|87| He said (when once more seeing off his sons): "O my sons, go forth and seek earnestly for Joseph and his brother; and do not despair of God’s Mercy, for none ever despairs of God’s Mercy, except people who disbelieve in Him."
12|88| They (went back to Egypt and once more) presented themselves before Joseph, saying: "O minister! Hardship has visited us and our family, and we have brought only merchandise of scant worth; but fill up for us the measure and be charitable to us. Surely God rewards the charitable."
12|89| He said: "Do you know what you did to Joseph and his brother at that time when you acted as if ignorant (of right and wrong)?"
12|90| They said: "Is it indeed you who are Joseph?" He said: "I am Joseph, and this is my brother. God has indeed been gracious to us. Surely whoever keeps from disobedience to God in reverence for Him and piety, and is patient – surely God will not leave to waste the reward of those devoted to doing good as if seeing God."
12|91| "By God," they responded, "God has indeed preferred you above us, and certainly we were sinful."
12|92| He said: "No reproach this day shall be on you. May God forgive you; indeed He is the Most Merciful of the merciful.
12|93| "Go with this shirt of mine and lay it over my father’s face, and he shall recover his sight; and come to me with all your people."
12|94| At the time that the (brothers’) caravan set out, their father said (to those around him): "Surely, I sense the fragrance of Joseph, unless you would consider me a dotard."
12|95| "By God," they said, "you are indeed still lost in your old error."
12|96| But when the bearer of the good tidings came (with Joseph’s shirt), Jacob laid it over his face and he regained his sight. (Soon the caravan of the brothers reached home.) Jacob said: "Did I not tell you that I know from God what you do not know?"
12|97| (Jacob’s sons confessed what they had done.) They said: "O our father! Ask God to forgive us our sins; surely we have been sinful."
12|98| He said: "I will ask my Lord to forgive you. Surely He it is Who is the All-Forgiving, the All-Compassionate."
12|99| (When Jacob’s family reached Egypt,) they presented themselves before Joseph (who had come out to welcome them). He embraced his parents, and said (addressing all those who came): "Enter Egypt by God’s will in security (free from fear of privation or grief)!"
12|100| He raised his parents on the throne and they all bowed down before Joseph (as a sign of loyalty to him). He said: "O my father! This is the meaning of my dream of long ago; my Lord has made it come true. He has indeed been gracious to me: He freed me from prison, and He brought you all from the desert after Satan had sown discord between me and my brothers. Truly, my Lord is subtly kind in the way He brings about whatever He wills. Surely, He it is Who is the All-Knowing, the All-Wise.
12|101| "My Lord! You have indeed granted me some important part of the rule and imparted to me some knowledge of the inner meaning of all happenings (including dreams). O You, Originator of the heavens and the earth each with particular features! You are my Owner and Guardian in this world and in the Hereafter. Take my soul to You a Muslim, and join me with the righteous."
12|102| That is an account of some exemplary events of the unseen (a realm and time beyond the reach of any created being’s perception) that We reveal to you, (O Messenger). You were not with them when those agreed upon their plans, and then were scheming (against Joseph).
12|103| Yet, be you ever so eager, most people will not believe.
12|104| You do not ask them any wage for it (for conveying the Qur’an to them). It is but a message and reminder to all conscious beings.
12|105| How many a sign there is in the heavens and earth that they pass by, being unmindful of the signs and giving no consideration to them.
12|106| And most of them do not even believe in God without associating partners with Him.
12|107| Do they deem themselves secure that there will not come upon them an overwhelming punishment of God, which will envelop them thoroughly, or that the Last Hour will not come upon them all of a sudden, without their being aware (of its coming)?
12|108| Say (to them, O Messenger): "This is my way: I call to God on clear evidence and with sure knowledge – I and those who follow me. All-Glorified is God (in that He is absolutely above having any partners) – and I am not one of those who associate partners with Him."
12|109| We did not send before you as Messengers any but men to whom We revealed, from amongst the people of the townships (where We raised them). Have they never traveled about the earth and beheld how was the outcome for those who came before them (those who persisted in associating partners with Him and in wrongdoing and transgression)? Assuredly, the abode of the Hereafter is best for those who keep from disobedience to God in reverence for Him and piety. Will you not, then, reason and understand?
12|110| So far so that when they (the earlier Messengers who all had to suffer much persecution for a long time) nearly lost hope and were convinced that they were denied, Our help came to them. And whoever We willed was saved. But Our mighty punishment cannot be averted from the guilty people committed to accumulating sin.
12|111| Indeed, in their exemplary life-stories there is a significant lesson for people of discernment. It (the Qur’an, which contains them) is not a discourse fabricated, but (a Divine Book revealed as) a confirmation of (the Divine authorship of and the truths still contained by) the Revelations prior to it, and an explanation of everything, and a guidance and mercy for people who will and do believe.
13|1| Alif. Lam. Mim. Ra. These are the Revelations of the Book; and what has been sent down on you from your Lord is the truth – yet most people do not believe.
13|2| God it is Who has raised the heavens without pillars you can see, then He established Himself on the Supreme Throne; and He made the sun and the moon subservient to His command, each running its course for a term appointed by Him. He directs all affairs (as the sole Ruler of creation); He sets out in detail the signs and proofs of the truth and the relevant Revelations included in the Book, that you may have certainty in the meeting with your Lord (on Judgment Day).
13|3| And it is He Who has spread the earth wide and set therein firm mountains and rivers, and of fruit of every kind He has made mated pairs. He covers the day with the night. Surely in that are signs (manifesting the truth) for people who reflect.
13|4| And on the earth are tracts close by one another (and yet different from one another), and gardens of vines, and cultivated fields, and date-palms growing in clusters from one root but standing alone, (all) watered with the same water; and yet as sustenance We have made some preferable to others (in certain respects). Surely in that are signs of truth for a people who use their reason.
13|5| If there is something for you to find strange, how strange their saying is: "What! After we have become dust, will we indeed be (raised up again) in a new creation?" Those are they who disbelieve in their Lord, and around whose necks are fetters (by which they are being dragged into the Fire). They are the companions of the Fire; they will abide therein.
13|6| They challenge you to hasten the coming upon them of the evil instead of the good, although there have indeed come to pass before them many exemplary punishments. Your Lord is indeed rich in forgiveness for humankind despite their wrongdoing, and your Lord is indeed severe in retribution.
13|7| Those who disbelieve say: "Why is not a miraculous sign (of the kind we desire) sent down on him from his Lord?" You are (O Messenger) but a warner, and for each people there is a guide (appointed by God).
13|8| God knows what any female bears (in her womb with all its traits from her conception of it until delivery), and what the wombs diminish and what they increase, (and by how much they may fall short in gestation, and by how much they may increase the average period), and everything with Him is by a determined measure.
13|9| The Knower of the Unseen and the witnessed (all that lies in the hidden and visible realms and beyond and within the reach of any created being’s perception), the All-Great, the All-Transcending.
13|10| (To Him) the one who holds his opinion in secret and the one who declares it are the same, and the one who hides himself (and his plans) under cover of night and the one who sallies out in the daylight.
13|11| (Every person advances through varying states before and after, and) by God’s command attendant angels succeeding one another accompany him before and after him to guard him (and record his deeds). God does not change the condition of a people unless they change what is in themselves. When God wills evil for a people (in consequence of their own evil deeds), it cannot be averted, and apart from Him, they have no protector.
13|12| He it is Who displays before you the lightning, giving rise to both fear (of being struck) and hopeful expectation (of rain), and builds the clouds heavy (with rain).
13|13| The thunder glorifies Him with His praise (that He is absolutely above having any partners, and that all praise belongs to Him exclusively) and so do the angels, in awe of Him. And He lets loose the thunderbolts and strikes with them whom He wills. Yet they stubbornly argue about God, (notwithstanding all evidence that) He is severe in repelling and retribution.
13|14| To Him alone is made the call of truth and the prayer of truth addressed. Those to whom they invoke and call others (to invoke), apart from Him, cannot answer them in any way – (so that he who invokes them is but) like one who stretches out his hands to water (praying) that it may come to his mouth, but it never comes to it. The prayer of the unbelievers is but destined to go to waste.
13|15| To God prostrate all that are in the heavens and the earth, willingly or unwillingly, as do their shadows in the mornings and the evenings.
13|16| Say: "Who is the Lord of the heavens and the earth?" Say: "God." Say (also): "Do you then take for guardians, apart from Him, , such as have no power to bring benefit to, or avert harm from, even themselves?" Say: "Are the blind and the seeing equal or are the depths of darkness and the light equal?" Or have they assigned to God partners who create the like of His creation so that the creation (that they make and God’s creation) seem alike to them (so that they cannot distinguish the true Creator?)" Say: "God is the Creator of all things, and He is the One, the All-Overwhelming."
13|17| He sends down water from the sky and the valleys flow (in abundance) each according to its measure, and the flood carries a swelling foam (on its surface). And out of what they smelt in the fire in order to make ornaments or utensils, there rises a scum like it. Thus does God strike a parable to illustrate truth and falsehood. For, as for the scum, it vanishes as does all dross, but that which is of use to people abides on earth. In this way does God strike parables.
13|18| For those who respond to (the call of) their Lord there is the fairest reward; and those who do not respond to Him – even if they possessed all that is on earth and its like besides, they would offer it as ransom (to be spared the punishment). Such are those whose is the most evil reckoning, and their final refuge is Hell: how evil a resting-place!
13|19| Is the one who knows that what is sent down to you from your Lord is the truth – is that one like him who is blind? Surely only people of discernment reflect and be mindful.
13|20| Those who fulfill God’s covenant (responsible for the order in the universe, and able to establish the peace, order and harmony in human life) and do not break the pledge (that they shall worship none save God, and fulfill all the moral, spiritual, and social obligations resulting from believing in and worshipping only One God);
13|21| And those who unite the bonds God has commanded to be joined (among kin as a requirement of blood relationship, and among people as required by human social interdependence), and stand in awe of their Lord, and fearful of (facing) the most evil reckoning;
13|22| And those who endure patiently (all adversities they face in God’s cause) in pursuit of where God’s good, eternal pleasure lies, and they establish the Prayer in conformity with its conditions, and spend of whatever We provide for them secretly and openly, and repel the evil with good. Such are those for whom there is the ultimate (everlasting) abode:
13|23| Gardens of perpetual bliss which they will enter, along with all who are righteous from among their ancestors, their spouses, and their descendants; and the angels will come to them from every gate, (saying):
13|24| "Peace be upon you, for that you endured patiently. How excellent is the ultimate (everlasting) abode!"
13|25| But those who break God’s covenant after its solemn binding, and sever the bonds God commanded to be joined, and cause disorder and corruption on the earth – such are those for whom there is curse (exclusion from God’s mercy), and for them there is the most evil abode.
13|26| God enlarges provision for whom He wills, and straitens it (for whom He wills). They (the unbelievers who have been given abundant provision and indulged in the present, worldly life oblivious of God and the Hereafter) rejoice in the present, worldly life, whereas the present, worldly life is but a fleeting enjoyment as compared with the Hereafter.
13|27| Those who disbelieve say: "Why isn’t a miraculous sign (of the kind we desire) sent down on him from his Lord?" Say (to them, O Messenger): "Surely God leads astray whomever He wills, and guides to Himself all who turn (to Him whole-heartedly),
13|28| Those who have believed (and become established in belief), and whose hearts find rest and contentment in remembrance of and whole-hearted devotion to God. Be aware that it is in the remembrance and of and whole-hearted devotion to God that hearts find rest and contentment.
13|29| Those (whose hearts have attained to rest and contentment) who have believed and who do good, righteous deeds – for them is the greatest happiness and the most beautiful of destinations.
13|30| For that end We have raised you as Messenger among a community before whom other (similar) communities have come and gone, that you may recite and convey to them what We reveal to you, whereas (in their ignorance) they disbelieve in the All-Merciful. Say: "He is my Lord. There is no deity save Him. In Him I have put my trust, and to Him is my recourse."
13|31| If at all through a discourse (qur’an) mountains were moved, or the earth were torn apart, or the dead were made to speak, (all would be only through this Qur’an so that the unbelievers would be compelled, having no choice but, to believe). No, but to God belongs the whole command (to decide what shall be and how it shall be). Do not yet those who believe accept that, if God had so willed, He would indeed have guided all humankind (to faith)? Those who disbelieve will not cease to be struck by severe blows for what they have been contriving, or these will alight close to their homes (to afflict them), until God’s promise (of the final victory of Islam or Judgment Day) is fulfilled. Surely God does not fail to keep the promise.
13|32| Messengers were certainly mocked before you. Yet (despite all that they did), I gave respite to those who disbelieved, but then I seized them (with terrible destructions). Then, (see) how was My retribution!
13|33| Is He Who watches over every soul and whatever it earns (to be denied or disobeyed)? Yet they associate partners with God. Say: "Name them (if anything can be a deity merely by calling it so)! Do you (presume to) inform Him of something (existent) on earth that He does not know? Or are you just uttering mere words (with neither meaning nor reference to anything existent and real)? No, but their own fictions are decked out to be appealing to those who disbelieve, and they are kept away from the right way. Whoever God leads astray, for him there is no guide.
13|34| For them is punishment in the life of this world, but the punishment of the Hereafter is yet more grievous, and they have none to guard them against God.
13|35| The Paradise promised to the God-revering, pious ones can be likened to a garden through which rivers flow. Its produce is everlasting, and so its shade. That is the ultimate outcome for those who keep from disobedience to God in reverence for Him and piety, just as the ultimate outcome for the unbelievers is the Fire.
13|36| Those to whom We granted the Book before rejoice in what is sent down to you. (Some do so because they believe that it is the expected final Revelation, and some because it contains passages confirming their Books and Prophets.) Yet among those parties (responding to the Book), some deny some of it (because it discloses their interpolations in their Books and does not serve their interests). Say (O Messenger): "I have only been commanded to worship God and not to associate any partners with Him. To Him I call (all people), and to Him is my destined return."
13|37| And so (as a Book, whose message is founded on belief in and worship of One God, and which should therefore be accepted by all who were given the Book before) We send down (this Qur’an) as a final judgment in the Arabic tongue. And, indeed, if you were to follow their desires and caprices after what has come to you of the Knowledge, you would have none to defend and protect you against God.
13|38| Most certainly We sent Messengers before you, and (like every other man) appointed wives and children for them. It was not (the way) for a Messenger to work a miracle (as a sign of his being a Messenger) except by God’s leave. Every appointed term has its own Revelation and law.
13|39| God effaces what He wills (of things and events He has created, and laws He has established), and He confirms and establishes (what He wills): with Him is the Mother of the Book.
13|40| Whether We let you (O Messenger) witness the fulfillment of some of what We have promised them, or whether We cause you to die (before it happens), still yours (by way of duty and command from Us) is only to convey the Message, and Ours is the reckoning.
13|41| Do they not see how We deal with the earth, reducing it of its outlying parts? God judges, and (when He has judged) there is none to revise His judgment. And He is swift at reckoning.
13|42| Those who were before them plotted (just as their descendants now do), but all schemes are owned by God (Who brings them to nothing and enforces His own "scheme"). He knows what every soul earns (by its intentions and deeds). So the unbelievers will know whose is the ultimate, everlasting abode.
13|43| Those who disbelieve say: "You are not a Messenger sent by God." Say (to them): "God suffices for a witness between me and you, and (as witnesses) those who have true knowledge of the Book."
14|1| Alif. Lam. Ra. (This is) a Book which We send down to you so that you may lead humankind, by their Lord’s leave, out of all kinds of (intellectual, spiritual, social, economic and political) darkness into the light, to the Path of the All-Glorious with irresistible might, the All-Praiseworthy (Who provides for them and all other beings and meets all their needs),
14|2| God, to Whom belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth; and woe to the unbelievers because of a severe punishment.
14|3| They choose the present, worldly life in preference to the Hereafter and bar (people) from God’s way, and seek to make it appear crooked – those have indeed gone far astray.
14|4| We have sent no Messenger save with the tongue of his people, that he might make (the Message) clear to them. Then God leads whomever He wills astray, and He guides whomever He wills. He is the All-Glorious with irresistible might, the All-Wise.
14|5| And, certainly, We sent Moses as Messenger with Our Revelations and signs (miracles to support him), saying: "Lead your people from all kinds of darkness into the light, and remind them (thereby preaching Our Message) of the Days of God. Surely in that are signs for all who are greatly patient and persevering (in God’s cause) and greatly thankful (to God).
14|6| And (recall) when Moses said to his people: "Remember God’s favor upon you when He saved you from the clan (the court and military aristocracy) of the Pharaoh, who were afflicting you with the most evil suffering (by enslaving you to such laborious tasks as construction, transportation and farming), slaughtering your sons and letting live your womenfolk (for further humiliation and suffering). In that was a grievous trial from your Lord.
14|7| And (remember also) when your Lord proclaimed: "If you are thankful (for My favors), I will most certainly give you more; but if you are ungrateful, surely My punishment is severe."
14|8| And Moses said: "Even if you and whoever else is on the earth were unbelieving and ungrateful, surely God is the All-Wealthy and Self-Sufficient (as Owner of everything that is or could be, so independent of all creation), All-Praiseworthy (to Whom belong all praise and gratitude)."
14|9| Has any account not reached you of the exemplary histories of those who lived before you – the people of Noah, and the ‘Ad and Thamud – and those who came after them? None save God has true knowledge about them. Their Messengers came to them with clear signs of the truth, but they thrust their hands into their mouths (in derision and anger, and frustrated by their inability to refute them), and said: "We certainly disbelieve in what you have been sent, and indeed we are in serious doubt about that to which you call us."
14|10| Their Messengers said: "Can there be any doubt about (the Existence, Oneness, and absolute Sovereignty of) God, the Originator of the heavens and the earth? He calls you so that He may forgive you your sins and grant you respite until a term appointed by Him (not destroying you because of your sins)." But they said: "You are but mortals like us; you desire to bar us from what our forefathers used to worship: well, then, bring us some clear authority."
14|11| Their Messengers said to them: "We are indeed only mortals like yourselves, but God has been specially gracious to whom He wills of His servants. It is not for us to bring you some authority (for our mission), unless it be by God’s leave; and so it is in God that the believers must put their trust.
14|12| "What reason do we have that we should not put our trust in God, seeing that He has guided us to our ways (that we follow)? So, we will surely endure patiently whatever hurt you may do us; and let all those who entrust themselves put their trust in God."
14|13| Those who disbelieve said to their Messengers: "Assuredly we will banish you from our land, unless you return to our faith and way of life." Then their Lord revealed to the Messengers: "Most certainly, We will destroy the wrongdoers,
14|14| "And most certainly We will make you dwell in the land after them. That is (My promise) for him who fears Me as (the All-Majestic, All-Powerful) God, and who fears My threat."
14|15| They (both the Messengers and unbelievers) sought a judgment (through test of right and might), and in the end every stubborn tyrant was frustrated (made to fail),
14|16| And Hell is awaiting him, and he is made to drink of oozing pus,
14|17| Sipping it little by little, yet hardly able to swallow it, and death besets him from every side though he cannot die, and a still harsher punishment lies ahead of him.
14|18| An exemplary likeness of those who disbelieve in their Lord: all their works are as ashes on which the wind blows fiercely on a stormy day (and so scatters). They have no control of anything that they have earned (to benefit from). That indeed is utmost error and failure.
14|19| Do you not see that God has created the heavens and the earth with truth (meaningfully, and with definite purpose, and on solid foundations of truth)? If He so wills (for the fulfillment of His purpose in creation), He can put you away and bring another generation (of humankind in your place).
14|20| And that is surely no great matter for God.
14|21| They will appear before God all together. Then those who were weak (in the world and followed the arrogant oppressors in their misguidance) will say to those who were arrogant and oppressed others: "We used to follow your lead: can you now avert from us anything of God’s punishment?" The others will answer: "If God had guided us (to the way to be saved), we would indeed have guided you to it. It is all the same for us now whether we are anguished (about it) or endure with patience; there is no escape for us!"
14|22| And Satan will say, when the matter is decided: "Surely God promised you something that was bound to come true; I too promised but I failed you. And I had no power over you, except that I appealed to you, and you answered me. So do not blame me, but blame yourselves. I cannot respond to your cry for help, nor can you respond to my cry for help. I reject your associating me as a partner with God (in belief or worship) in the past." Surely, for the wrongdoers (who have wronged and ruined themselves by denying God or associating partners with Him) there is a painful punishment.
14|23| But those who believed and did good, righteous deeds are admitted to the Gardens through which rivers flow, therein to abide by their Lord’s leave. Their greeting therein (among themselves and from God and the angels) will be "Peace!"
14|24| Do you not see how God strikes a parable of a good word: (a good word is) like a good tree – its roots holding firm (in the ground) and its branches in heaven,
14|25| It yields its fruit in every season due by its Lord’s leave. So God strikes parables for human beings, in order that they may reflect on them and infer the necessary lessons.
14|26| And the parable of a corrupt word is that of a corrupt tree uprooted from upon the earth, having no constancy.
14|27| God keeps firm those who believe by the true, firm word in the life of this world and in the Hereafter; and God leads the wrongdoers astray. And God does whatever He wills.
14|28| Do you ever consider those who exchanged God’s blessing (of thankfulness and faith) for ingratitude and unbelief, and caused their people to settle in the abode of ruin –
14|29| Hell – wherein they land to be roasted? How evil a place to settle in!
14|30| They have set up rivals to God (as deities, lords and objects of worship), and so they have deviated (themselves and other people) from His way. Say: "Enjoy yourselves (in this world). Your journey’s end is the Fire."
14|31| Tell those of My servants who believe that they must establish the Prayer in conformity with its conditions, and spend out of what We have provided for them (of wealth, power, and knowledge, etc.) secretly and openly, (and in God’s cause and to the benefit of the needy), before there comes a Day when there will be no trading nor friendship (that will bring any benefit).
14|32| God is He Who has created the heavens and the earth, and sends down water from the sky with which He brings forth fruits for your provision. And He has made the ships serviceable for you, so that they run upon the sea by His command, and He has made the rivers serviceable for you;
14|33| And He has made the sun and the moon constant in their courses, (and so) serviceable for you, and He has made the night and the day of service to you.
14|34| He has granted you from all that you ask Him. Were you to attempt to count God’s blessings, you could not compute them. But for sure humankind are much prone to wrongdoing (sins and errors of judgment) and to ingratitude.
14|35| And (remember) when Abraham prayed: "My Lord! Make this land (Makkah) secure, and preserve me and my children (my sons and their descendants) from ever worshipping idols.
14|36| "My Lord! They have indeed caused many among humankind to go astray. So, he who follows me is truly of me; while he who disobeys me, surely You are All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate.
14|37| "Our Lord! I have settled some of my offspring (Ishmael and his descendants) in an uncultivable valley near Your Sacred House, so that, our Lord, they may establish the Prayer; so make the hearts of people incline towards them, and provide them with the produce of earth (by such means as trade), so that they may give thanks (constantly from the heart and in speech, and in action by fulfilling Your commandments).
14|38| "Our Lord! Surely You know all that we keep secret as well as all that we disclose; nothing whatever, whether it be on earth or in heaven, is hidden from God.
14|39| "All praise and gratitude are for God, Who has granted me, despite my old age, Ishmael and Isaac. Indeed, my Lord is the Hearer of prayer.
14|40| "My Lord! Make me one who establishes the Prayer in conformity with its conditions, and (likewise) from my offspring (those who are not wrongdoers), Our Lord, and accept my prayer!
14|41| "Our Lord! Forgive me, and my parents, and all the believers, on the Day on which the Reckoning will be established."
14|42| Never reckon that God is unaware of what the wrongdoers are doing. He only defers them to a day when their eyes will stare (in terror);
14|43| Hurrying on in fear with necks outstretched and heads upraised, and their eyes are fixed on a point from which they are unable to look away, and their hearts are void (as if filled with air).
14|44| And warn humankind of the Day when the punishment will come upon them; and those who did wrong (by associating partners with God and other grave sins) will say: "Our Lord! Grant us respite for a short while – we will answer your call and follow the Messengers!" (And their entreaty will get the response:) "Did you not use to swear before that there would be no decline and fall for you?
14|45| "And you dwelt in the dwelling-places of those who wronged themselves (by associating partners with God and other grave sins), and it became clear to you how We had dealt with them, and We made examples for you (to enable you to grasp the truth and mend your ways)."
14|46| They schemed their schemes, but their schemes were in God’s disposition (entirely encompassed by His Knowledge and Power), even though their schemes were such as to shock mountains.
14|47| So do not reckon that God will fail to keep His promise to His Messengers. Assuredly, God is All-Glorious with irresistible might, Ever-Able to Requite (all wrongs).
14|48| On the Day when the earth is changed into another earth, and the heavens (also), they all appear before God, the One, the All-Overwhelming.
14|49| On that Day you will see all the disbelieving criminals linked together in shackles,
14|50| Clothed in garments of pitch and their faces covered by the Fire,
14|51| That God may recompense every soul for what it has earned. God is indeed swift at reckoning.
14|52| This is a clear message for humankind, that they may be warned by it, and that they should know that He is One God, and that people of discernment may reflect and be mindful.
15|1| Alif. Lam. Ra. These are the Revelations of the Book, a Qur’an clear in itself and clearly showing the truth.
15|2| Again and again will those who disbelieve wish that they had been Muslims.
15|3| Leave them that they may continue to eat and enjoy themselves, and that hope (for a long, easy life) distract them (from considering their main duty in life and considering their end). In time they will come to know (the truth).
15|4| And We did not destroy any township unless it had a known and recorded decree.
15|5| No community can ever hasten on the end of its term, nor can they delay it.
15|6| They say: "O you, on whom the Reminder (the Book of advice, warning, and instructions) is sent down, truly you are a madman.
15|7| "Why do you not bring down the angels to us if you are truthful (in your claim)!"
15|8| We do not send down the angels save with the truth (for a just reason and with wisdom, not to satisfy vain caprice or curiosity, and once the angels are sent down, the matter is decided, and) then they are allowed no (further) respite.
15|9| Indeed it is We, We Who send down the Reminder in parts, and it is indeed We Who are its Guardian.
15|10| Certainly We sent Messengers before you among the communities of old.
15|11| And there never came to them a Messenger but they did mock him.
15|12| Thus do We cause it (the Qur’an) to pass unheeded through the hearts of the disbelieving criminals.
15|13| They do not believe in it: for certain the pattern of life of the (sinful) peoples of old times has already passed.
15|14| Even if (as a miracle to convince them of the truth of God’s Message) We opened to them a gate in heaven and they kept ascending through it all the while,
15|15| They would say, "Our eyes are but spellbound; rather, we have been bewitched!"
15|16| (As evidence for a people open to belief) We have assuredly set in the heaven great constellations, and We have made it (the heaven) beautiful for those beholding;
15|17| And We have made it secure against every satan rejected (from God’s mercy),
15|18| Excepting one who listens by stealth, and is pursued (and destroyed) by a shooting-star clear to see.
15|19| And the earth – We have spread it out and set therein firm mountains, and caused to grow therein of every kind in balance and proportion (and in a measured quantity);
15|20| And We have provided means of livelihood therein for you, and for those for whom you do not provide (such as beasts, birds, and fish).
15|21| There is not a thing but the stores (for its life and sustenance) are with Us, and We do not send it down except in due, determined measure.
15|22| And We send the winds to fertilize, and so We send down water from the sky, and give it to you to drink (and use in other ways); it is not you who are the keepers of its stores (under earth).
15|23| Surely it is also We, We Who give life and cause to die, and We are the Inheritors (it is We Who remain after all others have passed away).
15|24| And well do We know those of you who have gone before and those who are to come later.
15|25| And your Lord – He will surely raise to life and gather them together (on Judgment Day). He is All-Wise, All-Knowing.
15|26| Assuredly We have created humankind from dried, sounding clay, from molded dark mud.
15|27| And the jinn We had created before, from smokeless, scorching fire penetrating through the skin.
15|28| And (remember) when your Lord said to the angels: "I am creating a mortal from dried, sounding clay, from molded dark mud.
15|29| "When I have fashioned him in due proportions and breathed into him out of My Spirit, then fall down prostrating before him (as a token of respect for him and his superiority)."
15|30| So the angels prostrated themselves, all of them together,
15|31| But Iblis did not; he refused to be among those who prostrated themselves.
15|32| (God) said: "O Iblis! What is the matter with you that you are not among those who have prostrated?"
15|33| (Iblis) said: "I am not one to prostrate myself before a mortal, whom You have created from dried, sounding clay, from molded dark mud."
15|34| (God) said: "Then get you down out of it; surely You are one rejected (from My mercy).
15|35| "And cursing is upon you until the Day of Judgment."
15|36| (Iblis) said: "Then, my Lord, grant me respite till the Day when they will all be raised from the dead!"
15|37| (God) said: "You are of the ones granted respite
15|38| "(But) until the Day of the appointed time known (to Me) (i.e. the Last Day)."
15|39| (Iblis said:) "My Lord! Because You have allowed me to rebel and go astray, I will indeed deck out as appealing to them on the earth (the worldly, material dimension of human existence and the path of error), and I will surely cause them all to rebel and go astray,
15|40| "Except Your servants from among them, endowed with sincerity in faith and Your worship."
15|41| (God) said: "This (path of sincerity in faith) is a straight path that I have taken upon Myself (to lead to Me).
15|42| "My servants – you shall have no authority over any of them, unless it be such as follow you being rebellious (against Me, as you are)."
15|43| And for all such (rebellious people), Hell is the promised place.
15|44| It has seven gates, with an appointed group of them for each gate.
15|45| The God-revering, pious ones are surely in Gardens and water-springs,
15|46| (And it is said to them): "Enter you here in peace, perfectly secure!"
15|47| We strip away whatever there is in their bosoms of rancor and jealousy (which they may have felt against each other while in the world). As brothers face to face, (they take their ease) on couches raised.
15|48| No sense of fatigue ever touches them, nor are they ever asked to leave.
15|49| Inform, (O Messenger,) My servants that I surely am the All-Forgiving, the All-Compassionate,
15|50| And that My punishment – it is indeed the painful punishment.
15|51| Inform them about the guests of Abraham:
15|52| They presented themselves before him and bade him peace. Abraham said: "We are apprehensive of you."
15|53| They said: "Do not be apprehensive. We have brought you the glad tidings of a boy to be endowed with profound knowledge."
15|54| He said: "Do you bring me glad tidings when old age has overtaken me, then how can you bring me such glad tidings?"
15|55| They said: "We have brought you the glad tidings with truth, so be not of those who despair."
15|56| He said: "Who would despair of his Lord’s mercy, other than those who are astray?"
15|57| He said: "Then (after that) what is your concern, O you (heavenly) envoys?"
15|58| They said: "Indeed, we have been sent to a people who are all criminals,
15|59| "Except for the family of Lot – we are surely to save them all
15|60| "Except his wife – about her God has decreed that she shall be among those who stay behind (and are destroyed)."
15|61| And when the envoys came to the family of Lot,
15|62| He said: "You are people unknown (here)."
15|63| They said: "No (do not be afraid)! We have come to you concerning that which they have persistently disputed (the inevitable consequence of their way of life).
15|64| "We have brought you the truth, and we are most certainly speaking the truth.
15|65| "So, set forth with your family in a part of the night, with yourself following them in the rear, and let no one among you turn round, but proceed whither you are ordered."
15|66| We made clear to him that decisive decree, that the root of those (sinful people) was to be cut off in the morning.
15|67| The people of the city came rejoicing at the news (that some handsome guests had arrived).
15|68| Lot said: "They are my guests; so do not put me to shame.
15|69| "Have fear of God, and do not disgrace me!"
15|70| They said: "Have we not forbidden you to offer protection and intercede for anyone in the world?"
15|71| Lot said: "Here are my daughters (whom you might lawfully take in marriage), if you have to be doing (something of that sort)!"
15|72| By your life (O Muhammad), they moved blindly and wildly in their delirium (of perversion).
15|73| The awful blast seized them at the sunrise,
15|74| And We turned them (the sinful towns) upside down, and rained down on them stones of baked clay.
15|75| Surely in this are signs (lessons and messages) for those who can read the signs (so as to understand the inner meaning of things and events).
15|76| They (the traces of those destroyed towns) stand by a road that still exists.
15|77| Surely in that there is a manifest sign for the believers (for the truth of God’s decree, and the way He enjoins, and the call to it).
15|78| And the people of al-Aykah were also wrongdoers (who associated partners with God).
15|79| So We inflicted Our retribution on them (which they deserved), and both (of these sinful communities) lived by a highway plain to see.
15|80| And most certainly the people of al-Hijr denied the Messengers (by denying the Messenger sent to them).
15|81| So We presented to them Our signs (including miracles, and sent Our Revelations), but they turned away from them in aversion.
15|82| They hewed out dwellings in the mountains, feeling themselves secure (against any calamity).
15|83| But the awful blast seized them in the morning.
15|84| All (the wealth and power) that they acquired was of no avail to them.
15|85| We did not create the heavens and the earth and all that is between them save with truth (meaningfully, and with definite purpose, and on solid foundations of truth); and the Last Hour is surely bound to come. So, overlook (the faults of the people, O Messenger) with a gracious forbearance.
15|86| Surely, your Lord is He Who is the Supreme Creator, the All-Knowing.
15|87| And, indeed We have granted you the Seven Doubly-Repeated (Verses) and, (built on it), the Grand Qur’an.
15|88| Do not strain your eyes toward what We have given some groups among them (the unbelievers) to enjoy (in the life of this world), nor grieve over them (because of their attitude toward your mission); and lower your wings (of compassion and protection) for the believers.
15|89| And say (to those coming to Makkah from neighboring towns): "Surely I, I am the plain warner (against a punishment to be sent down),"
15|90| Just as We have sent down on those who make divisions;
15|91| Those who have broken the Qur’an into fragments (as they please).
15|92| So, by your Lord, We will surely question them all
15|93| About what they have been doing.
15|94| So from now on, proclaim what you are commanded to convey openly and in an emphatic manner, and do not care (whatever) those who associate partners with God (say and do).
15|95| We suffice you against all those who mock,
15|96| Those who adopt some deity along with God. In time they will come to know.
15|97| We certainly know that your breast is constricted by the (blasphemous) things that they say.
15|98| But glorify your Lord with His praise (proclaim that He is absolutely above having any partners, and that all praise belongs to Him exclusively) and be one of those who prostrate themselves before Him (regularly in the Prayer, which strengthens their humility).
15|99| And (continue to) worship your Lord until what is certain (death) comes to you.
16|1| God’s command (for the calamity to strike the unbelievers and their final destruction at the end of time) is bound to come, so (O unbelievers) do not wish it to be hastened (by asking the Messenger to bring it immediately in order only to deride and cast doubt on it). All-Glorified is He, and absolutely exalted above all that they associate with Him.
16|2| He sends down the angels with the Spirit (the life-giving Revelation) from His (absolutely pure, immaterial realm of) command upon whom He wills of His servants (saying): "Warn people that there is no deity save Me, so keep from disobedience to Me in reverence for Me and piety."
16|3| He has created the heavens and the earth in truth (meaningfully and with definite purpose, and on solid foundations of truth). Absolutely exalted is He above all that they associate (with Him).
16|4| He has created human from (so slight a beginning as) a mere drop of seminal fluid; and yet, he turns into an open, fierce adversary (selfishly disputing against the truth).
16|5| And the cattle He has created, from which you get warmth (of clothing) and other uses, and from them you get (food) to eat.
16|6| And in them there is beauty for you when you drive them home (in the evening) and when you take them out to pasture (in the morning).
16|7| They carry your loads to many a land which (otherwise) you would be unable to reach except with great hardship to yourselves. Indeed your Lord is All-Pitying, All-Compassionate.
16|8| And horses, mules and donkeys (has He created for you) to ride, as well as for ornament (the loveliness they add to your world); and (besides all that you see and know of,) He creates what you have no knowledge of.
16|9| With God (being your Creator) rests the goal of the way (to which He will guide and which you must follow). And some (ways) are crooked (misleading those who follow them). But if God had willed (to impose His guidance without granting people freedom of choice), He would surely have guided you all together (on His way).
16|10| He it is Who sends down from the sky water; you drink thereof, and thereof (drink) the shrubs on which you pasture your cattle.
16|11| With it He causes to grow for you the crops, the olives, the date-palms, the grapes, and all (other) kinds of fruit. Surely in this is a sign (manifesting the truth) for people who reflect.
16|12| He has made the night and the day and the sun and the moon to be of service to you, and the stars are made subservient by His command. Surely in that are signs for people who reason and understand.
16|13| And whatsoever He has created for you on earth of varying colors (and diverse forms and qualities): surely in that is a sign for people who reflect and are mindful.
16|14| And He it is Who has made the sea to be of service (to you) so that you eat from it fresh meat, and draw out from it ornaments that you wear. And you see the ships plowing their course through it so that you may go forth in quest of His bounty and give thanks (to Him Who has created all this).
16|15| And He has cast firm mountains on the earth lest it should shake with you (with its movement), and rivers, and roads, so that you may find your way;
16|16| And (other) way-marks, and they (people) find their way by the stars.
16|17| Is He then Who creates to be likened to him who does not create? Will you not reflect and be mindful?
16|18| And should you attempt to count God’s blessings, you could not compute them. God is indeed All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate (Who continues to provide for His servants despite their sins and even their denial of Him).
16|19| God knows whatever you keep concealed and whatever you disclose.
16|20| But those whom they invoke, apart from God, create nothing, rather they are themselves created.
16|21| Dead (they are), not living (nor can they give life, being themselves in need of it). And they do not know when they will be raised to life.
16|22| Your God is the One God, but those who disbelieve in the Hereafter – their hearts are in denial (of this most evident and essential truth, and the many other truths based on it): they are (too) arrogant (to accept dependence on the Supreme Being, and answerability to Him).
16|23| Without doubt, God knows whatever they keep concealed and whatever they disclose; He does not love the arrogant.
16|24| When it is said to them: "What is it that your Lord (Who sustains, protects, and raises you) has sent down (on the Messenger)?" They say: "Fables of the ancients."
16|25| Hence, they will bear their own burdens (of sin) in full on the Day of Resurrection and some of the burdens of those whom they, being ignorant, caused to go astray. Look now! How evil is the burden they load upon themselves!
16|26| Those before them (like them, persistent in unbelief, wrongdoing and evil) schemed (against the Messengers and the Divine Message they brought), so God struck what they built at its foundations, and the roof fell in upon them from above, and the doom came upon them without their perceiving whence it came.
16|27| Then on the Day of Resurrection He will disgrace them and will say: "Where are (those beings whom you claimed) as partners with Me and for whose sake you used to oppose (the believers), defying and disobeying (My guidance)?" Those who (in their lifetime) were endowed with the Knowledge declare: "Disgrace and evil are, this day, on the unbelievers:"
16|28| Those whose souls the angels take while they are still wronging themselves (by falsely associating partners with God, and committing evils). (When they see the punishment), they offer full submission, (saying in an attempt to excuse themselves): "We did not (mean to) do any evil." (But they are answered:) "No! Surely God has full knowledge of what you were doing (and your intentions therein).
16|29| "So, go in through the gates of Hell to abide therein." How evil, indeed, is the dwelling of the arrogant (those too haughty to accept God’s guidance).
16|30| Whereas it is said to those who keep from disobedience to God in reverence for Him and piety: "What is it that your Lord sends down (on the Messenger)?" They answer: "That which is purely good and to our benefit (in both worlds)." For those devoted to doing good in this world, aware that God is seeing them, there is good, and the abode of the Hereafter is indeed better. How excellent, indeed, is the abode of the God-revering, pious!
16|31| Gardens of perpetual bliss which they will enter, through which rivers flow. Therein they will have whatever they may desire. Thus does God reward the God-revering, pious –
16|32| Those whose souls the angels take whilst they are in a pious state (free of evil, and worshipping none but God alone), saying: "Peace be upon you! Enter Paradise for what you have been doing."
16|33| Are they (the unbelievers and/or those who associate partners with God) but waiting for the angels to come to them (to take their souls or bring them a disaster), or for your Lord’s command (to judge them and open Hell for them)? Even so did those before them. God did not wrong them but they did wrong themselves.
16|34| Then the evil consequences of what they used to do fell upon them, and that which they were mocking overwhelmed them.
16|35| Those who associate partners with God say: "Had God so willed, we would not have worshipped anything other than Him, neither we nor our forefathers; nor would we have declared anything unlawful without (a commandment from) Him." Even so did those who lived before them (and associated partners with God like them). But, then, is any duty laid upon the Messengers except to convey the Message clearly?
16|36| And certainly, We have raised within every community a Messenger (to convey the primordial Message): Worship God alone, and keep away from false deities and powers of evil (who institute patterns of faith and rule in defiance of God). Among them (past generations) were people whom God guided, just as there were among them those for whom straying was their just due. Go about, then, on the earth and look! How was the outcome for those who denied (God’s manifest signs and His Messengers)!
16|37| Though you long ardently for them (all humankind) to be rightly guided, God surely does not guide those whom He has led astray (as their just due). And they have no helpers (to defend them against God).
16|38| And by God they swear their most solemn oaths, "God will never raise from the dead anyone who has died!" No! but it is a promise (that He has laid) upon Himself in truth, but most people do not know (being ignorant and lacking desire for knowledge of the truth).
16|39| (He will indeed fulfill that promise and resurrect them,) so that He will make clear to people the truth about what they differ on, and so that those who disbelieve will know that they were liars.
16|40| (Raising the dead to life, like giving them life in the first place, is easy for Us:) Our word for a thing when We will it is simply Our saying to it, "Be!" and it is.
16|41| Those who emigrate (to another land) for God’s cause after they have been oppressed on account of their faith, We will surely give them goodly residence in the world, and their reward in the Hereafter is certainly greater. If only they (all people) knew (how great that reward is)!
16|42| Those (they are) who have persevered in patience (through all adversities), and it is in their Lord that they put their trust.
16|43| We did not send before you (O Muhammad) any but men to whom We revealed – and if you (O people) do not know, then ask the people of expert knowledge (those who have knowledge of the Divine Revelations) —
16|44| (We sent them with) clear proofs of the truth and Scriptures. And on you We have sent down the Reminder (the Qur’an) so that you may make clear to humankind whatever is sent down to them (through you of the truth concerning their present and next life), and that they may reflect.
16|45| Do they, who (in defiance of God’s grace) devise evil schemes, feel safe and secure that God will not cause the earth to swallow them, or that the punishment will not befall them without their perceiving whence it has come?
16|46| Or that He will not seize them in the midst of their strutting about (the land in pomp and show of dominion), and they are helpless to frustrate Him?
16|47| Or that He will not seize them with gradual wasting (of wealth and health giving them time to mend their ways)? For surely your Lord is All-Pitying, All-Compassionate.
16|48| Do they not see the things that God has created, how their shadows bend to the right and to the left, making prostration before God, and that in the humblest manner?
16|49| Before God prostrates itself whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth of living creatures, and the angels (likewise, for) they are not arrogant.
16|50| They (the angels) fear their Lord high above them (i.e., Who has absolute power over them), and they do what they are commanded.
16|51| God has said: "Do not take two (or more) deities: He is but One God. So be in awe of Me and Me alone, (and be saved from other fears bringing disgrace upon you)."
16|52| To Him belongs all that is in the heavens and on the earth, and to Him alone absolute obedience is always due. Will you, then, fear and obey in piety and due reverence other than God?
16|53| Whatever blessing you have, it is from God; and when harm touches you, it is to Him that you cry for help.
16|54| When thereafter He removes the harm from you, a party of you attribute partners to their Lord (Who alone sustains and provides for you, and saves you from misfortunes);
16|55| And so deny with ingratitude the favors God has granted them. So enjoy (O polytheists, the favors We grant you) – in time you will come to know (the truth).
16|56| They assign, out of what We provide for them, a portion to the things (non-existent gods, misunderstood "causes," the real nature of) which they have no sure knowledge. By God, you will certainly be questioned about what you used to fabricate.
16|57| And they assign daughters to God – All-Glorified is He (above having children) – and to themselves sons!
16|58| When any of them is given news of the birth of a girl, his face becomes overcast, and he is (as if choking inwardly) with suppressed anger.
16|59| He hides himself from the people because of the evil (as he wrongly supposes it) of what he has had news of. (So he debates within himself:) Shall he keep her with dishonor or bury her in earth? Look now! how evil is the judgment they make (concerning God, and how evil is the decision they debate)!
16|60| To those who do not believe in the Hereafter applies the most evil of attributes, and to God applies the most sublime attribute, and He is the All-Glorious with irresistible might, the All-Wise.
16|61| If God were to take people immediately to task for their wrongdoings, He would not leave on it (the earth) any living creature (as the wrongdoings of humankind would make the earth uninhabitable). But He grants them respite to a term appointed (by Him). When their term has come, they can neither delay it by a single moment, nor can they bring it forward.
16|62| They make over to God that which they dislike (for themselves); and all the while their tongues utter the falsehood that ("if there would be another life as the Messenger claims," the best reward (Paradise) would be theirs. No doubt theirs is (on the contrary, only) the Fire, and they will be hastened on into it.
16|63| By God, We certainly sent Messengers to the communities before you (O Messenger), but Satan decked out their deeds as appealing to (the unbelievers among) them. And this day (too, when the Qur’an is being revealed), he is their close friend, and theirs is a painful punishment.
16|64| And We have not sent down the Book on you except that you may explain to them all (the questions of faith and law) on which they differ, and as guidance and mercy for people who will believe and who have already believed.
16|65| God sends down from the sky water and therewith revives the earth after its death. Surely in that there is a sign (manifesting the truth) for people ready to hear (and understand the discourses of the "Book of Creation" and the Revelation.)
16|66| And surely in the cattle (feeding on the pastures of the revived earth) there is a lesson for you: We give you from that which is within their bodies, (marvelously distinguished from) between the waste and blood, milk that is pure and palatable to those who drink.
16|67| And there are (among the produce that God brings forth as nourishment for you on the revived earth) the fruits of the date-palm, and grapes: you derive from them intoxicants and good, wholesome nourishment. Surely in this there is a sign for people who reason and understand.
16|68| And your Lord inspired the (female) bee: "Take for yourself dwelling-place in the mountains, and in the trees, and in what they (human beings) may build and weave.
16|69| "Then eat of all the fruits, and returning with your loads follow the ways your Lord has made easy for you." There comes forth from their bellies a fluid of varying color, wherein is health for human beings. Surely in this there is a sign for people who reflect.
16|70| God has created you, then He causes you to die. And among you are those who are deferred to the age of senility so they do not know, of what they once knew, anything at all. Surely God is All-Knowing, All-Powerful.
16|71| And God has favored some of you above others in provision. And yet, (while it is We Who provide them) those who are more favored do not consent to share their provision with those (slaves) whom their right hands possess so that they might be equal with them in this respect. How then do they deny God’s grace and bounty, (and associate partners with Him)?
16|72| God has made for you, from your selves, mates (spouses), and has made for you from your mates children and grandchildren, and has provided you with good, wholesome things. Do they, then, believe in falsehood and deny the blessings of God?
16|73| And do they worship, apart from God, what has no ownership of any provision in the heavens and the earth with which to provide for them, nor have they (whom they falsely worship) any capacity (to take on, still less, discharge such a task)?
16|74| So do not invent similitudes for God (do not liken Him to others to associate partners with Him, for there is nothing similar to Him). Surely God knows and you do not know (the exact truth about Him and the exact nature of things).
16|75| God strikes a parable (of two men so that you may understand that true freedom lies in the service of God, because it frees from servitude to all else): a man enslaved, unable to do anything of his own will, and a (free) man whom We have provided with a fair provision from Us, and he spends thereof secretly and openly. Are the two equal? All praise and gratitude are due to God (for to Him alone belongs absolute ownership and disposition of the universe); but most of them do not know.
16|76| And God strikes a parable of two (other) men: one of them dumb, unable to control anything (unable to answer any call, unable to decide any matter or meet any need). He is a burden upon his master; wherever he directs him, he brings no good. Is he equal with one who enjoins right and justice and is himself on a straight path?
16|77| And to God belongs (absolute dominion and full knowledge of) the unseen of the heavens and the earth, and the matter of the Hour (of Doom) is (in relation with the Divine Power) but the twinkling of an eye, or even quicker. Surely God has full power over everything.
16|78| God brought you forth from the wombs of your mothers when you knew nothing, and (in order that you might be perfected through learning) endowed you with hearing and eyes and hearts, that you may give thanks (from the heart and in speech, and in action by fulfilling His commandments).
16|79| Do they not consider the birds flying in the air subservient to God’s command? None holds them but God (Who has endowed them with the power of flight). Surely in that there are signs (manifesting the truth) for people who will believe who will deepen in faith.
16|80| And (among His blessings on you) God has made for you of your houses places of dwelling and rest; and He has made for you, from the hides of cattle, (another kind of) dwellings that you find light when you travel and when you stop to camp; and in their wool, fur, and hair (He has provided you with means for) furnishings and enjoyable comforts for a while.
16|81| And (among countless other blessings of His) He has made for you, out of the things He has created, shelter from the sun, and given you refuges in the mountains, and made (the means whereby you make) garments to protect you from heat (or cold), and garments (such as coats-of-mail) to protect you from your (mutual) violence. In this way He completes His favors on you so that you may submit to Him (and thereby receive the greatest favor of all).
16|82| Then if they (despite these blessings of God and His completing His favors upon them through this Revelation) turn away, what rests with you, (O Messenger,) is only to convey the Message fully and clearly.
16|83| They are fully aware of God’s favors, but they refuse to acknowledge them (as such), and most of them are obstinate unbelievers (willfully and stubbornly associating partners with Him in belief and worship).
16|84| But a Day (will come) when We raise up a witness from among every community (to testify against them that God’s Religion was communicated to them), and then those who were unbelievers will not be allowed (to speak their excuses), nor will they be allowed (it then being too late) to make amends.
16|85| When those who persist in wrongdoing (by associating partners with God and committing evils) see the punishment, it will not be lightened for them, nor will they be reprieved.
16|86| And when those who associate partners with God see their associate-deities (such as Prophets, saints, and heroes, whom they hold as partners with God in worship and absolute obedience), they will say "Our Lord! Those are our associate-deities whom we (held as partners with You, and) used to invoke apart from You. (They are the ones who led us astray.)" Whereupon (those beings) fling at them the retort: "You are indeed liars!"
16|87| On that Day they (those who associated partners with God) have offered submission to God, (which out of arrogance they used to withhold), and what they used to fabricate (by way of false deities to worship besides God) has failed them.
16|88| Those who (themselves) disbelieved and barred (other) people from God’s way – We add punishment to their punishment because they used to cause disorder and corruption.
16|89| And on that Day We will raise up within every community a witness from among themselves (to testify) against them (that God’s Religion was communicated to them), and We will bring you (O Messenger) as a witness against those (whom your Message has reached). We have sent down on you the Book as an exposition of everything (that pertains to guidance and error and to the knowledge of good and evil, and to happiness and misery in both worlds), and guidance and mercy and glad tidings for the Muslims (those who have submitted themselves wholly to God.
16|90| God enjoins justice (and right judgment in all matters), and devotion to doing good, and generosity towards relatives, and He forbids you indecency, wickedness and vile conduct (all offenses against religion, life, personal property, chastity, and health of mind and body). He exhorts you (repeatedly) so that you may reflect and be mindful!
16|91| And fulfill God’s covenant when you have made the covenant (and any commitment that you made among yourselves in God’s Name), and do not break your oaths after having confirmed them; indeed you have made God your guarantor. Surely God knows all that you do.
16|92| And do not be like her who destroys her yarn that she herself made strong, betraying (thereby her own effort) – by making your oaths a means of deception among yourselves in order that you may be a community greater in numbers (in power and other worldly things) than another community. In this God is only testing you, and on the Day of Resurrection, He will certainly make clear to you all that on which you used to differ.
16|93| Had God so willed, He would have made you all one single community (with the same faith and religion), but He (has granted you free will with the result that He) leads astray whomever He wills, and guides whomever He wills. You will certainly be called to account for what you used to do.
16|94| Do not make your oaths a means of deception and wrongdoing among yourselves, lest feet should slip (from the way of guidance) after having been firm (on it, and that others too may be misled by your misconduct); and you should taste the evil (consequences) of your barring from God’s way. And (in the Hereafter) there is a mighty punishment for you.
16|95| And do not sell God’s covenant for a trifling price (such as status and other worldly gains). Surely what is with God is the best for you, if you but knew.
16|96| Whatever is with you wastes away, but that which is with God is permanent. We will most certainly pay those who are persevering and patient (in fulfilling God’s commandments, refraining from sins, and all the adversities in God’s cause) their reward in accordance with the best of what they used to do.
16|97| Whoever does good, righteous deeds, whether male or female, and is a believer, most certainly We will make him (or her) live a good life, and most certainly We will pay such as these their reward in accordance with the best of what they used to do.
16|98| So when you recite the Qur’an (as a good, righteous deed), seek refuge in God from Satan rejected (from His Mercy, because of his evil suggestions and whisperings during the recitation).
16|99| Surely he has no power over those who believe and put their trust in their Lord.
16|100| His power is only over those who make a confidant of him (seeking and heeding his advice and direction), and those who associate partners with God (in worship and obedience).
16|101| When We put a Revelation in place of another Revelation (in the course of perfecting the Religion and completing Our favor upon you), – and God knows best what He sends down – they say: "You are but a forger!" No, rather, most of them do not know.
16|102| Say (to them, O Messenger): "(My Lord affirms): ‘The Spirit of Holiness brings it down in parts from your Lord with truth (embodying the truth and with nothing false in it), that it may confirm those who believe (strengthening them in their faith and adherence to God’s way), and as guidance, and glad tidings for the Muslims (those who have submitted themselves wholly to God)’."
16|103| Certainly We know that they say, "It is but a human being that teaches him." But the tongue of him to whom they falsely hint is outlandish, while this (Qur’an) is in clear Arabic tongue.
16|104| Surely those who do not believe in God’s Revelations (and therefore persist in wrongdoing) – God does not guide them (to the way of true prosperity), and for them is a painful punishment.
16|105| Only those fabricate lies who do not believe in God’s Revelations; and those are the liars.
16|106| Whoever disbelieves in God after having believed – not him who is under duress, while his heart is firm in and content with faith, but the one who willingly opens up his heart to unbelief – upon them falls God’s anger (His condemnation of them), and for them is a mighty punishment.
16|107| That is because they have chosen the present, worldly life in preference to the Hereafter, and because God does not guide the people of unbelief (to the way of true prosperity and Paradise).
16|108| Those are they upon whose hearts, hearing, and eyes God has set a seal, and those are they who are unmindful, heedless.
16|109| No doubt, in the Hereafter they will be the utter losers.
16|110| Yet surely your Lord turns with favor to those who emigrate after they have been subjected to persecutions (because of their faith) and thereafter exert themselves in God’s cause and endure with patience (whatever befalls them) – indeed, in return for such (good deeds) your Lord is All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate.
16|111| (Be ever mindful of) the Day when every soul will come pleading for itself, and every soul will be repaid in full for what it did, and none of them will be wronged.
16|112| God strikes a parable of a township which was secure and at ease, with its provision coming to it in abundance from all quarters. But it showed ingratitude to God (its people disbelieved, attributed their apparent well-being to other than God and so fell into the habit of making up partners with Him in belief and worship, and daily life); and so God caused it to taste the garment of famine and fear because of what they habitually contrived.
16|113| For sure a Messenger from among themselves had come to them, but they denied him, and in consequence, the punishment seized them while they were doing wrong.
16|114| So (O people) partake as pure, lawful and wholesome of what God has provided you, and give thanks for His bounty, if it is indeed Him that you worship.
16|115| He has made unlawful to you only carrion, and blood, and the flesh of swine, and that (the animal) which is offered in the name of other than God. Yet whoever is constrained by dire necessity to eat of them, provided he does not covet (what is forbidden) and does not exceed (the bounds of necessity) – (no sin shall be on him). Surely God is All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate.
16|116| And do not pronounce for what your tongues falsely describe: "This is lawful and this is forbidden," so that you fabricate falsehood in attribution to God. Surely those who fabricate falsehood in attribution to God do not prosper.
16|117| (Their lot is) a brief enjoyment (in this world), and theirs is a painful punishment (in the Hereafter).
16|118| And for those who are Jews We made unlawful what We have already related to you. We have never wronged them but they did habitually wrong themselves.
16|119| Then indeed your Lord is – to those who do evil in ignorance (as a result of failing to counter the prompting of the evil-commanding soul), and then repent (soon as they realize what they have done is wrong) and mend their ways and conduct – indeed your Lord is All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate (with special mercy toward His penitent servants).
16|120| Abraham was an exemplary leader, (whose self-dedication to the good of his community made him) as if a community, sincerely obedient to God as a man of pure faith (free from any stain of unbelief and hypocrisy), and he was not of those who associate partners with God –
16|121| Always thankful for His favors. He (God) chose him, and guided him to a straight path (to follow himself and guide others).
16|122| We granted him good in the world, and he is surely among the righteous in the Hereafter.
16|123| Thereafter, We have revealed to you (O Messenger): Follow the way of Abraham as one of pure faith (free from unbelief and hypocrisy), and he was never of those who associate partners with God.
16|124| The Sabbath was ordained only for those who differed about it (not for all the communities that were to follow the way of Abraham). Your Lord will assuredly judge between them on the Day of Resurrection concerning that on which they used to differ.
16|125| Call to the way of your Lord with wisdom and fair exhortation, and argue with them in the best way possible. Your Lord surely knows best who has gone astray from His way, and He knows best who are the rightly guided.
16|126| If you have to respond to any wrong, respond (only) to the measure of the wrong done to you; but if you endure patiently, it is indeed better for the patient.
16|127| Endure patiently; your endurance is only for God’s sake and by His help; and do not grieve for them (because of their attitude toward your mission), nor be distressed because of what they scheme.
16|128| Surely God is with those who keep from disobedience to God in reverence for Him and piety and those devoted to doing good, aware that God is seeing them.
17|1| All-Glorified is He Who took His servant for a journey by night from the Sacred Mosque to the Farthest Mosque the environs of which We have blessed, so that We might show him some of Our signs (of the truths concerning Our Divinity and Lordship). Surely He is the All-Hearing, the All-Seeing.
17|2| We granted Moses the Book and made it a guidance for the Children of Israel, (commanding them): "Take, apart from Me, no guardian (one to rely on and to whom affairs should be entrusted)."
17|3| (They were among) the descendants of those whom We carried (in the Ark) with Noah. He surely was a servant greatly thankful.
17|4| We decreed in the Book for the Children of Israel (as a consequence of their ingratitude and disobedience to the Book): "You will most certainly cause corruption and disorder in the land twice, and (elated with extreme arrogance) you will act with great insolence."
17|5| Hence, when the time of the first of the two came, We roused and sent against you some servants of Ours of great might (chosen by Us to punish you), and they ravaged the land, searching the innermost parts of your homes. That was a threat to be executed.
17|6| Then We gave the turn back to you to prevail over them, and strengthened you with resources and children, and made you the more numerous in human power (than before).
17|7| If you do good (aware that God is seeing you), you do good to your own selves; and if you do evil, it is likewise to your own selves. And so, when the time (for the fulfillment) of the second decree comes, (We rouse new enemies against you) to disgrace you utterly and to enter the Temple as the others entered it before, and to destroy entirely all that they conquer.
17|8| It is hoped that your Lord may show mercy to you, but if you return (to your sins), We will return (to Our punishment). And We have made Hell a prison for the unbelievers.
17|9| This Qur’an surely guides (in all matters) to that which is most just and right and gives the believers who do good, righteous deeds the glad tidings that for them there is a great reward.
17|10| And that for those who do not believe in the Hereafter, for them We have prepared a painful punishment.
17|11| Yet human (through his actions as well as his words) prays and calls for evil just as he prays and calls for good. Human is prone to be hasty.
17|12| (As in the life of humankind, "days" and "nights" alternate in the world also.) We have made the night and the day two signs (manifesting the truth of God’s Power, Knowledge, and absolute sovereignty, and His grace on you). We have obscured the sign of the night (made it dark) and We have made the sign of the day illuminating (therefore a means for you) to see, that you may seek bounty from your Lord and that you may know the computation of (time) the years and the reckoning; We set out all things in clear detail.
17|13| Every human being’s fate We have fastened around his neck, and We will bring forth for him on the Day of Resurrection a book which he will see spread open.
17|14| "Read your book! Your own self suffices you this day as a reckoner against you."
17|15| Whoever takes the right way takes it for the good of his soul only; and whoever goes astray, goes astray but to its harm only. No soul, as bearer of burden, is made to bear the burden of another. We would never punish (a person or community for the wrong they have done) until We have sent a Messenger (to give counsel and warning).
17|16| And when We finally will to destroy a township (that has deserved destruction), We leave those of its people lost in the pursuit of pleasures to their own devices, and so they transgress all limits therein. In consequence, the word (of punishment) is justified against it, and so We annihilate it, reducing it to nothing.
17|17| How many a generation have We (thus) destroyed after Noah! Your Lord suffices as one All-Aware and All-Seeing of the sins of His servants.
17|18| Whoever wishes for only the immediate gains (of this transitory life), We readily grant thereof as much as We please to whomever We will. Thereafter We consign him to Hell, wherein he will roast, disgraced and disowned.
17|19| But whoever wishes for the Hereafter and strives for it as it should be striven for, being a believer, then for those (who do so) their striving shall be recognized with thanks and reward.
17|20| Each do We supply – these ones as well as those ones – out of the free gifts of your Lord (in the world); the gift of your Lord is not confined.
17|21| See how We have made some of them excel others (in worldly gifts and in virtues); yet the Hereafter will certainly be greater in ranks and greater in excellence.
17|22| Do not set up another deity besides God, or you will be sitting disgraced and forsaken.
17|23| Your Lord has decreed that you worship none but Him alone, and treat parents with the best of kindness. Should one of them, or both, attain old age in your lifetime, do not say "Ugh!" to them (as an indication of complaint or impatience), nor push them away, and always address them in gracious words.
17|24| Lower to them the wing of humility out of mercy, and say: "My Lord, have mercy on them even as they cared for me in childhood."
17|25| Your Lord best knows what is in your souls (in respect of all matters, including what you think of your parents). If you are righteous (in your thoughts and deeds), then surely He is All-Forgiving to those who turn to Him in humble contrition.
17|26| And give his due to the relative, as well as the destitute and the wayfarer; and do not squander (your wealth) senselessly.
17|27| Surely squanderers are ever brothers of satans; and Satan is ever ungrateful to his Lord.
17|28| But if you (must) turn away from those (who are in need, because you are yourself in need, and) seeking mercy from your Lord in hopeful expectation, then (at least) speak to them gently and well-meaning.
17|29| Do not keep your hand bound to your neck (in niggardliness) nor stretch it without any restraint or else you will be left sitting reproached and denuded.
17|30| Surely your Lord God enlarges provision for whom He wills, and straitens it (for whom He wills). Indeed He is fully aware of His servants and sees them well.
17|31| Do not kill your children for fear of poverty; it is We Who provide for them as well as for you. Killing them is surely a grave sin.
17|32| Do not draw near to any unlawful sexual intercourse; surely it is a shameful, indecent thing, and an evil way (leading to individual and social corruption).
17|33| Do not kill any soul, which God has made forbidden, except in just cause. If anyone has been killed wrongfully and intentionally, We have given his heir (as defender of his rights) the authority (to claim retaliation or damages or to forgive outright). But let him (the heir) not exceed the legitimate bounds in (retaliatory) killing. Indeed he has been helped (already and sufficiently by the provisions and procedures of the Law).
17|34| And do not draw near to the property of the orphan except in the best way (such as to improve and increase it) until he comes of age and is strong; and fulfill the covenant: the covenant is surely subject to questioning (on the Day of Judgment you will be held accountable for your covenant).
17|35| Give full measure when you measure, and weigh with a true, accurate balance. That is what is good and (to do so is) best in the long term.
17|36| Do not follow that of which you have no knowledge (whether it is good or bad), and refrain from groundless assertions and conjectures. Surely the hearing, the sight, and the heart – each of these is subject to questioning about it (you are answerable, and will be called to account, for each of these on the Day of Judgment).
17|37| Do not strut about the earth in haughty self-conceit; for you can never split the earth (no matter how hard you stamp your foot), nor can you stretch to the mountains in height (no matter how strenuously you seek to impress).
17|38| The evil of all this is abhorrent in the sight of your Lord.
17|39| All this is (part) of the Wisdom which your Lord has revealed to you (O Messenger). (As the source and basis of all wisdom), do not set up with God another deity, or you will be cast into Hell, blamed and disowned.
17|40| Has, then, your Lord distinguished you (O unbelievers) by preferring for you sons, and taken for Himself from among the angels daughters? Most certainly you utter an awful, horrendous saying.
17|41| We have set out (the truths) in diverse ways in this Qur’an, so that they may reflect and be mindful, but all this increases them (the unbelievers) only in their aversion (to truth).
17|42| Say: "If there were, as they assert, deities apart from Him, surely they would seek a way to the Master of the Supreme Throne (the dominion of the creation)."
17|43| All-Glorified is He, and absolutely exalted, immeasurably high above all that they say.
17|44| The seven heavens and the earth, and whoever is therein, glorify Him. There is nothing that does not glorify Him with His praise (proclaiming that He alone is God, without peer or partner, and all praise belongs to Him exclusively), but you cannot comprehend their glorification. Surely He is (despite what His servants have deserved from Him) All-Clement, All-Forgiving.
17|45| When you recite the Qur’an, We place an invisible veil between you and those who do not believe in the Hereafter (and who, by making themselves deaf and blind to the creation’s praise of its Creator, make themselves incapable of such belief).
17|46| And over their hearts We lay veils (made from their ill-intention, wrongdoing, and arrogance) that prevent them from grasping it (the Qur’an), and in their ears, heaviness. When you make mention of your Lord in the Qur’an as the One (the Unique Divine Being), they turn their backs in aversion.
17|47| We know best what they wish to hear when they listen to you and that, when they are secluded among themselves, these wrongdoers say (to one another): "You are following but a man bewitched."
17|48| See what strange comparisons they invent about you. They have altogether strayed and are now unable to find a way (to the truth).
17|49| And they say: "What! is it when we have already become bones and particles of dust – is it then that we will be raised as a new creation?"
17|50| Say: "Whether you have become stone or iron,
17|51| "Or any other created substance which, in your minds, is greater (in its resistance to being given life)." Then they will say: "Who will bring us back to life?" Say: "He Who originated you in the first instance with a unique individuality." They will shake their heads at you (in amazement and derision) and say: "When will that be?" Say: "It may well be soon,
17|52| "On the Day when He will call you and you will answer with (words of) His praise, thinking that you have stayed (on the earth) but a little while."
17|53| And say to My servants that they should always speak (even when disputing with others) that which is the best. Satan is ever ready to sow discord among them. For Satan indeed is a manifest enemy for humankind.
17|54| Your Lord knows you best (and what you deserve). If He so wills, He has mercy on you (which is sheer grace), and if He so wills, He punishes you (which is pure justice). We have not sent you (O Messenger) to be a guardian over them, responsible for them; (you are only a warner).
17|55| And your Lord knows best all that are in the heavens and on the earth. Assuredly, We have exalted some of the Prophets above others (some in an absolute sense, and others in some respects); and to David We granted the Psalms.
17|56| Say: "Call upon those (the angels, human beings, jinn,) whom you pretend are deities apart from Him! They have no power to remove any affliction from you nor can they make any changes in your conditions."
17|57| Those whom they invoke themselves seek a means to approach their Lord, each trying to be nearer to Him, hoping for His mercy and fearing His punishment. The punishment of your Lord is surely to be feared and avoided.
17|58| There is not a township but that We will have destroyed it before the Day of Resurrection (as a consequence of its people’s way of life, and in accordance with the laws We have established for the lives of communities), or punished it with a severe punishment (such as dissension, corruption, and foreign invasion): all this is written down in the (eternal) Book.
17|59| Nothing stops Us from sending the miracles (they demand as evidence in support of the Messenger’s claim to be appointed by God) except that (many among the) former generations rejected them as false (and were destroyed). We had given the Thamud the she-camel as a visible sign (miracle) but they did wrong in respect of her. We do not send such signs except to warn (and to make them aware of possible destruction).
17|60| And (recall) when We said to you (by way of a warning), that your Lord encompasses all humankind (with His Knowledge and Power). We did not make the vision that We showed you (during the Ascension) but as a trial for humankind to mend their ways, and (in the same way We mentioned) in the Qur’an the Accursed Tree (the tree in Hell absolutely outside the sphere of God’s Mercy). And We warn them, exhorting them to be fearful and amend, but it increases them only in great insolence and rebellion.
17|61| And (recall another instance of arrogance and insubordination) when We said to the angels: "Prostrate yourselves before Adam!" they prostrated themselves, but Iblis did not; he said: "Shall I prostrate myself before one whom You created of clay?"
17|62| He said: "Do You see this that You have honored above me? Indeed, if You grant me respite till the Day of Resurrection, I will certainly bring his descendants under my sway, all but a few!"
17|63| He (God) said: "Go your way! Whoever of them follows you – surely, Hell will be the recompense of you all, a recompense most ample!
17|64| "Arouse with your (seductive) voice whomever you can from among them, and rally against them with your cavalry and foot soldiers, and be their partner in their wealth and children, and make promises to them. And Satan promises them nothing but deceit.
17|65| "But as for My (sincere, devoted) servants – you will have no authority over them." And your Lord suffices as protecting guardian (as One on Whom to rely and to Whom all affairs are referred).
17|66| Your Lord (O humankind) is He Who causes the ships to sail for you through the sea, that you may seek of His bounty. Surely He is ever Compassionate towards you.
17|67| When distress afflicts you in the sea, all that you invoke (as powers to help you) fail you save Him only; yet when He brings you safe to land, you turn away from Him. Indeed human is ever ungrateful.
17|68| Do you then feel secure that He will not cause a part of the land to (fall on you and) engulf you, or send a sand-storm upon you? Then you will not find a protecting guardian for yourselves.
17|69| Or do you feel secure that He will not send you back (to the sea) another time, and send against you a raging tempest to drown you because you disbelieve in ingratitude? Then you find none to uphold you against Us.
17|70| Assuredly We have honored the children of Adam (with many distinctions): We have sustained their traveling on the land and the sea, and provided for them (their sustenance) out of pure, wholesome things, and preferred them above many of those whom We have created with particular preferment.
17|71| On the Day when We will call every human community with its leader: whoever (has followed a leader towards true faith and righteousness and accountability in the Hereafter) is given his Record (of his life) in his right hand – those will read their book with contentment and they will not be wronged by even so much as a tiny hair.
17|72| Whoever is blind in this (world) (who has followed no guidance towards true faith and righteousness and accountability in the Hereafter), will be blind in the Hereafter, and even further astray from the way (that leads to Divine forgiveness and eternal contentment).
17|73| They have indeed sought to tempt you (O Messenger) away from what We have revealed to you so that you may fabricate something else against Us. And then (had you done so), they would have taken you as a trusted friend.
17|74| And had We not made you wholly firm (in what We reveal to you), you might just have inclined to them a little bit.
17|75| In that case, We would have made you taste double punishment in life and double punishment after death, and you would have found none to help you against Us.
17|76| Indeed they have sought to estrange you from the land (of your birth) and drive you from it; but then, they themselves will not remain there, after you, except a little while.
17|77| (That has been Our) way with all those whom We sent (as Messengers) before you. You will never find any alteration in Our way.
17|78| Establish the Prayer in conformity with its conditions, from the declining of the sun to the darkness of the night, and (be ever observant of) the recitation of the Qur’an at dawn (the Dawn Prayer). Surely the recitation of the Qur’an at dawn is witnessed (by the angels and the whole creation awakening to a new day).
17|79| And in some part of the night rise from sleep and observe vigil therein (through Prayer and recital of the Qur’an) as additional worship for you; your Lord may well raise you to a glorious, praised station (of nearness to Him and give you leave to intercede with Him, as He wills, on behalf of His servants, in the Hereafter).
17|80| And say: "My Lord! Cause me to enter in a manner sincere and faithful to the truth, and cause me to exit in a manner sincere and faithful to the truth, and grant me from Your Presence a sustaining authority!"
17|81| And say: "The truth has come, and falsehood has vanished. Surely falsehood is ever bound to vanish by its very nature."
17|82| We are sending down the Qur’an in parts – it is a healing and a mercy for the believers, though for the wrongdoers it increases them only in ruin.
17|83| When We favor human (an ungrateful one) with comfort and contentment, he draws aside and arrogantly keeps aloof (from any thought of Us), but when evil touches him, he is ever despairing.
17|84| Say: "Every one acts according to his own character (made up of his creed, worldview and disposition), and your Lord knows best who is better guided in his way."
17|85| They ask you about the spirit. Say: "The spirit is of my Lord’s Command, and of knowledge, you have been granted only a little."
17|86| (You are not, as the unbelievers allege, the author of the Qur’an. It is only We Who reveal it entirely.) If We willed, We could certainly take away what We have revealed to you (by effacing it from the hearts and memory of you and those who have memorized it, and from any written record of it). Then you would find for yourself no protecting guardian against Us (to help you to claim or recover it) –
17|87| But (you are one favored with) a great, special mercy from your Lord. His favor on you is great indeed.
17|88| Say: "Surely, if humankind and jinn were to come together to produce the like of this Qur’an, they will never be able to produce the like of it, though they backed one another up with help and support.
17|89| Assuredly We have set out in diverse ways for humankind in this Qur’an all kinds of parables and comparisons (to help them understand the truth), yet most people refuse to accept anything save unbelief.
17|90| They say: "We will not believe in you (O Messenger), until you cause a spring to gush forth for us from this land (which is short of water);
17|91| "Or you have a garden of date-palms and grapes, and cause rivers to gush forth in their midst abundantly;
17|92| "Or you cause the heaven to fall upon us in pieces, as you have claimed (could happen), or bring God and the angels as a warrant (before our eyes proving the truth of your message);
17|93| "Or you have a house of gold, or you ascend to the heaven. But we will even then not believe in your ascension until you bring down upon us (from heaven) a book that we can read." Say, (O Messenger): "All-Glorified is my Lord (in that He is absolutely above what you conceive of Him)! Am I anything but a mortal sent as a Messenger?"
17|94| And what has kept people from believing when guidance has come to them, except that they said: "Has God sent a mortal man as the Messenger?"
17|95| Say: "If angels had been walking about on earth as their abode, We would surely have sent down upon them an angel from heaven as Messenger."
17|96| Say: "God suffices for a witness between me and you. Surely He is fully aware of His servants, and sees them well."
17|97| Whoever God guides, then he it is who is rightly guided; and whoever He leads astray, you shall find for them, apart from Him, no guardians (who might own and help them). We will raise to life and gather them together on the Day of Resurrection prone upon their faces, blind, dumb, and deaf. Their refuge is Hell – every time it (seems to them that its torment) is abating (because of their being inured to it), We increase them in (suffering in its) blazing flame.
17|98| That will be their recompense because they disbelieved in Our Revelations and signs (manifesting the truth) and said: "What! Is it when we have already become bones and particles of dust – is it then that we will be raised as a new creation?"
17|99| Do they never consider that God Who has created the heavens and the earth is able to create them anew in their own likeness? And He has set a term for them about which there is no doubt; yet the wrongdoers refuse to accept anything save unbelief.
17|100| Say: "If you possessed the treasures of my Lord’s Mercy, still you would surely hold them back for fear of spending (in God’s cause and as subsistence for the needy)." Indeed human is ever grudging.
17|101| We certainly granted to Moses nine clear signs (miracles). So ask the Children of Israel (what happened despite these miracles): when he came to them (and asked the Pharaoh to let the Children of Israel leave Egypt with him, and even after he showed to them these miracles), the Pharaoh said to him: "Certainly, O Moses, I certainly believe that you are one bewitched."
17|102| (Moses) said: "You know for certain that no one but the Lord of the heavens and the earth has sent down these (signs) as openings to discernment and insight. And certainly, O Pharaoh, I certainly believe you are one doomed to loss."
17|103| Then the Pharaoh intended to terrify them from the land (of Egypt) and destroy them, but We caused him and all who were with him to drown.
17|104| And after that We said to the Children of Israel: "Dwell now securely in the land (which God has decreed for you and commanded you to enter). But when the time (for the fulfillment) of the last decree comes, We will bring you as a mixed crowd (gathered from disparate nations).
17|105| It is with the truth that We have sent it down (this Qur’an, embodying the truth and for ever invulnerable to falsehood), and it is with the truth that it has come down. We have not sent you but as a bearer of glad tidings (of prosperity in return for faith and righteousness) and a warner (against the evil consequences of misguidance).
17|106| And (it is) a Qur’an that We set forth in parts with clarity so that you may recite and convey it to people with deliberation (in order that they can absorb it), and We send it down in successive Revelations (each perfectly suited to its occasion and its wider purpose).
17|107| Say: "Believe in it or do not believe." Surely those who were endowed before it with knowledge (of the truth and Divine Revelation and teachings, and still follow that knowledge), fall down on their faces in prostration when the Qur’an is recited to them.
17|108| They say: "All-Glorified is our Lord. Surely the promise of our Lord is ever bound to be fulfilled."
17|109| And they fall down on their faces, weeping, and it increases them in humility and a feeling of awe.
17|110| Say: "Call upon Him as Allah (God) or call upon Him as ar-Rahman (the All-Merciful). By whichever Name you call upon Him, to Him belong the All-Beautiful Names. And offer your Prayer neither in too loud a voice nor in a voice too low, but follow a middle course.
17|111| And say: "All praise and gratitude are for God, Who has neither taken to Him a child, nor has a partner in the sovereignty (the dominion and ownership of the whole creation), nor (being exalted above all want or insufficiency) has He a guardian against neediness and weakness. And exalt Him with His immeasurable greatness.
18|1| All praise and gratitude are for God, Who has sent down on His servant the Book and has put no crookedness in it (so that it is free from contradiction and inconsistency, and anything offensive to truth and righteousness).
18|2| (He has made it) unerringly straight, to warn of a stern punishment from Him and give the believers who do good, righteous deeds the glad tidings that for them is an excellent reward (Paradise),
18|3| Abiding therein forever,
18|4| And to warn those who say: "God has taken to Him a child."
18|5| Of that they have no knowledge (on which to base such an assertion), nor did their forefathers. Dreadful as a word is (that assertion) coming out of their mouths. Indeed they speak nothing but falsehood.
18|6| Yet it may be that you (O Muhammad) will torment yourself to death with grief, following after them, if they do not believe in this Message.
18|7| We have surely made whatever is on the earth as an ornament for it (appealing to humanity), so that We may try them (by demonstrating it to themselves) which of them is best in conduct.
18|8| Yet We surely reduce whatever is on it to a barren dust-heap, (and will do so when the term of trial ends).
18|9| Or do you reckon the People of the Cave and the Inscription as something strange among Our signs (manifesting the truth, and too extraordinary to believe)?
18|10| (Events came to the point) when the young men took refuge in the cave and said: "Our Lord! Grant us mercy from Your Presence and arrange for us in our affair what is right and good!"
18|11| Then We drew a veil over their ears (causing them to go into a deep sleep) in the cave for a number of years.
18|12| Then We raised them up, (and dividing into two groups, they discussed how long they had remained in that state). We willed to make known which of the two groups were (more consciousness of time with the events in it, and therefore) better in computing for what period they had remained (in this state).
18|13| It is We who relate to you their exemplary story with truth. They were young men who believed in their Lord, and We increased them in guidance (so they adhered to the truth more faithfully).
18|14| And We strengthened their hearts, (and a time came) when they rose up (against association of partners with God and other injustices in the society), and they proclaimed: "Our Lord is the Lord of the heavens and the earth, and we never invoke any deity apart from Him; if we did so, we would certainly have uttered an enormity (a monstrous unbelief).
18|15| "These people of ours have adopted deities other than Him: although they cannot bring any clear authority for them. And who is more in the wrong than he who fabricates falsehood against God?"
18|16| (Events developed to the point that they had to leave their society. They discussed what they should do and concluded:) "And now that you have withdrawn yourselves from them and all that they worship instead of God, then seek refuge in the Cave. Your Lord will lay out for you of His mercy, and He will arrange for you in your affair a comfort and support."
18|17| (They entered the Cave and fell into a deep sleep.) You would have seen the sun, when it rose, moving away from their Cave to the right, and when it set, turning away from them to the left, while they lay in a spacious hollow in the Cave. That was one of God’s signs. Whoever God guides, he alone is rightly guided; and whoever He leads astray, you will never be able to find for him any guardian to guide him to the right way.
18|18| You would have thought them awake though they were asleep. We caused them to turn over to the right and the left, and their dog lay outstretching its two forelegs on the threshold. Had you come upon them unprepared, you would certainly have turned away from them in flight, and would certainly have been filled with awe of them.
18|19| Such being their state, We raised them up so they began to ask one another. One who spoke said: "How long have you stayed?" They (some among them) answered: "We have stayed a day, or part of a day." The others said: "Your Lord knows better how long you have stayed. Now (we must deal with our hunger. So) send one of you to the city with this coin of yours: let him see what food is most pure there (and so lawful), and bring a supply from it. But let him behave with utmost care and guarded courtesy and by no means make anyone aware of you.
18|20| "Indeed, if they should find you out, they will stone you to death or turn you back to their way of belief and life by force, then you will never attain prosperity ever hereafter."
18|21| And in this way We disclosed them to the people so that they might know that the promise of God is true, and that there can be no doubt about (the coming of) the Last Hour. When they (the people) disputed about their affair, they said: "Build a structure over them (to hide them and leave them to their rest). Their Lord knows best about them." Those who prevailed (in the long-disputed matter) said: "We will most certainly build a place of worship over them."
18|22| (Instead of reflecting on the lesson to be learnt from the People of the Cave, people concentrate their interest on the details of the event.) Some will say they were three, the dog being the fourth among them; and some will say they were five, the dog being the sixth – all guessing at random at (something related to) the Unseen. Still others will say: "They were seven, the dog being the eighth." Say (O Messenger): "My Lord knows their number better; it is but few that know (the truth about) them." So do not argue about them, being content with what is obvious (to you through Revelation), nor ask any of them (who argue even among themselves) to give you an opinion about them.
18|23| And do not say about anything (you intend), "I will do it tomorrow,"
18|24| Without (adding) "If God wills." And remember and mention Him (straightaway) should you forget (to do so when expressing an intention for the future). And say: "I hope that my Lord will guide me to what is nearer to right conduct than this (forgetfulness of mine)."
18|25| And they stayed in their Cave three hundred (solar) years, and added nine (for lunar years).
18|26| Say: "God knows better how long they stayed. To Him belongs (absolute dominion and full knowledge of) the unseen of the heavens and the earth. How perfect His seeing and how perfect His hearing! And they have apart from Him no guardian, and He allots to no one a share in His absolute authority.
18|27| Recite (and teach) that which has been revealed to you from the Book of your Lord. There is none who can change His words (whatever the unbelievers may say or desire), and you will never find, apart from Him, any refuge.
18|28| And keep yourself patient, along with those who invoke their Lord morning and evening, seeking His "Face" (His eternal, good pleasure and the meeting with Him in the Hereafter); and do not let your eyes pass beyond them, desiring the beauties of the life of this world (by the participation of those of leading positions among people in your assemblies). And pay no heed to (the desires of) him whose heart We have made unmindful of Our remembrance, who follows his lusts and fancies, and whose affair exceeds all bounds (of right and decency).
18|29| And say: "The truth from your Lord (has come in this Qur’an)." Then, whoever wills (to believe), let him believe; and whoever wills (to disbelieve), let him disbelieve. Surely, We have prepared for the wrongdoers a Fire, its billowing folds encompassing them. If they beg for water they will be given water like molten metal that scalds their faces. How dreadful a drink, and how evil a couch to rest on!
18|30| Surely, for those who believe and do good, righteous deeds – We do not leave to waste the reward of any who do good deeds, aware that God is seeing them.
18|31| Those are they for whom are Gardens of perpetual bliss through which rivers flow; adorned therein with armbands of gold and they will dress in green garments of fine silk and rich brocade; they recline there upon thrones. How excellent a reward, how lovely a couch to rest on!
18|32| Set forth to them the parable of two men: for one of them We had made two vineyards and surrounded both with date-palms, and placed between them a field of grain.
18|33| Each of the two vineyards yielded its produce, without failing in anything. We had also caused a stream to gush forth between the two.
18|34| So the man had fruit (in abundance), and one day he said to his companion, while he was conversing with him: "I am more than you in wealth, and mightier in manpower (children and those working for me)."
18|35| He went into his vineyard while wronging himself (in his vain conceit). He said: "I do not think that this will ever perish.
18|36| "Nor do I think that the Last Hour will ever come. Even if (it should come, and) I am brought back to my Lord, I will surely find something even better than this as a resort."
18|37| His companion said to him, while he was arguing with him: "Do you (expressing such ingratitude) disbelieve in Him Who created you from earth, then out of a mere drop of seminal fluid, then fashioned you into a perfect man?
18|38| "But (for my part I believe that) He is God, my Lord, and I do not associate with my Lord any partner.
18|39| "If only you had said, on entering your vineyard, ‘Whatever God wills (surely has and surely will come to pass); there is no strength (to achieve anything) save with God.’ Though you see me with less wealth and offspring than you (I have no complaint at all, for it is God Who does as He wills, and He is All-Compassionate toward His servants).
18|40| "It may well be that my Lord will give me something better than your vineyard, and send on it (your vineyard) a calamity from heaven so that it becomes a barren waste.
18|41| "Or its water comes to sink (so deep) into the ground, that you will never be able to seek it out."
18|42| And (as it happened) his produce was encompassed by ruin, and he set to wringing his hands with grief over all that he had spent on it, when it was now all ruined on its trellises, and he was saying: "Oh, would that I had never associated anyone with my Lord as partner!"
18|43| And he had, apart from God, none, no troop of men, to help Him, nor could he be of any help to himself.
18|44| For thus it is: all power to protect belongs to God, the True. He is the best for reward, and the best for the outcome.
18|45| And strike to them a parable of the present, worldly life: (it is) like water that We send down from the sky, and the vegetation of the earth mingles with it (flourishing abundantly). Then it turns into dry stubble which the winds scatter about. God is absolutely able to do all things.
18|46| Wealth and children are an adornment of the present, worldly life, but the good, righteous deeds (based on faith and) which endure are better in the sight of your Lord in bringing reward and better to aspire for.
18|47| (Bear in mind) the Day when We set the mountains in motion, and you see the earth denuded, and We raise to life and gather them together (all those who are content with themselves, deluded by the charms of the world), leaving out none of them.
18|48| They are arrayed before your Lord (Whom they disregarded in the world), all lined up (without discrimination of wealth or status as in the world, and they are told): "Now, indeed, you have come to Us (divested of all worldly things) as We created you in the first instance – though you used to suppose that We had not appointed for you a meeting with Us."
18|49| And the Record (of everyone’s deeds) is set in place; and you will see the disbelieving criminals filled with dread because of what is in it, and they will say: "Alas, woe is ours! What is this Record? It leaves out nothing, be it small or great, but it is accounted!" They have found all that they did confronting them (in the forms thereof particular to the Hereafter). And Your Lord wrongs no one.
18|50| And (recall) when We said to the angels, "Prostrate before Adam!" and they all prostrated, but Iblis did not; he was of the jinn (created before humankind, from smokeless, scorching fire), and transgressed against his Lord’s command. Will you, then, take him and his offspring for guardians (to rely on and refer your affairs to) rather than Me, when they are an enemy to you? How evil an exchange for the wrongdoers!
18|51| I did not make them (Iblis and his offspring) witnesses to the creation of the heavens and the earth, nor of the creation of their own selves, nor did I (being absolutely beyond need) ever take as helpers those that lead (humankind) astray.
18|52| The Day (will come when) He will say, "Now call upon all those whom you alleged to be My partners." Thereupon they will invoke them, but they will not respond to them, and We will place between them an unbridgeable gulf.
18|53| And the disbelieving criminals will see the Fire and know certainly that they are bound to fall into it, and they will find no way of escape from it.
18|54| Assuredly We have set out in diverse ways for humankind in this Qur’an all kinds of parables and comparisons (to help them understand the truth); but human is, above all else, given to contention.
18|55| What is there to keep people from believing when guidance has come to them, and from imploring their Lord for forgiveness – unless it be that they follow the way of the (sinful) people of olden times (as if wishing for their fate to come upon them) or the punishment (which they did not believe in but asked their Prophet, in derision, to bring down upon them) come and confront them? (Then indeed they would have no opportunity to implore forgiveness and hope for relief.)
18|56| We send the Messengers (not as bearers of punishment) but as bearers of glad tidings (of prosperity in return for faith and righteousness) and warners (against the evil consequences of misguidance). Whereas those who disbelieve contend on the basis of falsehood in order to refute the truth thereby; and they take My Revelations and that (the punishment) of which they are warned in mockery.
18|57| Who is greater in doing wrong than he who has been reminded of his Lord’s Revelations and signs, yet turns away from them and forgets all that his hands have forwarded (to the reckoning in the future life). Surely over their hearts We have laid veils (made up of their ill-intention, wrongdoing, and arrogance, which caused them to lose the ability to believe,) so that they do not grasp (the Qur’an with faith and understanding), and in their ears a heaviness (so they do not hear the Qur’an). And if you call them to guidance, they will never even then accept guidance.
18|58| Your Lord is the All-Forgiving, having infinite Mercy. If He were to take them immediately to task for what they have earned, surely He would hasten on the punishment for them; but for them is an appointed time-limit, beyond which they will never find an escape (from God’s punishment).
18|59| And (that was the case with) all those townships that We destroyed when they were given to wrong. We had surely appointed a time fixed for their destruction.
18|60| (Now relate to them, O Messenger, the experience of Moses): When Moses said to his (young) attendant: "I will not give up (journeying) until I reach the junction of the two seas, though I may march on for ages."
18|61| When they reached the junction of the two (seas), they forgot their fish, and it took its way amazingly through the sea as in an underground channel.
18|62| So when they had passed further on, Moses said to his attendant: "Bring us our morning meal; assuredly we have endured much fatigue in this journey of ours."
18|63| He (the servant) said: "Would you believe it? When we betook ourselves to that rock for a rest, I forgot about (our cooked) fish – and none but Satan caused me to forget to mention it (to you) – and it took its way into the sea in an amazing way."
18|64| He (Moses) said: "That is what we have been seeking!" So they retraced their footsteps.
18|65| And they found (there) one of Our servants to whom We had granted a mercy as a grace from Us and taught a special knowledge from Our Presence.
18|66| Moses said to him: "May I follow you so that you may teach me something of the knowledge of guidance which you have been taught?"
18|67| He said: "You will never be able to have patience with being in my company.
18|68| "How could you be patient about something that you have never encompassed in your knowledge?"
18|69| He (Moses) said: "You will find me patient, if God so wills and allows me to, and I will not disobey you in anything."
18|70| (Al-Khadr) explained: "Well, if you go with me, do not ask me concerning anything (that I may do) until I myself make mention of it to you."
18|71| So they set forth until, when they embarked on the boat, he (al-Khadr) made a hole in it. He (Moses) said: "Have you made a hole in it in order to drown its people (who would be using it)? You have certainly done an awful thing!"
18|72| He said: "Did I not tell you that you would never be able to bear patiently with my company?"
18|73| He (Moses) said: "Do not take me to task because I forgot, and do not overburden me in my affair (in what you ask of me)."
18|74| So they went on until, when they met a young boy, he (al-Khadr) killed him. (Moses) said: "Have you killed an innocent soul (not in lawful retaliation but) without his having killed anyone? Assuredly you have done a horrible thing!"
18|75| He said: "Did I not tell you that you would never be able to have patience with being in my company?"
18|76| (Moses) said: "If I should ever question you about anything after this, keep me no more in your company. You have already received (full) excuse from me."
18|77| So they went on until when they came upon the people of a township, they asked its people for food, but they refused them hospitality. They found there a wall which was on the verge of tumbling down, and he (al-Khadr) restored it. (Moses) said: "If you had wished, you could have taken payment for it."
18|78| He (al-Khadr) said: "This is the parting of ways between me and you. I will tell you the meaning of what you were unable to bear patiently.
18|79| "As for the boat, it belonged to some destitute people who worked on the sea – and I wished to damage it, for there was a king after them who was seizing every boat by force.
18|80| "And as for the young boy, his parents were believers, and we feared lest he should oppress them with rebellion and unbelief.
18|81| "So we wished that their Lord would grant them in his place one better than him in purity and nearer in affection (to his parents).
18|82| "And as for the wall, it belonged to two orphan boys in the city, and beneath it was a treasure belonging to them. Their father had been a righteous man. So your Lord willed that they should come of age and bring forth their treasure as a mercy from your Lord. I did not do this (any of the actions that you witnessed) of my own accord. This is the meaning of all (those events) with which you were unable to have patience."
18|83| And they ask you (O Messenger) about Dhu’l-Qarnayn. Say: "I will recite to you a mention of him (quoting the Almighty)."
18|84| We surely established him with power in the land, and for everything (that he rightly purposed) We granted him a way (the just means appropriate to just ends).
18|85| One such way he followed,
18|86| Until, when he reached the setting-place of the sun, he saw it setting in a spring of hot and black muddy water, and nearby he found a people. We said: "O Dhu’l-Qarnayn! You can either punish them or you can treat them with kindness. (Which way will you choose?)"
18|87| He said: "As for him who does wrong (by disbelieving in Him or associating partners with Him and oppressing others) we will punish him and then he is brought back to his Lord, and He punishes him in an indescribable manner.
18|88| "But as for him who believes and does good, righteous deeds, for him the recompense of the best is due, and we will speak to him an easy word of Our command (we will charge him with easy tasks)."
18|89| Then he followed another way,
18|90| Until, when he reached the rising-place of the sun and found it rising on a people for whom We had provided no shelter against it.
18|91| So it was (such was their state and the extent of Dhu’l-Qarnayn’s power). We assuredly encompassed all concerning him in Our Knowledge.
18|92| Then he followed another way,
18|93| Until, when he reached (a place) between two mountain-barriers, he found before them a people who scarcely understood a word.
18|94| They said: "O Dhu’l-Qarnayn! Gog and Magog are causing disorder in this land. May we pay you a tribute so that you set a barrier between us and them?"
18|95| He said: "What my Lord has established me in (the power that He has granted me on this earth) is better (than what you offer). So help me with strength (manpower) and I will set a strong rampart between you and them.
18|96| "Bring me blocks of iron." Then, after he had filled up (the space between) the two steep mountain-sides, he said: "(Light a fire and) work your bellows!" At length, when he had made it (glow red like) fire, he said: "Bring me molten copper that I may pour upon it."
18|97| And they (Gog and Magog) were no longer able to surmount, nor were they able to dig their way through (the barrier).
18|98| Dhu’l-Qarnayn said: "This is a mercy from my Lord. Yet when the time of my Lord’s promise comes, He will level it down to the ground; and my Lord’s promise is ever true."
18|99| On that day We will leave people to surge like waves on one another; and the Trumpet will be blown, then We will gather them all together.
18|100| And on that Day We will place Hell before the unbelievers, plain to view,
18|101| Those whose eyes are veiled from My Book and any remembrance of Me, and who cannot bear to hear (them).
18|102| Do they who disbelieve reckon that they can (rightly and justifiably) take any of My servants as guardians (to own and protect them) besides Me? Assuredly, We have prepared Hell to welcome the unbelievers.
18|103| Say: "Shall We inform you who are the greatest losers in respect of their deeds?
18|104| "Those whose endeavor has been wasted in this world (because it is directed only to this-worldly ends, and so it is bound to be wasted hereafter also) but who themselves reckon that they are doing good."
18|105| They are those who disbelieve in the signs and Revelations of their Lord, and in the meeting with Him. Hence, their deeds have come to nothing, and on the Day of Resurrection We will not accord to them any weight.
18|106| That will be their recompense – Hell – because they have disbelieved and taken My signs and Revelations and My Messengers in mockery.
18|107| Surely for those who believe and do good, righteous deeds, their welcome is Gardens of the highest level of Paradise.
18|108| Therein will they abide, without desiring any change therefrom.
18|109| Say: "If all the sea were ink to write my Lord’s words (the acts, decrees, and manifestations of all His Names and Attributes), the sea would indeed be exhausted before my Lord’s words are exhausted, even if We were to bring the like of it in addition to it."
18|110| Say: "I am but a mortal like you, but it is revealed to me that your God is the One and Only God. So, whoever is looking forward to meeting his Lord, let him do good, righteous deeds, and let him not associate any partner in the worship of His Lord."
19|1| Kaf. Ha. Ya. ‘Ayn. Sad.
19|2| A mention of your Lord’s mercy to His servant Zachariah:
19|3| When he invoked his Lord with a call in secret,
19|4| Saying: "My Lord! My bones have grown feeble and my head glistens with gray hair from old age, and, my Lord, I have never been unblessed in my prayer to You.
19|5| "I have fears about (how) my kinsmen (will act in respect of continuing my mission, and safeguarding the future of Mary), and my wife is barren. So bestow upon me a successor out of Your grace,
19|6| Who will be my heir (in my duty) and heir to (the straight way of) the House of Jacob; and make him, my Lord, one with whom You are well-pleased.
19|7| (The angels called out to him on God’s behalf:) "O Zachariah! We give you the glad tidings of a son whose name will be Yahya (John). We have not given this name to anyone before."
19|8| He said: "My Lord! How shall I have a son when my wife is barren and I have already reached infirmity in old age?"
19|9| (The angel) answered: "Just so. Your Lord says: ‘It is easy for Me – assuredly I did create you before, when you had been nothing.’ "
19|10| (Zachariah) prayed: "My Lord, appoint a sign for me." "Your sign," He said, "is that you will not be able to speak to people for three nights."
19|11| So he (Zachariah) came out to his people from the sanctuary (where he had been praying in the Temple), and signified to them: "Glorify your Lord at daybreak and in the afternoon."
19|12| (John was born and when he grew up, We commanded him:) "O John! Hold fast to the Book (the Torah) with (all your) strength!" And We granted him sound, wise judgment (and true understanding of God’s Law) while he was yet a little boy;
19|13| And (the gift of) compassion from Our Presence, and purity. He was very pious and righteous,
19|14| And dutiful towards his parents, and he was never unruly, rebellious.
19|15| So peace be upon him on the day he was born and the day of his death, and the day when he will be raised to life.
19|16| And make mention, in the Book, of Mary. She withdrew from her family to a chamber (in the Temple) facing east (to devote herself to worship and reflection).
19|17| Thus she kept herself in seclusion from people. Then We sent to her Our spirit, and it appeared before her in the form of a perfect man.
19|18| She said: "I seek refuge in the All-Merciful from you, if you are a pious, God-conscious one."
19|19| He replied: "I am only a messenger of your Lord to be a means (for God’s gift) to you of a pure son."
19|20| She said: "How shall I have a son, seeing no mortal has ever touched me, and I have never been unchaste?"
19|21| He said: "Just so. Your Lord says: ‘It is easy for Me; and (it must be just so) so that We make him for humankind a sign (of Our Power on account of his birth) and a mercy from Us (on account of his being a Messenger). It is a matter already decreed."
19|22| So she conceived him, and then she withdrew with him to a distant place.
19|23| And the throes of childbirth drove her to the trunk of a date-palm. She said: "Would that I had died before this, and had become a thing forgotten, completely forgotten!"
19|24| (A voice) called out to her from beneath her: "Do not grieve! Your Lord has set a rivulet at your feet.
19|25| "And shake the trunk of the date-palm towards you: it will drop fresh, ripe dates upon you.
19|26| "So eat and drink, and be comforted. If you should see some person, say (through gesture): "I have vowed a fast of silence to the All-Merciful, so I cannot speak to any human being today."
19|27| She came to her people, carrying him. They exclaimed: "O Mary! You have come for sure with an unheard of, mighty thing!
19|28| "O sister of Aaron, your father was never a wicked man, nor was your mother unchaste."
19|29| Mary pointed to him (the infant, signifying that they should ask him). They cried: "How can we talk to one in the cradle, an infant boy?"
19|30| (The infant) said: "Surely I am ‘abdu’l-Lah (a servant of God). He (has already decreed that He) will give me the Book (the Gospel) and make me a Prophet.
19|31| "He has made me blessed (and a means of His blessings for people) wherever I may be, and He has enjoined upon me the Prayer (the Salah) and the the Prescribed Purifying Alms (the Zakah) (and to enjoin the same upon others) for as long as I live.
19|32| "And (He has made me) dutiful towards my mother, and He has not made me unruly, wicked.
19|33| "So peace be upon me on the day I was born and the day of my death, and the day when I will be raised to life."
19|34| Such was Jesus, the son of Mary: in the words of the truth about which they (the Jews and Christians) have been doubting (and disputing amongst themselves and with each other).
19|35| It is not for God to take to Himself a child. All-Glorified is He (in that He is absolutely above doing such things). When He decrees a thing, He does but say to it "Be!" and it is.
19|36| "Surely, God is my Lord and your Lord, so worship Him. This is a straight path (to follow)."
19|37| And yet, the parties (the Jews and Christians) have differed among themselves (about him). Woe, then, to those who disbelieve because of the meeting of an awesome Day.
19|38| How well they will hear and how well they will see on the Day when they come before Us (the truth that they hide or push away will be clear to them)! But today (it will be of no avail to) the wrongdoers, (and they) will be in obvious loss.
19|39| So warn people of the coming of the Day of anguish and regrets, when everything will have been decided, for (even now) they are in heedlessness, and they do not believe.
19|40| Surely it is We alone Who will inherit the earth and all who live on it; and to Us all will be brought back.
19|41| And make mention of Abraham in the Book. He was surely a sincere man of truth, a Prophet.
19|42| When he said to his father: "O my father! Why do you worship that which neither hears nor sees, nor can in anything avail you?
19|43| "O my father! There has indeed come to me of knowledge (of truth) such as has never come to you, so follow me, and I will guide you to an even, straight path.
19|44| "O my father! Do not worship Satan (by obeying his whispering to you to worship idols)! Satan is ever rebellious against the All-Merciful.
19|45| "O my father! I am fearful lest a punishment from the All-Merciful befall you, and then you will become a close friend of Satan (and an instrument in his hand)."
19|46| His father said: "Have you turned away from my deities, O Abraham? If you do not desist, I will surely cause you to be stoned! Now get away from me for a long while!"
19|47| He said: "Peace be upon you! I will pray to my Lord to forgive you. Surely He has been ever gracious to me.
19|48| "And I will withdraw from you (my father and my people), and from whatever you deify and invoke other than God. I pray to my Lord alone; I hope that I will not be unblessed in my prayer to my Lord."
19|49| After he had withdrawn from them and from all that they were worshipping other than God, We bestowed upon him Isaac and Jacob; and each of them We made a Prophet.
19|50| We bestowed upon them (many other gifts) out of Our Mercy, and granted them a most true and lofty renown.
19|51| And mention Moses in the Book. He was one chosen, endowed with perfect sincerity in faith and practicing the Religion, and was a Messenger, a Prophet.
19|52| We called out to him from the right side of Mount Sinai and drew him close for communication.
19|53| Out of Our Mercy, We granted him his brother Aaron to be a Prophet.
19|54| Also make mention of Ishmael in the Book. He was one always true to his promise, and was a Messenger, a Prophet.
19|55| He used to enjoin on his people the Prayer and the Prescribed Purifying Alms, and he was one favored and pleasing in his Lord’s sight.
19|56| And mention Idris in the Book. He was surely a sincere man of truth, a Prophet.
19|57| And We raised him to a high station.
19|58| Those are some of the Prophets – upon whom God bestowed His blessings (of Scripture, Prophethood, good judgment, and wisdom) – from among the descendants of Adam and of those whom We carried (in the Ark) with Noah, and from among the descendants of Abraham and Israel (Jacob), and those whom We guided and chose. When the All-Merciful’s Revelations were recited to them, they would fall down, prostrating and weeping.
19|59| Then, there succeeded them generations who neglected and wasted the Prayer and followed (their) lusts, (abandoning the service of God’s cause). They will meet perdition (as their just deserts).
19|60| Except those who repent and come to belief and do good, righteous deeds. Such will enter Paradise and will not be wronged in anything.
19|61| Gardens of perpetual bliss which the All-Merciful has promised to His servants while unseen (beyond the perception and knowledge of the servants). His promise is ever sure of fulfillment.
19|62| They will hear therein no idle talk, but only peace (contentment and safety). And they will have their provision therein morning and evening.
19|63| That is the Paradise which We will cause those of Our servants who are God-revering, pious to inherit (as theirs forever).
19|64| (In response to an interval in the coming of Revelation, Gabriel explained:) We do not descend but by your Lord’s command only. To Him belongs whatever is before us and whatever is behind us and whatever is between (all time and space and whatever we do at all times in all places). And your Lord is never forgetful (so do not fear that He forgets you).
19|65| (He is) the Lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them; so worship Him alone, and be constant and patient in His worship. Do you know of any whose name is worthy to be mentioned along with His (as Deity and Lord to worship)?
19|66| And (despite this, that disbelieving) human says: "What? Once I am dead, will I then be brought forth alive?"
19|67| Does (that) human not bear in mind that We created him before when he was nothing?
19|68| And so, by your Lord, We will most certainly raise to life and gather them all together, as well as the satans (of humankind and jinn whom they used to follow), before Us, and then We will most certainly heap them up on their knees in groups around Hell.
19|69| Then We will certainly pluck out from every group of the same belief the ones who were most obstinate in rebellion against the All-Merciful.
19|70| Indeed, We know best who deserves most (and before all others) to be thrown into Hell to roast therein.
19|71| There is no one among you, (O humankind,) who will not come to it. This is a fixed decree which your Lord has bound Himself to fulfill.
19|72| Then We will save those who keep from disobedience to Him in reverence for Him and piety, and We will leave in it the wrongdoers (who associate partners with God or deny Him), humbled on their knees.
19|73| When Our Revelations, clear as evidence and in meaning are recited (and conveyed) to them, those who persistently disbelieve say to those who believe: "Which of the two parties (– you or us –) is superior in status with more impressive dwellings and more imposing as a company?"
19|74| And yet, how many a generation have We destroyed before them who were superior in respect of possessions and outward show!
19|75| Say: "Whoever is lost in error, no matter how much the All-Merciful adds (to their wealth and how long He prolongs their life-span), when they face what they were promised – whether it be punishment (here in this world) or the Last Hour – they will come to know who is worse in position and weaker in forces.
19|76| God strengthens in guidance those who have sought and found guidance. The righteous, good deeds of lasting merit are best in your Lord’s sight for reward, and best for returns.
19|77| Have you considered the one who disbelieves in Our Revelations and says (in insolence): "(Whatever you say, I will continue just as I am, for) I will most certainly be given wealth and children"?
19|78| Has he gained knowledge of the Unseen, or has he made a (particular, private) covenant with the All-Merciful?
19|79| No indeed! But We will record what he says and saddle him (with its consequence) as an ever increasing punishment.
19|80| And We will inherit of him what he says, and he will come to us quite alone (bereft of wealth and children).
19|81| They have taken deities apart from God so that they may be (a means of) might and glory for them.
19|82| No indeed! Those (whom they deified – beings such as angels, jinn, Prophets, saints, and heroes, etc.) will deny their worship of them and turn against them as adversaries (on Judgment Day).
19|83| Do you not see that We send the satans upon the unbelievers (because of their unbelief), and they impel them (towards sin and every kind of evil) with strong impulsion?
19|84| So be in no haste against them (so that their days and their persecutions of you might end sooner), for We but number for them a certain (fixed) number (of days, the time allotted for their respite).
19|85| A Day (will come) when We will gather the God-revering, pious ones as honored guests of the All-Merciful (in Paradise);
19|86| And drive the disbelieving criminals to Hell like thirsty cattle.
19|87| (Those who have taken deities so that they may intercede with God on their behalf should know that) none will have a right of intercession except such as have a covenant with the All-Merciful (by virtue of the quality of their faith and worship, and their nearness to Him).
19|88| As it is, some say: "The All-Merciful has taken to Himself a child."
19|89| Assuredly you have (in such an assertion) brought forth something monstrous –
19|90| The heavens are all but rent, and the earth split asunder, and the mountains fall down in ruins –
19|91| That they ascribe to the All-Merciful a child!
19|92| It is not for the All-Merciful to take to Himself a child.
19|93| There is none in the heavens and the earth but comes to the All-Merciful as a servant.
19|94| Most certainly He knows and registers them, and has numbered them exactly, (having appointed for every being a particular service or duty, and determined for each a life-span and provision);
19|95| And every one of them will appear before Him on the Day of Resurrection, quite alone (bereft of all worldly things, children and family, friends and helpers).
19|96| Assuredly, those who believe and do good, righteous deeds, the All-Merciful will assign for them love (in the hearts of the inhabitants of the heaven and many on the earth, so that they will receive welcome throughout creation, no matter if they are weak and small in number now).
19|97| We make it (this Qur’an) in your tongue and easy (to recite and understand) so that you may thereby give glad tidings to the God-revering, pious ones, and warn thereby a people given to contention.
19|98| And how many a generation We have destroyed before them! Can you feel (the existence) of a single one of them, or hear any whisper of them?
20|1| Ta. Ha.
20|2| We do not send down the Qur’an on you so that you suffer distress (in your duty of conveying it to people);
20|3| But only as a reminder for him who holds some awe of God in his heart (and so has the potential to achieve faith).
20|4| A gradual sending down from Him Who has created the earth and the high heavens,
20|5| The All-Merciful, Who has established Himself on the Throne.
20|6| To Him belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth, and whatever is between them, and whatever is under the soil.
20|7| If you say something aloud (or keep it to yourself), He surely knows the secret as well as (whatever you may be keeping as) the more hidden.
20|8| God – there is no deity save Him; His are the All-Beautiful Names.
20|9| Has the story of Moses come to you?
20|10| (He was traveling with his family in the desert) when he saw a fire, and so said to his family: "Wait here! Indeed I perceive a fire far off. Perhaps I can bring you a burning brand from it, or find guidance by the fire."
20|11| Then when he came near to it, he was called by name: "O Moses!
20|12| "Indeed it is I, I am your Lord. So take off your sandals, for you are in the sacred valley of Tuwa.
20|13| "I have chosen you (to be My Messenger), so listen to what is revealed (to you).
20|14| "Assuredly, it is I, I am God, there is no deity save Me. So worship Me, and establish the Prayer in conformity with its conditions for remembrance of Me.
20|15| "Surely the Last Hour is bound to come (unexpectedly. It is so great a truth that) I all but keep it hidden so that every soul may strive for what it strives for (and achieve the just recompense for it).
20|16| "So do not let anyone who does not believe in it and (instead) follows his own desire and caprice, turn you from (believing in and preaching the truth about) it, lest you then perish!
20|17| "What is that in your right hand, Moses?"
20|18| He said: "It is my staff. I lean on it, and with it I beat down leaves for my flock, and I have some other uses for it."
20|19| (God) said: "Throw it down, O Moses!"
20|20| So he threw it down, and there and then it was a snake, slithering.
20|21| (God) said: "Take hold of it and do not fear! We will return it to its former state.
20|22| "Now, put your (right) hand under your armpit: it will come forth shining white, flawless, as another (miraculous) sign,
20|23| "So that We may show you some of Our greatest miraculous signs,
20|24| "Go to the Pharaoh, for he has indeed rebelled."
20|25| (Moses) said: "My Lord! Expand for me my breast.
20|26| "Make my task easy for me.
20|27| "Loose a knot from my tongue (to make my speaking more fluent),
20|28| "So that they may understand my speech clearly.
20|29| "And appoint a minister (helper) for me from my family:
20|30| "Aaron, my brother.
20|31| "Confirm my strength with him,
20|32| "And let him share my task;
20|33| "So that we may glorify You much,
20|34| "And mention and remember You abundantly.
20|35| "Surely You are ever seeing and watching us."
20|36| (God) said: "Your request has already been granted, O Moses.
20|37| "And assuredly We did bestow Our favor upon you at another time before.
20|38| "We inspired in your mother that which she was to be inspired with, saying:
20|39| ‘Place the child in a chest and cast it into the river, then the river will throw it up on the bank: one who is both My enemy and his enemy (the Pharaoh, who has decided to kill all the new-born sons of the Children of Israel) will take him up.’ I cast over you (Moses) love from Me (protecting you, so love for you was aroused in the hearts of people who saw you), and so that you were brought up under My eyes.
20|40| "When your sister (on your mother’s instruction, knowing the Pharaoh’s household had taken you in) went and said: ‘Shall I guide you to one who will nurse him?’ Thus ( – and it is We Who made none other capable of nursing you – ) We returned you to your mother, so that she might rejoice and forget her grief. And (much later on) you killed a man (not intending it), so We saved you from the (ensuing) trouble, and We tested you with trial (of different kinds and degrees only to perfect you). You stayed for years among the people of Midian, and then you attained to the (quality of mind and spirit) expected of and decreed for you, O Moses.
20|41| "And I have attached you to Myself (and so trained you to My service).
20|42| "Go, you and your brother, with My miraculous signs (with which I have provided you), and never slacken in remembrance of Me and reminding (others) of Me.
20|43| "Go, both of you, to the Pharaoh for he has exceedingly rebelled.
20|44| "But speak to him with gentle words, so that he might reflect and be mindful or feel some awe (of me, and behave with humility)."
20|45| They said: "Our Lord, we fear lest he act hastily in regard to us (not allowing us to complete our preaching), or become (more) tyrannical."
20|46| He said: "Do not fear! Surely I am with you, hearing and seeing.
20|47| "Go to him and say: ‘We are indeed Messengers of your Lord (Who has created and sustains you), so let the Children of Israel go with us, and do not cause them to suffer (longer). Assuredly we have come to you with a manifest proof from your Lord. And peace (success and safety and triumph) is upon him who follows His guidance.
20|48| ‘It has surely been revealed to us that (only) punishment is upon him who denies and turns away (from God’s call).’ "
20|49| (When they had spoken to the Pharaoh as God had commanded them,) the Pharaoh said: "Who is this Lord of you two, O Moses?"
20|50| (Moses) said: "Our Lord is He Who creates everything and endows each thing with its particular character, and then guides (it to the fulfillment of the aim and purpose of its existence)."
20|51| (The Pharaoh) said: "Then, what is the case with the earlier generations (all of whom have passed away, how are they recompensed for their beliefs and deeds)?"
20|52| (Moses) answered: "My Lord holds the knowledge of them in a Record. My Lord never errs, nor forgets."
20|53| He Who has made the earth a cradle for you and traced out roads on it for you, and sends down water from the sky, and produces with it pairs of various plants.
20|54| Eat thereof, and feed your cattle. Surely, in all this are signs (manifesting the truth) for people of sound, unbiased thinking.
20|55| From it (earth) We create you, and into it are We returning you, and out of it will We bring you forth a second time.
20|56| We certainly showed the Pharaoh Our signs, all of them (including those We granted particularly to Moses), but he contradicted them and refused (to believe).
20|57| He said: "Moses, have you come to drive us from our land with your sorcery?
20|58| "Then, We will most certainly produce before you sorcery like it. So appoint a meeting between us and you, which neither we nor you will fail to keep, in an open, level place convenient (to both of us)."
20|59| (Moses) said: "The meeting will be on the Day of the Festival, and let the people assemble in the forenoon."
20|60| The Pharaoh then left, and he (set out to) mobilize all his devices, then presented himself (at the appointed meeting).
20|61| Moses said to them (warning them before it was too late for them to be warned): "Woe to you! Do not fabricate lies against God (such as falsely describing His clear proofs as sorcery, falsely pretending that His Message to you aims at driving you out of your land, and by adopting other deities than Him), lest He ruin you with a severe scourge. Whoever fabricates a lie is doomed."
20|62| (Moses’ warning having influenced some among the sorcerers and the Pharaoh’s men,) they began to debate their affair among themselves, holding a secret counsel.
20|63| (The Pharaoh’s men spoke to the sorcerers, and) they said: "These two men are surely sorcerers intent on driving you out of your land with their sorcery, and doing away with your exemplary way of life.
20|64| "So gather your devices, and then come in ordered ranks (as an organized, unified force), for the one who gains the upper hand today has surely triumphed."
20|65| They (the sorcerers) said: "Moses, either you throw or we will be the first to throw!"
20|66| He said: "No, you throw first!" And there and then, by their sorcery, their ropes and their staffs seemed to him to be slithering.
20|67| Then Moses felt in his soul a bit apprehensive (that people may have been influenced by their sorcery).
20|68| We said: "Do not fear! You surely, you are the uppermost.
20|69| "Throw that which is in your right hand: it will swallow up all that they have contrived. What they have contrived is only a sorcerer’s artifice. And a sorcerer can never prosper whatever he may aim at."
20|70| And so (it happened, and) the sorcerers were thrown down, prostrate. They proclaimed: "We have come to believe in the Lord of Aaron and Moses!"
20|71| (The Pharaoh) said: "Do you believe in Him before I give you leave? I see that he (Moses) is your master who taught you sorcery! I will surely have your hands and feet cut off alternately, and have you crucified on the trunks of palm-trees, and you will certainly come to know which of us (– the Lord of Aaron and Moses or I –) is more severe in punishment and (whose punishment is) more lasting!"
20|72| They said: "We will never prefer you above the clear evidence (manifesting the truth) that has come before us, and above Him Who originated us. So decree whatever you decree: you can decree only for the life of this world.
20|73| "We have surely come to believe in our Lord and (we hope) that He may forgive us our faults and that sorcery to which you compelled us. God is the best (in giving reward), and the most permanent."
20|74| Whoever comes before his Lord as a disbelieving criminal, for him surely there will be Hell: he will neither die therein nor live.
20|75| Whereas he who comes before Him as a believer who did good, righteous deeds, for such are high ranks and lofty stations –
20|76| Gardens of perpetual bliss through which rivers flow, therein to abide. Such is the recompense of whoever attains to purity.
20|77| We revealed to Moses: "Set forth with My servants by night, and (when you reach the sea’s edge with the Pharaoh and his army in pursuit) strike for them a dry path with your staff through the sea, and you need have no fear of being overtaken (by Pharaoh) or of drowning in the sea."
20|78| Then the Pharaoh pursued them with his armed hosts, and they were overwhelmed by the sea to their complete destruction.
20|79| The Pharaoh had led his people astray (and finally he led them to destruction); he did not guide them (either to the truth or to prosperity).
20|80| O Children of Israel! We saved you from your enemy; and We made a covenant with you through Moses on the right side of Mount Sinai (and granted you the Torah); and We sent down on you manna and quails (to sustain you in the desert).
20|81| (We said:) Eat of the pure, wholesome things that We have provided for you but do not exceed the bounds therein (by wastefulness, ingratitude, unlawful earnings, and the like). Otherwise My condemnation will justly fall upon you, and upon whoever My wrath falls, he has indeed thrown himself into ruin.
20|82| Yet I am surely All-Forgiving to whoever repents and believes and does good, righteous deeds, and thereafter keeps himself on the right path.
20|83| (When Moses came to Our appointment with him in Mount Sinai to receive the Torah, We asked him:) "Moses, what has caused you to leave your people behind in such haste?"
20|84| He replied: "They are following in my footsteps; and I have shown haste to come to You so that You may be well-pleased with Me."
20|85| (God) said: "Then (know that) We have put your people to a test in your absence, and the Samiri (Samaritan) has led them astray."
20|86| So Moses returned to his people in anger and sorrow. He said: "My people! Did your Lord not make you a fair promise (that He would grant you the Torah for your happiness in both worlds and settle you in the land the environs of which He has blessed)? Did, then, the time appointed (for my absence) seem too long to you or did you desire that a condemnation from your Lord should fall upon you, that you broke your promise to me?"
20|87| They said: "We did not break our promise to you of our own accord (with intent), but we were loaded with (sinful) loads of ornaments of the people (of Egypt), and we threw them (to get rid of them), in the same way as the Samiri threw (them, into a fire)."
20|88| And then he brought out for them a calf shaping to it (from the molten ornaments) a body (which made a sound like) mooing. Then they said (some of them to others): "This is your deity and the deity of Moses, but he has forgotten."
20|89| Did they not see at all that (even) it could not return to them a word (for answer), and had no power to harm or benefit them?
20|90| And Aaron had certainly said to them, before Moses’ return, (warning them:) "O my people! You are only being tested through this (idol to prove the quality of your understanding and faith). Truly Your Lord is the All-Merciful (Who is most forgiving), so follow me and obey my order!"
20|91| But they said: "We will by no means cease to worship it until Moses comes back to us."
20|92| (Having returned, and unaware of Aaron’s warning, Moses) said: "O Aaron! What prevented you, when you saw them gone astray,
20|93| "From following me? Have you, then, disobeyed my order?"
20|94| Aaron said: "O son of my mother! Do not seize me by my beard, nor by my head! I was afraid lest you should say: ‘You have caused division among the Children of Israel, and paid no heed to my orders!’ "
20|95| (Moses turned to the Samiri and) said: "What is the matter with you, O Samiri, (that you did such a monstrous thing)?"
20|96| He answered: "I have seen something which they were unable to see, and so I took a handful (of dust) from the trail of the messenger (the archangel Gabriel) and cast it into the molten ornaments: thus did my soul prompt me to act."
20|97| (Moses) said: "Be gone, then! (The sentence) upon you is that in this present life you say ‘Touch me not!’ (to warn people against proximity to you), and surely there is for you a promise (of punishment) that you cannot evade. Now look to this deity of yours to whose worship you have become devoted: we will most certainly burn it, and scatter whatever remains of it over the sea!
20|98| (O my people!) Your only deity is God, other than Whom there is no deity. He encompasses all things in His Knowledge."
20|99| Thus do We relate to you (O Messenger) some of the exemplary events which happened in the past. Indeed We have granted you a Reminder (a Book of knowledge and instructions) from Our Presence.
20|100| Whoever turns away from it, certainly bears a burden on the Day of Resurrection,
20|101| Forever carrying it. How evil a burden is theirs on the Day of Resurrection!
20|102| That Day the Trumpet will be blown, and We will raise to life and gather the disbelieving criminals white-eyed (with terror and fatigue);
20|103| They whisper among themselves: "You stayed in the world only ten (days)."
20|104| It is We Who have full knowledge of what they talk about, when the most perceptive among them say, "You stayed only one day."
20|105| They ask you (O Messenger) about (what will happen to) the mountains (on Doomsday). Say: "My Lord will blast them into scattered dust.
20|106| "And He will leave it (the earth) as a desolate waste.
20|107| "You will see in it neither curve nor ruggedness."
20|108| On that Day, all will follow the summoning Voice straightforwardly without any deviation, and all voices will be humbled for the All-Merciful, and you will hear nothing but a hushed murmur.
20|109| On that Day, intercession is not of any avail except his, to whom the All-Merciful gives permission and with whose words He is well-pleased.
20|110| He knows what lies before His servants (especially on Judgment Day) and whatever (of intentions, or speech, or actions) they have left behind, whereas they cannot comprehend Him with their knowledge.
20|111| And (on that Day) all faces are humbled before the All-Living, the Self-Subsisting One (by Whom all else subsist). And assuredly he has failed whose load is wrongdoing.
20|112| Whereas whoever does good, righteous deeds, being a believer, need have no fear of being wronged or deprived (of his just recompense).
20|113| And thus have We sent it down as a qur’an (a discourse) in Arabic and set out in it warnings in diverse contexts and from diverse perspectives, so that they may keep from disobedience to Us in reverence for Us and piety, or that it may prompt them to remembrance and heedfulness.
20|114| Absolutely exalted is God, the Supreme Sovereign, the Absolute Truth and Ever-Constant. Do not show haste (O Messenger) with (the receiving and memorizing of any Revelation included in) the Qur’an before it has been revealed to you in full, but say: "My Lord, increase me in knowledge."
20|115| Assuredly We had made a covenant with Adam (and forbidden him to approach a tree in the Garden), but he acted forgetfully. We did not find resolve in him (at that moment).
20|116| And when We said to the angels, "Prostrate yourselves before Adam," they all prostrated themselves. But Iblis did not; he refused.
20|117| So We said: "O Adam, surely this is an enemy to you and your wife; so let him not drive the two of you out of the Garden, lest you become distressed.
20|118| "Surely it is provided for you that you shall not go hungry therein nor become naked,
20|119| "And that you shall not go thirsty therein nor suffer the sun’s heat."
20|120| But Satan made an evil suggestion, saying: "O Adam, shall I lead you to the tree of everlasting life and a kingdom that will never decay?"
20|121| They both ate of it, so their shameful parts (and all the seemingly evil impulses in their creation) were apparent to them, and both began to cover themselves with leaves from the Garden. Adam disobeyed his Lord and fell into error.
20|122| Thereafter his Lord chose him (for His favor), accepted His repentance, and bestowed His guidance upon him.
20|123| We said: "Go down from here, the two of you, all together (with Satan, and henceforth you will live a life,) some of you being the enemies of others. If there comes to you from Me a guidance (like a Book through a Messenger), then whoever follows My guidance (and turns to Me with faith and worship), will not go astray, nor will he be unhappy.
20|124| "But as for him who turns away from My remembrance (and from the Book), his will be a suffocated life, and We will raise him up blind on the Day of Resurrection."
20|125| He says: "My Lord, why have You raised me up blind, while I used to be seeing (in my life of the world)?"
20|126| (God) says: "Just so. Our Revelations came to you but you disregarded them, so today you will be disregarded."
20|127| Thus do We recompense him who is wasteful (of his God-given faculties) and commits excesses, and does not believe in his Lord’s Revelations. And indeed, the punishment in the Hereafter is more severe and most enduring.
20|128| Is it not a guidance for them how many a generation We have destroyed before them, in whose ruined dwelling-places they walk about (in the present)? Surely in that there are signs (manifesting the truth) for people of discernment.
20|129| Had it not been for a decree already issued by your Lord, and for a term already appointed (by Him), the judgment (against them) would certainly have been given and executed.
20|130| Therefore, be patient (O Messenger) with whatever they say and glorify your Lord with praise before sunrise and before sunset, and glorify Him during some hours of the night – as well as glorifying (Him) at the ends of the day – so that you may obtain God’s good pleasure and be contented (with what God has decreed for you).
20|131| Do not strain your eyes toward what We have given some groups among them to enjoy (in this worldly life), the splendor of the present, worldly life, so that We may test them thereby. The provision of Your Lord (the favors He has bestowed upon you here and hereafter) is better and more lasting.
20|132| Order your family and community to establish the Prayer, and be diligent in its observance. We do not ask you to provide for Us; rather it is We Who provide for you. (So all your worship is for your own benefit.) And the (desired) outcome is in favor of piety and righteousness.
20|133| And they say: "If only he brought us a miracle from his Lord!" Has there not come to them (as a sufficient miracle) a Clear Evidence of (the truth) in what is (to be found) in the former Scriptures?
20|134| Had We destroyed them with a punishment before it (before the Evidence came to them), they would surely have said: "Our Lord! If only You had sent us a Messenger, we would have followed Your Revelations before we were humiliated and disgraced."
20|135| Say: "Everyone (we and you) is in an expectation (of what the future will bring), so continue to expect! You will soon come to know who have been the followers of the even path and who have been rightly guided (and therefore whose expectations have proved true).
21|1| Their reckoning has drawn near for humankind, yet they do not pay heed to it, being lost in worldly things and heedlessness.
21|2| Whenever a new Revelation comes to them from their Lord to warn and enlighten them, they only listen to it in a playful manner,
21|3| With hearts set on passing pleasures; yet those who lead in wrongdoing, especially by associating partners with God, confer among themselves in great secret: "Is this (not) but a mortal like you? Will you, then, yield to magic while you see it patently?"
21|4| (The Messenger) says (in response): "My Lord knows every word spoken in the heaven and on the earth. He is the All-Hearing, the All-Knowing."
21|5| (Confused about which source they should attribute the Qur’an to) they say, "No, but Muhammad offers some jumbles of dream images he has. No, but he fabricates all this! No, but he is a poet. If he is true in his claim, then let him come to us with a sign (a miracle), just as the previous Messengers were sent with miracles!"
21|6| Not one of the peoples before them that We destroyed believed (even though the Messengers came to them with miracles). Will then these believe?
21|7| We did not send as Messengers before you (O Muhammad), any but men to whom We revealed. So (O people) ask those who have special knowledge (of the Divine Revelations), if you do not know.
21|8| Nor did We make them bodies not needing food so that they would not eat like others, nor were they immortals.
21|9| We promised them help and victory and We kept Our promise: We saved them and all whom We willed (and bound Ourselves to save – the believers), and We destroyed those who wasted their God-given faculties and committed excesses.
21|10| Now We send down to you (O people of Makkah and O all humankind,) a Book which contains what you must heed in life for your honor and happiness. Will you not, then, use your reason?
21|11| How many a community that did the greatest wrong (by associating partners with God) and thereby wronged itself have We shattered, and raised up another people after them.
21|12| When they felt Our mighty punishment coming, they at once attempted to flee from it.
21|13| "Do not attempt to flee, but return to all that (ease and comfort) in which you had been lost without scruples, and to your homes, that you may be appealed to by the poor and needy, or to take your valuable counsels!
21|14| They could only cry: "Oh, woe to us! We were indeed wrongdoers!"
21|15| That cry of theirs did not cease until We made them like reaped corn, and a heap of ashes.
21|16| We have not created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them as a play and game for Us.
21|17| If We had willed to find a pastime (without creating the heavens and the earth with all that is in and between them), We would indeed have found it in Our Presence, if We were going to do so!
21|18| No, but We hurl the truth against falsehood, and it breaks the latter’s head, and see, it vanishes. So woe to you for all the falsehood you attribute to God.
21|19| To Him belongs whoever is in the heavens and the earth. And those (the angels) who are with Him, never disdain to worship Him, nor do they ever weary.
21|20| They glorify Him by night and day (proclaiming that He is absolutely exalted above any shortcoming or need of partners or doing pointless things), and never show tiredness and never lose zeal.
21|21| What, have those polytheists (given up hope of heaven and) adopted deities from the earth, (do they believe) that they (those deities) can raise up the dead?
21|22| But the fact is that had there been in the heavens and the earth any deities other than God, both (of those realms) would certainly have fallen into ruin. All-Glorified God is, the Lord of the Supreme Throne, in that He is absolutely above all that they attribute to Him.
21|23| He cannot be called to account for whatever He does, but their false deities (they have adopted from among conscious beings) are accountable.
21|24| What, have they adopted deities other than Him? Say (O Messenger): "If so, present your proof! But look, here is the Book those who are in my company follow, and there are the Books those who came before me followed: (what is stressed in all of them is that there is no deity other than Him.)" Whereas they have nothing to do with knowledge so that they might know the truth. This is why they turn away from it in aversion.
21|25| We never sent any Messenger before you except that We revealed to him that there is no deity but Me, so worship Me alone.
21|26| Yet some say, "The All-Merciful has taken to Himself a child." All-Glorified He is (in that He is absolutely above doing such things). Rather, those (the angels, whom they regard as God’s offspring) are but His honored servants.
21|27| They speak only what He has spoken to them and allows them to speak, and they act by His command.
21|28| He knows what lies before them and what lies after them (what lies in their future and in their past, what is known to them and what is hidden from them); and they cannot intercede for any but His believing servants, those with whom He is well-pleased, and they themselves quake for reverent awe of Him.
21|29| If any of them were to attempt to say, "I am a deity besides Him," We would recompense him with Hell. Thus do We recompense all such wrongdoers.
21|30| Do those who disbelieve ever consider that the heavens and the earth were at first one piece, and then We parted them as separate entities; and that We have made every living thing from water? Will they still not come to believe?
21|31| We have set up firm mountains on the earth lest it should shake them with its movement, and We have made thereon broad paths, so that they might find their way.
21|32| And We have established the heaven as a canopy well-secured (against collapse and the ascension of devils). Yet they turn away from all such signs (of truth manifested) in the universe.
21|33| It is He Who has created the night and the day and the sun and the moon. Every one (of such celestial bodies) floats in its orbit.
21|34| We never granted everlasting life to any human being before you (O Messenger); so if you die, will they live forever?
21|35| Every soul (person) is bound to taste death, and We try you through the bad and the good things (of life) by way of testing (so that your real character and rank may reveal itself). In fact, you are on the way to return to Us, (to finally be brought to Our Presence).
21|36| When those who persistently disbelieve see you, they make you but a target of mockery, (saying to each other): "Is this the one who speaks against your deities?" (They cannot bear to hear their false deities denied.) And yet it is they themselves who deny the Book of the All-Merciful (Who has created them and embraces them with mercy, without recognizing this as a crime).
21|37| Humankind are by nature impatient as if made of haste, (this is why they ask derisively when the punishment with which they are threatened will come.) I will soon show you the truth of My threats, so do not ask Me to hasten it.
21|38| But they insistently ask, "After all, when will this threat be fulfilled? (Answer us, O you who believe in it,) if you are people of truth!"
21|39| If only those who persistently disbelieve knew the time when they will be unable to ward off the Fire from their faces, and from their backs, and they will never be helped against it!
21|40| But it will come upon them all of a sudden and dumbfound them. They will not be able to avert it, nor will they be given respite to escape it.
21|41| Indeed, Messengers were mocked before you (O Muhammad), but the very thing, because of which the people used to mock them, overwhelmed those who scoffed at the Messengers (to humiliate them).
21|42| Say: "Who could protect you by night and day from the All-Merciful, if He wills to punish you?" And yet, they turn away from the Book of their Lord in aversion.
21|43| Or do they really have deities apart from Us to defend them? They (those alleged deities) are not even able to help themselves, nor can they get any help and friendship from Us.
21|44| The truth is that We have provided for those (polytheist sinners) and their forefathers to enjoy life, so that they have lived for a long time in ease and safety. (This is why they think that they will live forever in prosperity.) Whereas do they not see how We deal with the earth, reducing it of its outlying parts? So, can they really be the victors?
21|45| Say: "I warn you only on the strength of the Revelation (in which there is no doubt). But the deaf do not hear the call, however much they are warned."
21|46| And yet, if but a breath of your Lord’s punishment touches them, they are sure to cry: "Oh, woe to us! We were indeed wrongdoers!"
21|47| We will set up balances of absolute justice on the Day of Resurrection, and no person will be wronged in the least. Even though it be a deed so much as the weight of a grain of mustard seed, We will bring it forth to be weighed. We suffice as reckoners.
21|48| We granted Moses and Aaron the Criterion (the Book distinguishing between truth and falsehood,) and made it a (guiding) light and reminder for the God-revering, pious.
21|49| They stand in great awe of their Lord though unseen (and beyond their perception), and tremble with the thought of the Last Hour.
21|50| And this one (the Qur’an), too, is a Reminder full of blessings which We are sending down. Will you then reject it?
21|51| Indeed We had, before this, granted Abraham discretion and his particular consciousness of truth, and We knew him very well (in all aspects of his character).
21|52| He said to his father and people: "What are these images to which you pay such sincere devotion?"
21|53| They said: "We have found our forefathers worshipping them."
21|54| "So, it is certain that," said he, "both of you, you and your forefathers, have been in obvious error."
21|55| They asked: "Is it the truth that you are proclaiming to us or are you jesting?"
21|56| He answered: "No, but your Lord is the Lord of the heavens and the earth, Who has originated them, each with particular features, and I am one to bear witness to this truth."
21|57| And (he made a decision:) "By God, I will most certainly devise a plan against your idols as soon as you have turned your backs and gone away!"
21|58| And then he broke all of them to pieces except the one biggest in their sight, so that they might be able turn back to it (to ask what had happened)!
21|59| "Who has done all this to our deities?" they exclaimed. "Indeed, he is one of the worst wrongdoers!"
21|60| Some said: "We heard a young man make mention of them, who is called Abraham."
21|61| They said: "Then bring him before the people’s eyes, so that they may bear witness against him!"
21|62| "Abraham," they asked, "is it you who has done this to our deities?"
21|63| He answered: "Rather, (some doer) must have done it – this is the biggest of them. Ask them, if they are able to speak!"
21|64| So they turned to their conscious nature which awoke to truth, and said (among themselves): "You (we), it is you (we) who are the wrongdoers!"
21|65| But afterwards, (under the influence of the same factors causing them to disbelieve) they relapsed into their former way of believing, and said to Abraham: "You know very well that these (images) cannot speak."
21|66| (Abraham) said: "Then, do you worship, instead of God, that which cannot benefit you in any way, nor harm you?
21|67| "Shame on you and on all that you worship instead of God! Will you not reason and understand?"
21|68| They exclaimed: "Burn him and so protect your deities, if you really mean to do something!"
21|69| "O fire," We ordered, "Be cool and peaceful for Abraham!"
21|70| They had schemed to destroy him but We frustrated them, making them the worst of losers.
21|71| We saved him and Lot (who believed in him), guiding them to the land (of Damascus, including Palestine) in which We have produced many blessings for all peoples.
21|72| We bestowed upon him Isaac, and as an additional gift, Jacob (for grandson); and each We made righteous.
21|73| And We made them leaders guiding people by Our command, and We revealed to them to do good deeds, and to establish the Prayer in conformity with its conditions, and pay the Prescribed Purifying Alms. They were Our servants devoted to worshipping us with all sincerity.
21|74| And Lot too (We made a leader), to whom We granted sound, wise judgment, and revealed knowledge, and We saved him from the people of the land who were given to deeds of corruption. Truly, they were a wicked people lost in transgression.
21|75| We embraced him in Our mercy; surely he was among the righteous.
21|76| And Noah, too. He had called out to Us long before (Abraham), and We answered his prayer and saved him and (those of) his family and people (who believed in him) from the tremendous distress.
21|77| We helped him to safety from the people who denied Our Revelations. Truly, they were a wicked people, so We caused them all to drown.
21|78| (Among those whom We made leaders were) David and Solomon. The two were once judging a case regarding a field into which the sheep of some other people had strayed at night. We were watching and witnessing their judgment.
21|79| We made Solomon understand the case more clearly. We granted each of them sound, wise judgment and knowledge (pertaining to the mission and in accordance with the time and conditions of each). And We subdued the mountains, as well as birds, to glorify Us along with David. It is We Who do all these things.
21|80| And We taught him the art of making iron coats-of-mail so that they might fortify you from the violence of war. So, are you (really people who are) thankful?
21|81| And in Solomon’s service We put the stormy wind, running at his command to carry him to the land in which We have produced blessings (for people). We have full knowledge of everything (with their true nature and all their aspects).
21|82| And of the jinn and satans (devils) were some who dived for him (to extract precious stones from the sea) and did other works besides, and We were keeping watch over them (to prevent them from disobeying him).
21|83| And (mention) Job (among those whom We made leaders): he called out to his Lord, saying: "Truly, affliction has visited me (so that I can no longer worship You as I must); and You are the Most Merciful of the merciful."
21|84| We answered his prayer and removed all the afflictions from which he suffered; and restored to him his household and the like thereof along with them as a mercy from Us and, as a reminder to those devoted to Our worship.
21|85| (Mention also) Ishmael, Idris, and Dhu’l-Kifl (among the leaders). All were men of fortitude and patience.
21|86| We embraced them in Our mercy. They were among the people of utmost righteousness.
21|87| And (also mention) Dhu’n-Nun (Jonah). He departed in anger (from his people, who persistently disbelieved and paid no attention to his warnings), and he was certain that We would never straiten (his life for) him. But eventually he called out in the veils of darkness (formed of the belly of the fish, the sea, and dark, rainy night): "There is no deity but You, All-Glorified You are (in that You are absolutely above having any defect). Surely, I have been one of the wrongdoers (who have wronged themselves)."
21|88| We answered His call, too, and We saved him from distress. Thus do We save the believers.
21|89| (Mention also) Zachariah. Once he called out to his Lord, saying: "My Lord! Do not let me leave the world without an heir, for You are the Best of the inheritors."
21|90| We answered his call, too, and bestowed upon him John, and cured his wife for him (so she was able) to bear a child. Truly, these (three) used to hasten to do good deeds as if competing with each other, and invoke Us in hopeful yearning and fearful anxiety. And they were utterly humble before Us.
21|91| And (mention) that blessed woman who set the best example in guarding her chastity. We breathed into her out of Our Spirit, and We made her and her son a miraculous sign (of Our Power and matchless way of doing things) for all the worlds.
21|92| So, this community of yours (which all the Messengers and their followers have formed) is one single community of the same faith, and I am your Lord (Who creates, sustains, and protects you); so worship Me alone.
21|93| But people have broken up and differed among themselves as regards the Religion. But they are all bound to return to Us (to account for all that they did).
21|94| Whoever does any deed of good and righteousness, being a true believer, his endeavor will not be left unrewarded in ingratitude. We are keeping the record of every good deed of his in his favor (without the least being neglected).
21|95| It is inconceivable that a community, the destruction of which We have decreed (because of their unbelief and irremediable sins), could return to faith, (nor a community which We destroyed should not come back to Us and then be returned to the world again so that they could believe and do good deeds).
21|96| Eventually, a day will come when Gog and Magog will be let loose, and they will rush down from every mound.
21|97| And the true promise of the Last Hour has been close at hand, and look, the eyes of those who stubbornly disbelieve stare in horror fixedly, exclaiming: "Woe to us! Indeed we have lived in heedlessness and forgetfulness of this. Ah! We truly have been wrongdoers (who have, most of all, wronged our own selves)!"
21|98| "You and all the things you deify and worship apart from God are but firewood for Hell. You are bound to arrive in it."
21|99| If those (false objects of their worship) had truly been gods, they would not arrive in it. Every one of them will abide therein.
21|100| Moaning will be their lot in it, and (nothing to their benefit) will they be able to hear therein (as a recompense for their willful deafness to the Divine Revelation in the world).
21|101| But, as for those for whom the decree of ultimate good has already gone forth from Us, they will be kept away from it (Hell).
21|102| They will not even hear the slightest sound of it, and they will abide in that which their souls desire, (enjoying it to the full).
21|103| Even the greatest shock (of the second blowing of the Trumpet) will not cause them any worry, and the angels welcome them, with the greeting: "This is your day, the day which you were promised."
21|104| The Day when We will roll up heaven as written scrolls are rolled up. We will bring the creation back into existence as easily as We originated it in the first instance. This is a binding promise on Us, and assuredly We fulfill whatever We promise.
21|105| We (recorded in the Supreme Preserved Tablet and then) wrote down in the Psalms after the Torah that My righteous servants will inherit the earth.
21|106| Surely in this (Qur’an) there is the explanation (of every truth necessary) for God’s servants devoted to worshipping Him.
21|107| We have not sent you (O Muhammad) but as an unequalled mercy for all the worlds.
21|108| Say: "It is revealed to me that your God is the One and Only God. Will you, then, become Muslims (those wholly submitted to Him)?"
21|109| If they still turn away, say: "I have conveyed to you all that I must convey, and warned you all alike. But I do not know if that with which you are threatened (whether it be the destruction or the Last Judgment,) is near or far.
21|110| "Truly, He knows all that is spoken openly, just as He knows all that you keep concealed (including your secret intentions).
21|111| "I do not know but the respite given to you may be a trial for you (– a respite so that you may fully display your deserving His punishment), and enjoyment for a while."
21|112| (The Messenger) said (in conclusion): "My Lord, judge (between me and those unbelievers) with truth (and allow the truth to be fully manifested). Our Lord is the All-Merciful, the One Whose help is ever sought against all that you falsely attribute (to Him and me)."
22|1| O humankind! Keep from disobedience to your Lord in reverence for Him and piety and get under His protection. (Never forget that) the violent convulsion of the Last Hour is an awesome thing.
22|2| On the Day when you all see it, every suckling mother will utterly forsake her infant in dread, and every pregnant female will cast off her burden. You will see all people as if gone out of their senses, while, in fact, they are in their senses. This is because God’s punishment is extremely severe.
22|3| Among people there are such as dispute about God without any true knowledge and follow every corrupt, rebellious, and mischievous satan.
22|4| It is decreed about him (Satan) that whoever takes him for a guardian, surely he leads him astray, and guides him to the punishment of the Blaze.
22|5| O humankind! If you are in doubt about the Resurrection, (consider that) We created you from earth (in the beginning while there was nothing of your existence as humankind, and the material origin of every one of you is also earth). Then (We have created you) from a drop of seminal fluid, then from a clot clinging (to the womb wall), then from a lump in part shaped and in part not shaped, and differentiated and undifferentiated, and so do We clarify for you (the reality of the Resurrection). And We cause what We will (to come into the world) to rest in the wombs for an appointed term, then We bring you out as (dependent) infants, then (We provide what is necessary and appropriate) so that you may attain your age of full strength. Among you some are caused to die (during this period of growth and afterwards), and some are kept back to the most miserable state of old age, ceasing to know anything after once having known some things. (As another proof for the Resurrection and a sign to comprehend it,) you see earth dry and lifeless, and suddenly, when We send down the (known, blessed) water on it, it stirs and swells and grows every pleasant pair of vegetation.
22|6| And so, God is He Who is the Absolute Truth and Ever-Constant, and He gives life to the dead, and He has full power over everything.
22|7| And the Last Hour is sure to come – there is no doubt about it. And God will surely raise up all who are in the graves.
22|8| And yet, among people there are some who dispute about God without having any true knowledge or any true guidance or an enlightening (Divine) Book.
22|9| They keep on disputing arrogantly to lead people astray from God’s way. For such there is disgrace in the world, and on the Day of Resurrection We will cause them to taste the punishment of the scorching Fire.
22|10| "This punishment is the outcome of what you have (committed and) forwarded with your own hands, and never does God do the least wrong to His servants."
22|11| Among people are also many a one who worships God on the borderline (of faith) in expectation of only worldly gains. If any good befalls him, he is satisfied with it, but if a trial afflicts him, he turns away utterly, reverting back to unbelief. He (thereby) incurs loss of both this world and the Hereafter. This indeed is the obvious loss.
22|12| He invokes, apart from God, that which can neither harm nor benefit him. That indeed is straying very far away.
22|13| He even invokes the being that is far more likely to cause harm than benefit: what evil a patron, and what evil an associate!
22|14| Surely God will admit those who believe and do good, righteous deeds into the Gardens through which rivers flow. Surely God does whatever He wills.
22|15| Whoever thinks that God will not help the Messenger to victory in the world and to utmost prosperity in the Hereafter, then let him move heaven and earth to prevent His help: let him stretch out a rope to heaven (to prevent God’s help and Revelation from reaching him), and then sever that rope to descend without being broken into pieces. Then let him see whether the schemes he makes will be of any avail to him, and (whether he can) do away with what enrages him.
22|16| It is in the face of such rage and malice that We send down the Qur’an in messages clear in meaning and content and as manifest signs of the truth; and God guides whomever He wills.
22|17| Those who truly believe (in God and follow Muhammad), and those who have become Jews, and the Sabaeans, and the Christians, and the Magians, and those who associate partners with God (without having any relation with a Divinely-inspired religion) – God will certainly judge between them on the Day of Resurrection. God is witness over everything.
22|18| Do you ever consider that all who are in the heavens and all who are on the earth prostrate themselves to God, and so do the sun, the moon, the stars, the mountains, the trees, and the beasts, and so do many among human beings? Whereas many others are deservedly condemned to punishment. Whoever God humiliates can have none to give him honor. Assuredly, God does whatever He wills.
22|19| These are two opposing groups (– those who prostrate to God and those who do not. Though there may be differences of approach within either group), they contend about (the truth concerning) their Lord. As for those who disbelieve (by categorically denying Him or associating partners with Him in His Attributes or authority as the Lord), garments of fire are certain to be cut out for them, with boiling water being poured down over their heads,
22|20| With which all that is within their bodies, as well as their skins, is melted away.
22|21| For them are also goads and maces of iron.
22|22| Whenever in their anguish they attempt to come out of the Fire, they will be returned into it (and told): "Taste the punishment of the scorching Fire!"
22|23| (On the other hand,) God will admit those who believe and do good, righteous deeds into the Gardens through which rivers flow; adorned therein with armbands of gold and pearls, and their garments therein will be of silk.
22|24| They have been guided to (believe in and declare) the purest of words, and they have been guided to the path of the All-Praiseworthy One, (saying and doing only what is praiseworthy).
22|25| Those who disbelieve and bar (others) from God’s way and (the believers from visiting) the Sacred Mosque, which We have set up as a place of worship for all (believing) people alike, both for those who dwell therein (in Makkah) and for those who come from abroad – whoever seeks a deviation from the right course therein by deliberate wrongdoing, We cause him to taste a painful punishment.
22|26| Remember when We assigned to Abraham the site of the House (Ka‘bah) as a place of worship, (directing him): "Do not associate any partners with Me in any way, and keep My House pure (from any material and spiritual filth) for those who will go round it in devotion, and those who will stand in prayer before it, and those who will bow down and prostrate themselves in worship."
22|27| Publicly proclaim the (duty of) Pilgrimage for all humankind, that they come to you on foot and on lean camels, coming from every far-away point,
22|28| So that they may witness all (the spiritual, social, and economic) benefits in store for them, and offer during the known, appointed days the sacrificial cattle that He has provided for them by pronouncing God’s Name over them. Eat of their meat and feed the distressed, the poor.
22|29| Thereafter let them tidy themselves up (by having their hair cut, removing their ihram (Hajj attire), taking a bath, and clipping their nails, etc.), and fulfill the vows (if they have made any, and complete other acts of the Pilgrimage), and go round the Most Ancient, Honorable House in devotion.
22|30| All that (is what God ordained concerning the Hajj). So whoever venerates God’s sanctities will find it to be the best for him in his Lord’s sight. Cattle have been made lawful for you (for sacrifice and food) except what has already been mentioned to you (as unlawful). So, shun the loathsome evil of idol-worship and shun all words of falsehood (never say or consider or legislate anything contrary to revealed commandments concerning the lawful and the unlawful),
22|31| Being believers of pure faith in God, without associating any partners with Him. Whoever associates any partners with God, it is as if he fell down from heaven, and thereupon the wild birds of prey snatch him away, or the wind blows him away into a distant, abysmal ditch (causing him to be shattered into pieces).
22|32| That (is the truth itself). And whoever venerates the public symbols and rituals set up by God (such as Jumu‘ah and ‘Id Prayers, call to the Prayer, Sacrifice, and the rites of the Pilgrimage), surely it is because of the true piety and God-consciousness of their hearts.
22|33| There are benefits for you in them (the sacrificial animals offering of which in God’s cause is among Islam’s public symbols and rituals,) until the appointed term (of their sacrifice). Then their being carried for sacrifice (during the Hajj) ends in the sacred precincts of the Most Ancient, Honorable House.
22|34| For every believing community We have laid down sacrifice as an act of worship to be performed at a certain time and place. So they must pronounce God’s Name over what We have provided for them of cattle (while offering it). And (bear in mind that) your God is the One and Only God, so to Him alone submit yourselves wholly. And give glad tidings to the deeply devoted, humble servants –
22|35| Those whose hearts tremble with awe whenever God is mentioned, who are always patient with whatever ill befalls them, who always establish the Prayer in conformity with its conditions, and who spend (in God’s cause and for the needy) out of whatever We provide for them.
22|36| And the cattle, (including especially the camels) – We have appointed their sacrifice as among the public symbols and rituals set up by God for you, in which there is much good for you. When they (the camels) are lined up in standing position for sacrifice, pronounce God’s Name over them. When they fall down on their sides and fully die ready to be eaten, eat of their meat and feed the poor such as (beg not but) live in contentment and such as beg with due humility. (It is for the purposes and benefits mentioned, and based on the principles mentioned) that We have put the sacrificial animals in your service, so that you may give thanks to God.
22|37| (Bear in mind that) neither their flesh nor their blood reaches God, but only piety and consciousness of God reach Him from you. (It is for the purposes and benefits mentioned, and based on the principles mentioned) that We have put them in your service so that you must exalt God because He has guided you (to correct belief and worship and obedience to Him). Give glad tidings to those devoted to doing good, aware that God is seeing them.
22|38| Surely God defends strongly those who believe. Certainly God does not love any treacherous, ungrateful one.
22|39| The believers against whom war is waged are given permission to fight in response, for they have been wronged. Surely, God has full power to help them to victory –
22|40| Those who have been driven from their homeland against all right, for no other reason than that they say, "Our Lord is God." Were it not for God’s repelling some people by means of others, monasteries and churches and synagogues and mosques, where God is regularly worshipped and His Name is much mentioned, would surely have been pulled down (with the result that God is no longer worshipped and the earth becomes uninhabitable). God most certainly helps whoever helps His cause. Surely, God is All-Strong, All-Glorious with irresistible might.
22|41| They are the believers who, if We give them authority on earth, without doubt establish the Prayer in conformity with its conditions, pay the Prescribed Purifying Alms fully, and enjoin and promote what is right and good and forbid and try to prevent the evil. With God rests the outcome for all matters.
22|42| If they are denying you (O Messenger, you know that) before them the people of Noah, the Ad and the Thamud also denied (the Messengers sent to each.)
22|43| And so too did the people of Abraham and the people of Lot;
22|44| And the dwellers of Midian, and Moses too was denied (by the Pharaoh and his clan). Every time I granted respite to the unbelievers and then seized them (when they persisted in unbelief and injustices), how awesome was My disowning them!
22|45| How many a township have We destroyed because it was given up to wrongdoing: so they all lie in ruins, with their roofs caved in, wells and fountains deserted, and towering, lofty castles collapsed.
22|46| Do they never travel about the earth (and view all these scenes with an eye to learn lessons) so that they may have hearts with which to reason (and arrive at truth), or ears with which to hear (God’s call)? For indeed it is not the eyes that have become blind, it is rather the hearts in the breasts that are blind.
22|47| They challenge you to hasten the coming upon them of God’s punishment (with which they are threatened). Let them know that God never fails to fulfill His promise; but a day with your Lord is like a thousand years in your reckoning.
22|48| (Let them not hasten you to bring on them Our punishment.) How many a township that was given up to wrongdoing have I given respite to, but then seized them (when they persisted in unbelief and injustices); and to Me is the homecoming.
22|49| Say (O Messenger): "O people! (I am not a man who can do whatever he wills, nor whatever you wish;) I am only a plain warner sent to you."
22|50| So those who believe and do good, righteous deeds – for them is a forgiveness (to bring unforeseen blessings) and an honorable, generous provision (in the Hereafter).
22|51| As to those who strive against Our Revelations, seeking to frustrate and void them, they are the companions of the Blazing Flame.
22|52| Never did We send a Messenger or a Prophet before you but that when he recited (God’s Revelations to the people) Satan would make insinuations (about these Revelations, prompting people to misconstrue them in many wrong senses, rather than the right one). But God abrogates whatever insinuations Satan may make, and then He confirms and establishes His Revelations. God is All-Knowing, All-Wise.
22|53| He makes Satan’s insinuations a trial for those in the center of whose hearts there is a sickness (that extinguishes their power of understanding and corrupts their character), and who have hardened hearts. The wrongdoers have certainly veered far from the truth and are in wide schism.
22|54| While those who have been granted knowledge (of the truth) know (with a greater certainty) that whatever God reveals is the truth itself, and they believe in it and their hearts submit to Him in utmost humility. God most certainly guides to a straight path those who believe with sincerity.
22|55| Whereas those who persistently disbelieve will not cease to be in doubt about it (the Revelation) until the Last Hour comes upon them suddenly, or there comes to them the punishment of a barren day (when every hope would turn into despair, and after which there will be no night to rest in).
22|56| On that Day the absolute authority belongs to God exclusively. He judges (all people and makes a distinction) between them. Consequently, those who believe and do good, righteous deeds will be in Gardens of bounty and blessings.
22|57| As for those who disbelieve and deny Our Revelations, for them there will be a shameful, humiliating punishment.
22|58| Those who emigrate in God’s cause, and then are killed (for God’s cause) or die – God will most certainly provide for them with a good, wholesome sustenance. Surely God is He Who is the Best to be sought as provider with the ultimate rank of providing."
22|59| He will most certainly admit them into a place with which they will be pleased. Surely God is All-Knowing, All-Clement.
22|60| So it will be. And whoever responds to the wrong done to him to the extent of the wrong, and then is again subjected to oppression, God will most certainly help him. Assuredly, God is All-Pardoning, (Who overlooks the faults of His servants), All-Forgiving.
22|61| So (will He do), because God makes the night pass into the day and makes the day pass into the night, and God is All-Hearing, All-Seeing.
22|62| So (will He do), because God is He Who is the Absolute Truth and all that they (the unbelievers) deify and invoke instead of (or apart from) Him is sheer falsehood, and God is He Who is the All-Exalted, the All-Great.
22|63| Do you not consider that God sends down from the sky water, and behold, the earth turns green. Surely, God is All-Subtle (penetrating to the most minute dimensions of all things and accomplishing what He wills by ways that are not quite tangible), All-Aware.
22|64| To Him belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is on the earth. And surely God is He Who is the All-Wealthy and Self-Sufficient (absolutely independent of the whole creation), the All-Praiseworthy (Who provides for all of them as their Lord).
22|65| Do you not consider that God has made all that is on earth to be of service to you, and the ships that run upon the sea by His command? And He holds the heaven so that it may not fall upon the earth unless by His leave. Surely God is for humankind All-Pitying, All-Compassionate.
22|66| It is He Who has given you life, then He causes you to die, then He will bring you to life again. However, humankind are really ungrateful.
22|67| For every community We have appointed a whole system of worship which they are to observe. So do not let those (who follow their own systems) draw you into disputes concerning this matter, but continue to call people to your Lord. You are most certainly on the straight way leading to pure guidance.
22|68| If they argue with you, say only: "God knows well what you are doing. (To me are accounted my deeds, and to you, your deeds. You are quit of all that I do, and I am quit of all that you do.)"
22|69| God will judge between you on the Day of Resurrection concerning what you used to differ on.
22|70| Do you not know that surely God knows whatever there is in the heavens and on the earth (including whatever takes place in them). They are all recorded in a Book. This (keeping the record of them all) is indeed easy for God.
22|71| And yet, they worship, apart from God, things for which He has sent down no warrant, nor are they are based on true knowledge (when they claim that there can be partners with Him). The wrongdoers will have no helper (to protect them from God’s punishment).
22|72| When Our Revelations, clear as evidence and in meaning are recited (and conveyed) to them, you perceive utter repugnance and denial on the faces of those who disbelieve; they would almost pounce upon those who convey Our Revelations to them. Say: "Then, shall I tell you of something worse than what you now regard as repugnant? The Fire! God has promised it to those who disbelieve. How evil a destination to arrive at!
22|73| O humankind! A parable is struck, so pay heed to it: Those whom, apart from God, you deify and invoke will never be able to create even a fly, even if all of them were to come together to do so. And if a fly snatches away anything from them, they cannot recover that from it. Powerless indeed is the seeker, and (so is) the sought!
22|74| They have no true judgment of God as His right (in being God) requires. God is certainly All-Strong, All-Glorious with irresistible might.
22|75| God chooses Messengers from among the angels as well as from among humankind (so they are all created beings having no share in Divinity at all.) Surely God is All-Hearing, All-Seeing.
22|76| He knows what lies before them and what lies after them (what lies in their future and in their past, what is known to them and what is hidden from them). To God are all affairs ultimately referred, (and whatever He wills occurs).
22|77| O you who believe! Bow down and prostrate yourselves, (thus performing the Prayer), and fulfill all your other duties of worship to your Lord, and do (all the other commands of your Religion, which are all) good, so that you may prosper.
22|78| Strive in God’s cause and purely for His sake (against His enemies to raise His Word, and against Satan and your carnal, evil-commanding souls,) in a manner worthy of that striving. He has chosen you (especially for this task) and has not laid any hardship on you in the Religion. This is the way of your father Abraham. God named you Muslims previously, and in this Book, that the (most noble) Messenger may be a witness for you (as to the ways you follow), and that you may be the witnesses for people. So establish the Prayer in conformity with its conditions, pay the Prescribed Purifying Alms, and hold fast to God. He is your Owner and Guardian. How excellent a Guardian and an Owner He is, how excellent a Helper.
23|1| Prosperous indeed are the believers.
23|2| They are in their Prayer humble and fully submissive (being overwhelmed by the awe and majesty of God).
23|3| They always turn away from and avoid whatever is vain and frivolous.
23|4| They are in a constant effort to give alms and purify their own selves and wealth.
23|5| They strictly guard their private parts, and their chastity and modesty,
23|6| Save from their spouses or (as a permission for men) those (bondsmaids) whom their right hands possess, for with regard to them they are free from blame.
23|7| But whoever seeks beyond that, such are they who exceed the bounds (set by God).
23|8| They are faithful and true to their trusts (which either God or society or an individual places in their charge) and to their pledges (between them and God or other persons or society).
23|9| They are ever mindful guardians of their Prayers (including all the rites of which they are constituted).
23|10| Those (illustrious ones) are the inheritors,
23|11| Who will inherit the highest floor of Paradise. Therein they will abide forever.
23|12| We created humankind (in the very beginning) from a specially sifted extract of clay.
23|13| Then We have made it into a fertilized ovum in a safe lodging.
23|14| Then We have created of the fertilized ovum a clot clinging (to the womb wall), and (afterwards in sequence) We have created of the clinging clot a (chew of) lump, and We have created of (a chew of) lump bones, and We have clothed the bones in flesh. Then We have caused it to grow into another creation. So Blessed and Supreme is God, the Creator Who creates everything in the best and most appropriate form and has the ultimate rank of creativity.
23|15| Then, after all this, you are bound to die.
23|16| Thereafter, you will, on the Day of Resurrection, certainly be raised up.
23|17| Indeed, We have created above you seven heavens, one layer upon the other, and seven paths (for angels to move, God’s commands to descend, and acts of conscious beings to ascend, along). Never are We unaware of creation and what We create (with all aspects of their lives).
23|18| We send down from the sky water with a measure set by Us, and lodge it in the earth. We are most certainly able to withdraw it.
23|19| And with it We cause to grow for you gardens of date-palms and vines, wherein are abundant, diverse fruits for you, and from which you eat and obtain some of your livelihood.
23|20| As well as a tree that grows from and in the lands around Mount Sinai, yielding oil and a kind of relish for all to eat.
23|21| And in the cattle (feeding on the grass God brings forth with the water He sends down) there is a lesson for you. We give you to drink of that (milk) which is within their bodies; and you have many other benefits in them, and from them you obtain food.
23|22| And on them (on land) and on the ships (in the sea) you are carried.
23|23| Indeed, We sent Noah to his people as Messenger, and he said: "O my people! Worship God alone: you have no deity other than Him. Will you not, then, keep from disobedience to Him in reverence for Him and piety?"
23|24| The leading ones who disbelieved from among his people reacted, saying (among themselves and to each other): "This is but a mortal like you. He only wishes to gain superiority over you. Had God willed (to send us a Messenger to convey His Message), He would surely have sent down angels (to communicate His Message). Further, we have never heard of anything like this in the case of our forefathers of old.
23|25| "He is but a man in whom there is madness, so watch him for a while (to see) whether he will recover."
23|26| Noah prayed: "My Lord, help me because they have denied me!"
23|27| Thereupon We revealed to him: "Build the Ark (which We have described to you) under Our eyes and in accordance with Our instructions to be revealed (to you). Then finally, when Our command comes to pass and the boiler starts boiling over, take on board a pair of each kind of animal, as well as your family, except those of them against whom Our sentence (of destruction) has already been passed. Do not plead with Me for those people who have persisted in wrongdoing. They are bound to be drowned.
23|28| "Then, when you are seated in the Ark, you and those who are with you, say: ‘All praise and gratitude are for God, Who has saved us from the wrongdoing people.’
23|29| "And pray: ‘My Lord, let me land in a blessed place (in peace and safety and) with blessings from You. You are the Best to cause people to land in peace and safety’."
23|30| Surely in that (exemplary story) are signs (manifesting the truth); and for sure We are ever trying (people).
23|31| Then, after them, We brought forth another generation.
23|32| In time, We sent among them a Messenger from among themselves (with the message): "Worship God alone; you have no deity other than Him. Will you not, then, keep from disobedience to Him in reverence for Him and piety?"
23|33| The leading ones from among his people – who disbelieved, and denied the meeting of the Hereafter, and to whom We granted ease and comfort in the life of this world – said: "This is but a mortal like you, eating of what you eat of, and drinking of what you drink of.
23|34| "If you obey a mortal like yourselves, then you will surely be the losers.
23|35| "Does he promise you that, after you have died and become mere dust and bones, you will be brought forth (to a new life)?
23|36| "Far-fetched, utterly far-fetched, is what you are promised.
23|37| "There is no life beyond our present, worldly life. Some of us die (while others are born,) and so life continues; and we are not raised from the dead.
23|38| "He is nothing but a man, fabricating falsehood in attribution to God; and we are not (going to) to believe in him."
23|39| Eventually, the Messenger invoked: "My Lord, help me because they deny me!"
23|40| (God) said: "In a little while, they are sure to be regretful."
23|41| So in consequence, the awful blast seized them as a judgment of God rightly fitted to their deserts, and We made them like the waste of dead plants carried by a flood and left on the coast once the water recedes. So away with the wrongdoing people!
23|42| Then, after them, We brought forth new generations (in succession).
23|43| (What happened to all those generations proves that) no community can ever hasten on the end of its term, nor can they delay it (once it has been decided by God because of their beliefs and life-styles).
23|44| We sent Our Messengers one after the other (each to a generation). Whenever their Messenger came to a community, they denied him, and in consequence We caused each community to follow the other to its doom, and reduced them to mere tales of the past. So away with a people who do not believe!
23|45| After all those Messengers (sent to the past generations that are now all extinct,) We sent Moses and his brother Aaron as Messengers with Our clear signs (miracles to support them) and a manifest authority (from Us),
23|46| To the Pharaoh and his chiefs. But they grew arrogant in the face of them, and demonstrated that they were a haughty, self-exalting people.
23|47| They said: "Shall we believe in two mortals like ourselves, when their people {the people of Moses and Aaron) are serving us in humility and obedience?"
23|48| They denied them, and they too eventually became of those who were destroyed.
23|49| (After their destruction) We granted Moses the Book so that his people might follow the right way.
23|50| We made the Son of Mary and his mother a miraculous sign (of Our Lordship and Power), and We provided for them refuge on a lofty ground of comfort and security with a (water) spring.
23|51| O you Messengers! Partake of (God’s) pure and wholesome bounties, and always act righteously. I have full knowledge of all that you do.
23|52| This community of yours is one single community of the same faith, and I am your Lord (Who creates, sustains, and protects you), so hold Me alone in fear and keep your duty to Me in piety.
23|53| But people, having broken up into groups, differed among themselves as regards the Religion, each group proudly rejoicing in the portion they have.
23|54| So (if they, despite all the evidence We have put forth in support of the truth of the Message that you, O Messenger, are conveying to them, still refuse to accept it), leave them alone, immersed in their ignorance and heedlessness until an appointed time.
23|55| Do they think that by all the wealth and children We provide for them,
23|56| We but hasten to lavish on them all kinds of good? No, but they do not perceive (the reality of the matter).
23|57| While as for those who live in awe because of deep reverence for their Lord,
23|58| Who have renewed, ever-strengthening faith in their Lord’s signs and Revelations,
23|59| Who never associate partners with their Lord,
23|60| Who do whatever they do and give whatever they give in charity and for God’s cause, with their hearts trembling at the thought that they are bound to turn to their Lord (remaining anxious, for they are unsure whether God will accept from them and be pleased with them) –
23|61| It is those (illustrious ones) who hasten to do all kinds of virtuous deeds, and they are in a virtuous competition with one another in doing them.
23|62| (No one, especially those unbelievers, should think that there is something superhuman required of humanity. For) We do not burden any soul except within its capacity, and with Us is a record that speaks the truth (about the deeds, thoughts, and intentions of each individual). They will in no wise be wronged.
23|63| The fact is that the hearts of those unbelievers are utterly ignorant and heedless of all this, and apart from this, they have some evil deeds that they habitually commit (which prevent them from seeing and accepting the truth),
23|64| Until the time when We seize (them) with the punishment – those of them who have been lost in the pursuit of pleasures. They will then begin to groan for help.
23|65| "Stop groaning for help today; you are not to receive any help from Us!
23|66| "You know that My Revelations used to be recited to you, but you used to turn on your heels in aversion,
23|67| "Behaving arrogantly, and talking nonsense (about the Messenger and the Religion he conveys) in your nightly conversations."
23|68| Have they ever pondered over this Word (of God) or has there come to them something (completely novel in human history) which never came to their forefathers of old?
23|69| Or is it that they are unaware of their Messenger, and so they disavow him?
23|70| Or do they say that there is madness in him? No, he has brought them the truth, but most of them are disdainful of the truth.
23|71| Were the truth to follow their desires and caprices, the heavens and the earth and all those who live in them would certainly have gone to ruin. But We have brought to them whatever they must heed in life for their honor and happiness, and they turn away from that which will bring them honor and happiness.
23|72| Or do you (O Messenger) ask them for any payment? Whereas the reward of your Lord is the best and to everyone’s good. He is the Provider, with the ultimate rank of providing and the Best to be sought as provider.
23|73| And certainly, you are calling them to a Straight Path.
23|74| Whereas, those who do not believe in the Hereafter are ever astray from the Path.
23|75| If We have mercy on them and remove from them the harm afflicting them, for sure they will persist in their rebellion, blindly wandering on.
23|76| For indeed We have seized them with the punishment (of famine), and yet, they have not bowed down to their Lord, nor do they invoke Him humbly.
23|77| Finally We open to them a gate of severe punishment and look, they are plunged into utter despair and sorrow.
23|78| He it is Who has made for you (the faculty of) hearing, and eyes, and hearts. Scarcely do you give thanks.
23|79| He it is Who has brought forth and made you grow up on earth, and to Him you will be gathered.
23|80| He it is Who gives life and causes to die, and the alternation of night and day (with their periods shortening and lengthening) occurs in obedience to Him (and for the purposes He has established). Will you not, then, reason and understand (that there cannot be another deity besides God)?
23|81| (Instead of using their reason), they only speak as the former (disbelieving) peoples spoke.
23|82| They say, "What! after we have died and become dust and bones, will we then be raised from the dead?
23|83| "We were already promised such things, we and our forefathers. These are no more than the fables of the ancients."
23|84| Say: "To whom belongs the earth and whoever is on it? (Tell me,) if you have any knowledge?"
23|85| They could not help but acknowledge: "To God." Say: "Will you not, then, reflect and be mindful?"
23|86| Say: "Who is the Lord of the seven heavens and the Lord of the Supreme Throne (He Who rules the whole universe and sustains all that live in it)?"
23|87| They could not help but acknowledge: "These belong to God, too." Say: "Will you not, then, keep from disobedience to God in reverence for Him and piety?"
23|88| Say: "In Whose Hand is the absolute ownership and dominion of all things, and He protects and grants asylum, whereas against Him no asylum is available, and Himself never needs protection? (Tell me,) if you have any knowledge."
23|89| They could not help but acknowledge: "God exclusively." Say: "How, then, can you be so deluded?"
23|90| The fact is that We have conveyed to them the truth but for sure they are the liars (in their assertions, denial of the pillars of faith, and against their own selves).
23|91| God has never taken to Himself a child, nor is there any deity along with Him; otherwise each deity would surely have sought absolute independence with his creatures under his authority, and they would surely have tried to overpower one another. All-Glorified is God, in that He is far above what they attribute to Him,
23|92| The Knower of the Unseen and the witnessed (all that lies in the hidden and visible realms and beyond and within the reach of any created being’s perception), and absolutely exalted is He above all that they associate with Him as partners.
23|93| Say: "My Lord, if You let me witness the fulfillment of what they have been promised (to suffer),
23|94| "Then, do not include me, my Lord, among those wrongdoing people!"
23|95| Surely We are absolutely able to let you witness the fulfillment of what We have promised them to suffer (and save you from).
23|96| (But whatever they may say or do) repel the evil (done to you and committed against your mission) with the best (of what you can do). We know best all that they falsely attribute to Us.
23|97| And say: "My Lord! I seek refuge in You from the promptings and provocations of the satans (of the jinn and humankind especially in my relations with people, while I am performing my mission).
23|98| "I seek refuge in You, my Lord, lest they be present with me."
23|99| (Those who persist in their evil ways will not cease from their false attributions to God, and from their harsh reaction to you) until when death comes to one of them, and then he implores: "My Lord! Please, let me return to life,
23|100| "That I may act righteously with respect to whatever I have left undone in the world." No, never! It is merely a word that he utters over and over again. Before those (who are dead) is an intermediate world (of the grave, where they will stay) until the Day when they will be raised up.
23|101| Then, when the Trumpet (of Resurrection) is blown, there will no longer be any ties of kinship among them (which will be of any avail), nor will they ask about one another (as everyone will be too engrossed in their own plight to think of others).
23|102| (Balances are set up) and those whose scales (of good deeds) are heavy – they are the prosperous.
23|103| While those whose scales (of good deeds) are light – they will be those who have ruined their own selves, in Hell abiding.
23|104| The Fire will scorch their faces, their lips being displaced and their jaws protruding.
23|105| "Were not My Revelations recited to you, and you used to deny them?"
23|106| They will say: "Our Lord! Our wretchedness (which we ourselves provoked upon ourselves) prevailed over us, and we were people lost in error.
23|107| "Our Lord! Take us out of this (suffering). Then, if we ever revert to evil, we will indeed be wrongdoers."
23|108| "Away with you into it! No longer address Me!"
23|109| "There was among My servants a party who would pray, ‘Our Lord! We have believed, so forgive us, and have mercy on us, for You are the Best of the merciful.’
23|110| "You used to take them in mockery, so much so that your hostilities to them caused you to forget My remembrance, and you simply persisted in laughing at them.
23|111| "But look, today I have rewarded them for what they endured patiently, so that they are those who are the triumphant."
23|112| (God) says: "For how many years did you stay on earth?"
23|113| They say: "We stayed for a day or part of a day. Ask of those who are able to keep count of this."
23|114| Says He: "You stayed but for a short while, if only you had known (how short it was to be and acted accordingly)!
23|115| "Or did you think that We created you in vain, and that you should devote all your time to play and entertainment, and that you would not be brought back to Us?"
23|116| Absolutely exalted is God, the Supreme Sovereign, the Absolute Truth and Ever-Constant. There is no deity but He, the Lord of the Supreme Throne of Nobility and Munificence.
23|117| Whoever asserts the existence of another deity to worship along with God, for which it is inconceivable for him to have any evidence, will certainly be questioned by his Lord. Surely the unbelievers will not prosper.
23|118| Say: "O my Lord, forgive me and have mercy on me (always treat me with Your forgiveness and mercy), for You are the Best of the merciful."
24|1| (This is) a surah which We have sent down and made obligatory (the observance of the rules therein); and in it We have sent down clear explanations (of the truth about belief and unbelief) and instructions (concerning human life), so that you may reflect and be mindful.
24|2| The fornicatress and the fornicator – flog each of them with a hundred stripes; and do not let pity for them hold you back from carrying out God’s law, if you truly believe in God and the Last Day; and let a group of believers witness their punishment.
24|3| A fornicator (one notorious for indulgence in illicit sexual relations) is not to marry other than a fornicatress (a woman notorious for indulgence in illicit sexual relations) or an idolatress, and fornicatress – only a fornicator or an idolater is to take her in wedlock. Acting the other way is forbidden to the believers.
24|4| Those who accuse chaste, honorable women (of illicit sexual relations) but do not produce four male witnesses (who will witness that they personally saw the act being committed): flog them with eighty stripes, and do not accept from them any testimony ever after. They are indeed transgressors,
24|5| Except those of them who repent thereafter and mend their ways. For surely God is All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate.
24|6| As for those who accuse their own wives of adultery but have no witnesses except themselves, such a person must testify four times swearing by God in each oath that he is indeed speaking the truth.
24|7| And the fifth time, that God’s curse be upon him if he is lying.
24|8| But the punishment will be averted from the wife if she testifies four times by swearing by God in each oath that the man is surely telling a lie,
24|9| And the fifth time, that the wrath of God be upon her if the man is speaking the truth.
24|10| Were it not for God’s bounty grace and favor upon you, and His mercy, and that God is One Who opens a way to repentance and truly returns repentance it with liberal forgiveness and additional reward, and All-Wise, (you could not resolve your problems justly and wisely).
24|11| Surely those who invented and spread the slander (against ‘A’ishah, the Messenger’s wife) are a band from among you. However, do not deem this incident an evil for you; rather, it is good for you. (As for the slanderers:) every one of them has accumulated sin in proportion to his share in this guilt, and he who has the greater part of it will suffer a tremendous punishment.
24|12| When you heard of it, why did the believing men and women not think well of one another and declare: "This is obviously a slander"?
24|13| Why did they not produce four witnesses (in support of the accusation)? Now that they have not produced witnesses, it is indeed they who are the liars in God’s sight.
24|14| Were it not for God’s grace to and favor upon you, and His mercy in the world and the Hereafter, a mighty punishment would certainly have afflicted you (who got involved in circulating rumors) on account of what you indulged in.
24|15| Just think how you welcomed it with your tongues from one another and uttered with your mouths something about which you had no knowledge. You deemed it a trifle whereas in God’s sight it was most grave.
24|16| Why did you not say, when you heard of it, "It is not for us to speak of this. All-Glorified are You (O God)! This is an awesome slander."
24|17| God admonishes you lest you ever repeat anything like this, if you are (truly)] believers.
24|18| He clearly expounds to you His instructions and the signposts of His way. God is All-Knowing, All-Wise.
24|19| Those who love that indecency should spread among those who believe, surely for them is a painful punishment in the world and the Hereafter. God knows (the exact truth and nature of all matters), but you do not know.
24|20| Were it not for God’s grace and favor to upon you, and His mercy, and that God is All-Pitying, All-Compassionate (especially towards His believing servants, what terrible consequences would such evils have caused in your community)!
24|21| O you who believe! Do not follow in the footsteps of Satan. Whoever follows in the footsteps of Satan, (let him know well that) Satan insistently calls to all that is indecent and shameful, and all that is evil. Were it not for God’s bounty on you, and His mercy, not one of you would have ever attained purity; but God purifies whomever He wills. God is All-Hearing, All-Knowing.
24|22| Let not those among you who are favored with resources swear that they will no longer give to the kindred, the needy, and those who have emigrated in God’s cause, (even though those wealthy ones suffer harm at the hands of the latter). Rather let them pardon and forbear. Do you not wish that God should forgive you? God is All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate.
24|23| Those who falsely accuse chaste women, who are unaware of devious ways of corruption and are believers, are cursed in the world and the Hereafter, and for them is a mighty punishment.
24|24| On the Day when their own tongues and hands and feet will all bear witness against them in regard to what they were doing.
24|25| On that Day God will pay them in full their just due, and they will come to know that God is the Absolute Truth (from Whom nothing is hidden and Who makes all truth manifest).
24|26| (In principle,) corrupt women are for corrupt men, and corrupt men for corrupt women, just as good, pure women are for good, pure men, and good, pure men for good, pure women. (On account of their purity and chastity coming from faith) the latter are innocent of all that evil tongues may impute to them. For them there is a forgiveness and an honorable, generous provision.
24|27| O you who believe! Do not enter dwellings other than your own until you have ascertained the permission of their residents and have greeted them with peace. Your doing so is what is good and appropriate for you, so that you may be mindful (of good manners and proper courtesy).
24|28| Then if you find no one in them, do not enter them until you have permission to enter. If you are asked to go back, then go back (without feeling offended). It is a purer way for you. God has full knowledge of all that you do.
24|29| There is no blame on you if you enter dwellings that are uninhabited which are of use to you. (But always bear in mind that) God knows whatever you reveal (of acts or intentions) and whatever you keep concealed.
24|30| Tell the believing men that they should restrain their gaze (from looking at the women whom it is lawful for them to marry, and from others’ private parts), and guard their private parts and chastity. This is what is purer for them. God is fully aware of all that they do.
24|31| And tell the believing women that they (also) should restrain their gaze (from looking at the men whom it is lawful for them to marry, and from others’ private parts), and guard their private parts, and that they should not display their charms except that which is revealed of itself; and let them draw their veils over their bosoms, and (tell them) not to display their charms to any save their husbands, or their fathers (and grandfathers and both paternal and maternal uncles), or the fathers of their husbands, or their sons, or the sons of their husbands (both their own and step-sons and grandsons), or their brothers (and foster- and step-brothers), or the sons of their brothers, or the sons of their sisters, or the Muslim women and the women of good conduct with whom they associate, or those (slave-girls) their right hands possess, or the male attendants in their service free of sexual desire, or children that are as yet unaware of femininity. Nor should they stamp their feet (i.e. act in such a manner as to) draw attention to their charms (and arouse the passion of men). And O believers, turn to God all together in repentance that you may attain true prosperity.
24|32| Marry those among you who are single (whether men or women) and those of your male and female slaves that are righteous (and fit for marriage). If they are poor, God will grant them sufficiency out of His bounty. God is All-Embracing in His mercy, All-Knowing.
24|33| Let those who cannot afford to marry keep themselves chaste until God grants them sufficiency out of His bounty. And if any of those whom your right hands possess desire to enter into a contract with you to purchase their freedom, make this contract with them if you know that they are honest (and able to earn without begging and be good, free citizens). Help them out of God’s wealth which He has granted you. And do not compel your slave-girls to prostitution in order to seek the (fleeting) benefits of the life of this world while they desire to remain chaste. If anyone compels them to prostitution, then God will be All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate to them after they are subjected to such compulsion.
24|34| Indeed, We have sent down to you Revelations which show the truth clearly and illuminate your way, and examples (from the histories) of those who have passed away before you, and an instruction for the God-revering, pious.
24|35| God is the Light of the heavens and the earth. The example of His Light is like a niche wherein is a lamp; the lamp is in a crystal, and the crystal shining as if a pearl-like radiant star, lit from the oil of a blessed olive tree that is neither of the east nor of the west. The oil would almost give light of itself though no fire touches it: light upon light. God guides to His Light whom He wills. God strikes parables for people. God has full knowledge of all things.
24|36| (This light can best be obtained and those guided to it are found) in some houses (that are usually concealed from people’s eyes and) for which God has provided a way for them to be built and appreciated, and for His Name to be mentioned and invoked therein; in them glorify Him in the morning and evening,
24|37| Men (of great distinction) whom neither commerce nor exchange (nor any other worldly preoccupations) can divert from the remembrance of God, and establishing the Prayer in conformity with all its conditions, and paying the Prescribed Purifying Alms; they are in fear of a Day on which all hearts and eyes will be overturned.
24|38| God will reward them in accordance with the best of what they have ever done, and give them yet more out of His bounty (i.e. more than they deserve). God provides beyond all measure for whom He wills.
24|39| As for the unbelievers, all their deeds are like a mirage in the desert, which the thirsty one supposes to be water until he comes up to it, only to find that it was nothing; instead he finds God near it, and He settles his account in full. God is swift at settling the account.
24|40| Or their deeds are like veils of darkness covering up an abysmal sea down into its depths, covered up by a billow, above which is a billow, above which is a cloud: veils of darkness piled one upon another, so that when he stretches out his hand, he can hardly see it. For whomever God has appointed no light, no light has he.
24|41| Do you not see that all that is in the heavens and the earth, and the birds flying in patterned ranks with wings spread out glorify God. Each knows the way of its prayer and glorification. God has full knowledge of all that they do.
24|42| To God belongs the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth; and to God is the homecoming.
24|43| Do you not see that God gently drives the clouds, then joins them together, (completing the formation of a circuit between them,) and then turns them into a thick mass, and consequently you see rain-drops issue out of their midst. He sends down hail out of snow-laden mountains (of clouds) from the sky, and smites with it whom He wills and averts it from whom He wills. The flash of the lightning almost takes away the sight.
24|44| God turns about the night and the day. Surely in that is a lesson for those who have the power of seeing.
24|45| God has created every living creature from water. Among them are such as move on their bellies, and such as move on two legs, and such as move on four. God creates whatever He wills. Surely, God has full power over everything.
24|46| Assuredly We have sent down Revelations which show the truth clearly and illuminate your way. God guides whom He wills to a straight path.
24|47| They say, "We have believed in God and in the Messenger, and We have promised obedience (to both)," but then, after that a party among them turn away (contradicting their declaration by their attitudes and actions). Such are not believers.
24|48| When they are called to God and His Messenger so that the Messenger may judge between them, see how a party among them turn away in aversion.
24|49| If the right be on their side, they come willingly in acceptance of it.
24|50| Is there a sickness in their hearts (that corrupts their will and character)? Or have they fallen prey to doubts? Or do they fear that God and His Messenger will deal unjustly with them? No, the truth is that they themselves are wrongdoers.
24|51| The only utterance of the (true) believers, when they are called to God and His Messenger so that the Messenger may judge between them, is: "We have heard and we obey." Such are those who are the prosperous.
24|52| Whoever obeys God and His Messenger, and is overwhelmed by awe of God and keeps from disobedience to Him in reverence for Him and piety, such indeed are those who are the triumphant.
24|53| They (the hypocritical ones) swear by God most solemnly that if you should ever order them, they would most certainly go forth (to fight in God’s cause). Tell them: "Do not swear. What is expected of you is obedience of the proper kind, well-known. (So you should do what other believers do and therefore will go forth when commanded to do so without gestures indicating exaggeration and affectation)." God is fully aware of all that you do.
24|54| Say: "Obey God and obey the Messenger." But, (O people), if you turn away from the Messenger, (then be aware that) what rests with him is only what he has been charged with and what rests with you is only what you have been charged with. However, if you obey, you will be guided (to the truth). What rests with the Messenger is but to convey the Message fully and clearly.
24|55| God has promised those of you who believe and do good, righteous deeds that He will most certainly empower them as vicegerents on the earth (in the place of those who are in power at present), even as He empowered those (of the same qualities) that preceded them, and that, assuredly, He will firmly establish for them their Religion, which He has (chosen and) approved of for them, and He will replace their present state of fear with security (so that they can practice their Religion freely and fully and in peace). They worship Me alone, associating none with Me as partners (in belief, worship, and the authority to order their life). Whoever turns ungrateful after that, such indeed are the transgressors.
24|56| Establish the Prayer in conformity with its conditions and pay the Prescribed Purifying Alms, and obey the Messenger so that you may be shown mercy (to be granted a good, virtuous life in the world and eternal happiness in the Hereafter.)
24|57| Do not suppose that those who disbelieve can frustrate (Our will) on the earth. Their final refuge is the Fire: how evil a destination to arrive at!
24|58| O you who believe! Let (even) those whom your right hands possess (as slaves), as well as those of you (your children) who have not yet reached puberty, ask for your permission (before they come into your private room) at three times (of the day) – before the Morning Prayer, and when you lay aside your garments in the middle of the day for rest, and after the Night Prayer. These are your three times of privacy. Beyond these occasions, there is no blame on you nor on them if they come in without permission – they are bound to move about you, some of you attending on others. Thus God makes clear for you (the instructions in) the Revelations. God is All-Knowing, All-Wise.
24|59| And when your children reach puberty, let them ask you for permission (whenever they want to enter your private room), even as those (who have already reached the same age) before them ask for it. Thus God makes clear for you (the instructions in) His revelations. God is All-Knowing, All-Wise.
24|60| The women advanced in years, having passed the age of child-bearing and no longer feel any sexual desire, incur no sin if they cast off their outer garments without making display of their charms. But even so, it is better for them to abstain from this. God is All-Hearing, All-Knowing.
24|61| There is no blame on the blind nor any blame on the lame nor any blame on the sick (for eating only to satisfy their need without causing any harm and waste, in the house of any healthy, well-off person), and neither on yourselves that (in case of need and without prior invitation), you eat in your spouse’s and children’s houses, or your fathers’ houses, or your mothers’ houses, or your brothers’ houses, or your sisters’ houses, or your paternal uncles’ houses, or your paternal aunts’ houses, or your maternal uncles’ houses, or your maternal aunts’ houses, or in the houses for which you are responsible, or the house of any of your close friends (who should be happy to see you feeling free to eat at their home). There is no blame on you if you eat together or separately. But when you enter any of these houses, greet one another with a blessed, pure and good salutation appointed by God. Thus God makes clear for you (the instructions in) His Revelations, that you may use your reason and understand.
24|62| Only those are true believers who believe in God and His Messenger, and who, when they are with him for a collective cause, do not leave unless they have obtained his permission. Surely those who ask for your permission, it is they who truly believe in God and His Messenger. So, if they ask you for permission for some affair of their own, give permission to whomever of them you will, and ask God for forgiveness on their behalf. Surely, God is All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate.
24|63| Do not treat the Messenger’s summoning and praying for you as your summoning and praying for one another. Indeed, God knows well those of you who surreptitiously sneak away, taking cover behind one another. So, let those who go against the Messenger’s order beware lest a bitter trial befall them or a painful punishment afflict them.
24|64| Beware: to God belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth. He knows well where you stand (and what you are about). And (to Him belongs) the Day when you are brought back to Him, then He will make them understand all that they did (in the world). God has full knowledge of everything.
25|1| Blessed and Supreme is He Who sends down the Criterion in parts on His servant so that he may be a warner to all conscious beings (against the consequences of misguidance).
25|2| He to Whom belongs the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth, and He has taken to Himself no child, nor has He any partner (in His dominion or any aspect of His being God), and He creates everything and determines its destiny.
25|3| Yet some choose to take, apart from God, deities that create nothing but are themselves created, and have no power to avert harm from, or bring benefit to, even themselves (so that they can give harm or bring benefit to their worshippers), and they have no power over death, nor over life, nor over resurrection.
25|4| Those who disbelieve say: "This (Qur’an) is but a fabrication which he (Muhammad) himself has invented, and some others have helped him with it, so they have produced a wrong and a falsehood."
25|5| They also say: "(It consists of) only fables of the ancients which he has got written. They are being read to him in early mornings and evenings (while people are at home)."
25|6| Say: "(It is a Book full of knowledge revealing many secrets such as no human being could in any wise discover by himself:) He Who knows all the secrets contained in the heavens and the earth sends it down (to teach you some of these secrets and guide you in your life so that you may attain happiness in both worlds). He surely is All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate."
25|7| Again, they say: "What sort of Messenger is this? He eats food and goes about in market-places (like any other mortal). Why is an angel not sent down to him so that he may act as a warner in his company (and help him to persuade the people)?"
25|8| Or: "Why is a treasure not cast down upon him from the heaven (so that he should no longer need to go about in market-places to earn a living)?" Or: "Why does he not have a garden (granted to him miraculously) to obtain his food from?" And so these wrongdoers say (to the believers): "You are following only a man bewitched!"
25|9| See how strangely they invent comparisons about you. They have so strayed and are no longer able to find a way (to the truth). excuse
25|10| Blessed and Supreme is He Who, if He wills, can grant you (O Messenger) better than all that (they propose): gardens through which rivers flow, and grant you palaces.
25|11| But they deny the Last Hour (and this is why they invent such pretexts for their denial of your call. However,) We have prepared a Blaze for whoever denies the Last Hour.
25|12| When the Blaze sees them (even) from a far-off place, they will hear it raging and roaring.
25|13| And when they are flung, chained together, into a narrow place in it, they will pray there for extinction.
25|14| (They will then be told) "Today, you will not pray to die only once, instead, you will pray to die many times, (but it will be of no avail)."
25|15| Say (O Messenger): "Is this or is the Garden of life everlasting, which has been promised to the God-revering, pious, better to prefer?" It will be for them a reward and a final destination.
25|16| For them there will be therein all that they desire, themselves abiding (in it). This is a promise which your Lord has bound Himself to fulfill.
25|17| A Day (will come) when God will gather them together (all the unbelievers) and all those whom they worship (apart from God: angels, Prophets, saints, and others, and idols), and He will ask them: "Was it you who led these servants of Mine astray or did they themselves stray away from the right way?"
25|18| They will say: "All-Glorified You are! It was not for us to take for friends other than You (so they had no right to take us as such and make us objects of their worship). But (the truth is that, out of Your grace) You lavished on them and their forefathers ease in life, but they (being ungrateful) forgot all remembrance of You (and paid no heed to the warning Message Your Messengers brought to them). They were people (corrupt and) doomed to perdition."
25|19| (God will say:) "So they have denied you (who falsely worship them) in all that you assert regarding them, and you can neither ward off (your due punishment) nor obtain any help (from those you falsely deified and worshipped while in the world)." (O people!) Whoever commits the greatest wrong (by associating partners with God), We will cause him to taste a great punishment.
25|20| (O Messenger!) We never sent any Messengers before you but they surely ate food and went about in the market-places (to meet their needs). We cause you (O humankind) to be a means of testing for one another. Will you show good patience and perseverance (in the face of Our decrees and remain steadfast in Our way)? Your Lord is All-Seeing.
25|21| Those who (being unbelievers) do not expect to meet Us (in the Hereafter) say: "Why are no angels sent down on us or (why) do we not see our Lord?" Assuredly they are far too arrogant of themselves (demanding what is impossible for them), and exceed all bounds (in their presumption).
25|22| The Day when they see the angels – there will be no good tidings on that Day for the disbelieving criminals, and they will cry out to the angels in fear: "Keep away, away from us!"
25|23| And We will turn to deal with all the (supposedly good) deeds that they did (in the world), and will reduce them all to dust particles scattered about.
25|24| Whereas the companions of Paradise will, on that Day, have appointed for them the best abode and the fairest place of repose.
25|25| On that Day the heaven will split asunder with the clouds (covering it) and the angels will be made to descend in a majestic descending.
25|26| The sovereignty on that Day will absolutely and belong to the All-Merciful, (which He will exercise then with no intermediary veil of cause and effect). It will be a hard day for the unbelievers.
25|27| On that Day the wrongdoer will bite at his hands, saying (with remorse) "Oh, would that I had taken a way in the company of the Messenger.
25|28| "Oh, woe is me! Would that I had not taken so-and-so for a friend!
25|29| "Indeed, he led me astray from the Reminder (the Qur’an) once it had come to me. Satan has proved to be a betrayer of humankind."
25|30| And the Messenger says: "My Lord! Surely my people have made this Qur’an something worthy of no attention."
25|31| So for every Prophet We have made an enemy (band) from among the disbelieving criminals committed to accumulating sins. But Your Lord is sufficient as a guide (to truth and the right course of action) and a helper (against the plots and practices of your enemies).
25|32| Those who disbelieve say (by way of yet another false argument for unbelief): "Why has the Qur’an not been sent down on him all at once?" (We send it down in parts) so that We may (impress it on your mind and) establish your heart with it, and We are conveying it distinctly and gradually, (one part supporting the other, and providing guidance and instruction for emerging occasions).
25|33| And also, they never come to you with any (false) argument (to taunt and provoke you) but that We provide you with the truth (to counter their false arguments) and a better exposition (which enables and deepens understanding).
25|34| Those who will be gathered in Hell upon their faces: such represent the evil side in standing and are further astray from the right way.
25|35| (Examples from history:) Assuredly We granted to Moses the Book and appointed his brother Aaron with him as a helper.
25|36| Then We said: "Go both of you to the people who deny Our signs (in the universe and within their own selves that demonstrate Our Existence and Oneness). Then (after they had been warned), We destroyed them utterly.
25|37| And the people of Noah – when they denied (Noah and thereby meant to deny) the Messengers, We drowned them, and made them a sign (of warning and instruction) for humankind. We have kept ready a painful punishment for the wrongdoers.
25|38| And the Ad and Thamud, and the people of ar-Rass, and many other generations that lived between these (and the people of Noah).
25|39| To each (of them) did We explain the truth in diverse ways and warning examples (from history), and each (of them) did We annihilate utterly.
25|40| And they (in Makkah who now persist in unbelief) have surely come across the land (of the Prophet Lot) upon which was rained a rain of evil. Have they, then, never seen it (with an eye to take heed)? No, they have no expectation of being raised after death (and so they pay no heed to any warning).
25|41| Whenever they see you (O Messenger), they take you for nothing but a mockery, (saying): "Is this the one whom God has sent as Messenger?
25|42| "Indeed, he would almost have led us astray from our deities, had we not persevered in our attachment to them." But in time when they see the (promised) punishment, they will come to know who it was that strayed too far from the right way.
25|43| Do you ever consider him who has taken his lusts and fancies for his deity? Would you then be a guardian over him (and thereby assume responsibility for guiding him)?
25|44| Or do you think that most of them (really) hear or reason and understand? They are but like cattle, (following only their instincts). No, they are more heedless of the right way (and therefore in greater need of being led than cattle).
25|45| Have you considered your Lord – how He spreads the shade? If He willed, He would surely make it stationary, but We have made the sun its pilot.
25|46| And then (as the sun rises), We gradually draw it back up towards Us.
25|47| And He it is Who has made the night a garment for you, and sleep a rest. And He has made the day a time of rising to life and going about (for daily livelihood).
25|48| And He it is Who sends forth the (merciful) winds as glad tidings in advance of His mercy. And We cause pure water to descend from the sky,
25|49| So that We may revive through it a dead land and give it for drink to many beings among Our creation, beasts as well as humans.
25|50| Assuredly We distribute it among them (without depriving any) so that they may remember and so be mindful. But most of humankind obstinately refuse to do anything except showing ingratitude.
25|51| Had We so willed, We could certainly have raised up a warner in every township.
25|52| (But We have willed instead that you are the last Messenger whose mission is universal.) So pay no heed to (the desires of) the unbelievers, but engage in a mighty striving against them by means of it (the Qur’an).
25|53| And He it is Who has let flow forth the two large bodies of water, one sweet and palatable and the other salty and bitter; and He has set a barrier and an insurmountable, forbidding ban that keeps them apart.
25|54| And He it is Who from a fluid has created human and made it (a male and female and, through them,) into a population through descent and marriage. And Your Lord is All-Powerful.
25|55| And yet they (the polytheists) worship, apart from God, that which can neither benefit them nor harm them. The unbeliever is ever prone to make cause (i.e. to back everyone and every movement) against his Lord.
25|56| Yet, We have not sent you (O Messenger) but as a bearer of glad tidings and a warner (you are not accountable for their straying and sinning).
25|57| Say: "I ask of you no wage for this (conveying of the Message to you), except that whoever so wills may take a way leading to his Lord."
25|58| Put your trust in the All-Living Who does not die, and glorify Him with His praise (proclaiming that He is absolutely above having any partners and that all praise is due to Him). He suffices as One Who is ever aware of the sins of His servants –
25|59| He Who has created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days, and then established Himself on the Supreme Throne. That is the All-Merciful (with absolute Will, Power, and Knowledge), so ask Him about it (the truth about Him and creation) as All-Aware, (and ask Him for whatever you will ask for).
25|60| When they are told: "Prostrate before the All-Merciful (to express your submission to Him)," they say: "What is the All-Merciful? Shall we prostrate before whatever you command us?" Your call but increases them in (their haughty) aversion.
25|61| Blessed and Supreme is He Who has set in the sky great constellations, and placed in it a (great, radiant) lamp and a shining moon.
25|62| It is He Who has appointed the night and the day to succeed one another, providing a sign for whoever desires to reflect and so be mindful, or desires to be thankful.
25|63| The (true) servants of the All-Merciful are they who move on the earth gently and humbly, and when the ignorant, foolish ones address them (with insolence or vulgarity as befits their ignorance and foolishness), they response with (words of) peace, (without engaging in hostility with them);
25|64| And (those true servants of the All-Merciful are they) who spend (some of) the night (in worship) prostrating before their Lord and standing;
25|65| And who entreat (whether after the Prayers or at other times): "Our Lord! Ward off from us the punishment of Hell; its punishment is surely constant anguish:
25|66| "How evil indeed it is as a final station and permanent abode!";
25|67| And who, when they spend (both for their own and others’ needs), are neither wasteful nor niggardly, and (are aware that) there is a happy mean between those (two extremes);
25|68| And who invoke no other deity along with God, and do not kill any soul – which God has made forbidden – except by right (for just cause and after due process), and do not commit unlawful sexual intercourse. Whoever commits any of these will face a severe penalty.
25|69| His punishment will be greater on the Day of Resurrection, and he will abide in it in ignominy,
25|70| Except he who gives up his way in repentance and believes (without associating partners with God), and does good, righteous deeds – such are those whose (past) evil deeds God will efface and record virtuous deeds in their place (and whose faculties which enabled the evil deeds He will change into enablers of virtuous deeds). God is All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate.
25|71| Whoever repents and does good, righteous deeds (and who has therefore shown that he has renounced his evil ways for good) – such a one has surely turned to God with true repentance.
25|72| And (those true servants of the All-Merciful are they) who do not take part in and bear witness to any vanity or falsehood, (and who will not deem anything true unless they know it to be so for certain), and when they happen to pass by anything vain and useless, pass by it with dignity;
25|73| And who, when they are reminded of the Revelations of their Lord (and His signs in the creation as well as in their inner world, as a basis of advice or teaching or discussion), do not remain unmoved as though deaf and blind;
25|74| And who say: "Our Lord! Grant us that our spouses and offspring may be a means of happiness for us, and enable us to lead others in piety (to become a means of the promotion of piety and virtue)."
25|75| Such (illustrious) ones will be rewarded with the loftiest mansion (in Paradise) for their steadfastness (in spite of adversities, for their obedience to God in spite of all persecutions), and they will be met therein with a greeting of welcome and peace.
25|76| Therein to abide. How good it is as a final station and permanent abode.
25|77| Say: "My Lord would not care for you were it not for your prayer. Now that you have denied (His Message), the inescapable punishment will cleave to you."
26|1| Ta. Sin. Mim.
26|2| These are the Revelations of the Book clear in itself and clearly showing the truth.
26|3| It may be that you (O Messenger) will torment yourself to death because they refuse to believe.
26|4| If We will, We can send down a (compelling) sign on them from heaven, so that they are forced to bow their necks before it (in humility).
26|5| Whenever a new Revelation comes to them from the All-Merciful (to warn and enlighten them), they but turn away from it in aversion.
26|6| So they have obstinately denied (this Message). But soon they will come to understand what it was that they were mocking.
26|7| Have they not considered the earth, how many of every noble kind We have caused to grow therein in pairs?
26|8| Surely in this there is a sign, but most of them are not believers.
26|9| And surely your Lord is indeed the All-Glorious with irresistible might (able to punish whoever goes against His Glory), the All-Compassionate (especially towards His believing servants).
26|10| (Remember) when your Lord called Moses, saying: "Go to the wrongdoing people,
26|11| "The people of the Pharaoh. Will they not give up their way in fear of Me and take the way of piety?"
26|12| Moses replied: "My Lord! I fear that they will deny me,
26|13| "And my breast will be constricted (so that I fail to show the necessary perseverance and tolerance), and my tongue will not be free (to convey Your Message with the right fluency), so appoint Aaron as a Messenger beside me.
26|14| "They also have a charge of crime against me, so I fear that they will kill me (and not let me convey Your Message)."
26|15| (God) said: "Not so, indeed! Go forth, then, the two of you, with Our miraculous signs (with which I have provided you). We will surely be with you all (you and them), listening attentively (to all that is to happen between you).
26|16| "So go, both of you, to the Pharaoh and say: ‘We have come with a message from the Lord of the worlds (He Who has created and sustains everything):
26|17| ‘Let the Children of Israel go with us!’ "
26|18| (When Moses delivered his message, the Pharaoh) said: "Did we not bring you up among us (in our palace) when you were a child? And you spent many years of your life among us!
26|19| "Then you committed that heinous deed of yours which you did, (proving thereby that) you are indeed one of the ungrateful."
26|20| (Moses) said: "I committed that deed unintentionally when I did not know (it would end in the way it did.)
26|21| "Then I fled from you when I feared (living together with) you (any longer), but (since then) my Lord has granted to me sound, wise judgment, and has made me one of His Messengers.
26|22| "As for that favor you taunt me with: (it is owed to the fact) that you have enslaved the Children of Israel."
26|23| (The Pharaoh) said: "What (and who) is that, ‘the Lord of the worlds’?"
26|24| (Moses) answered: "The Lord (Creator, Sustainer, and sole Ruler) of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them, if you would but (let yourselves be) convinced!"
26|25| (The Pharaoh) said to those around him: "Do you not hear (what he is saying)?"
26|26| (Moses) continued: "Your Lord, and the Lord of your forefathers."
26|27| (The Pharaoh) exclaimed: "See! This Messenger of yours who has been sent to you is assuredly a madman."
26|28| (Moses) went on: "He is the Lord of the east and the west and all that is between them, if you would but reason and understand!"
26|29| (The Pharaoh) threatened: "If you, (O Moses,) take any deity other than me (to worship, to offer your prayer and sacrifices to, and to seek help from), I will most certainly make you one of those imprisoned."
26|30| (Moses) said: "Even if I have brought you something clear (which demonstrates that I am speaking the truth)?"
26|31| (The Pharaoh) answered: "Then, produce it if you are truthful (in your claim)!"
26|32| Thereupon Moses threw down his staff, and it was manifestly a serpent.
26|33| And he drew forth his (right) hand (from his armpit where he had put it), and thereupon it was shining white to those looking on.
26|34| (The Pharaoh) said to the chiefs around him: "This is indeed a learned, skillful sorcerer,
26|35| "Who seeks to drive you out from your land by his sorcery. What, then, do you advise (me to do)?"
26|36| They said: "Put him and his brother off for a while, and (in the meantime) send forth heralds to all cities,
26|37| "To bring to your presence every learned, skillful sorcerer."
26|38| So the sorcerers were assembled (to contend with Moses) at the appointed time on a day (made) well-known (to all),
26|39| And it was said to the people: "Will you not assemble (and attend also)?
26|40| "We are expecting that the sorcerers will triumph and we will follow them (in their religion)."
26|41| So then the sorcerers came forth (for the encounter) and said to the Pharaoh: "We shall surely have a reward, if we are the victors, shall we?"
26|42| (The Pharaoh) answered: "Yes, indeed. And you will then be among those near-stationed to me."
26|43| Moses said to them (the sorcerers): "Throw whatever you are going to throw!"
26|44| So they threw their ropes and staffs, saying: "By the might and glory of Pharaoh, we will surely be the victors."
26|45| Thereafter, Moses threw his staff, and behold, it swallowed up their false devices.
26|46| The sorcerers threw themselves down, prostrating,
26|47| And they said: "We have come to believe in the Lord of the worlds,
26|48| "The Lord of Moses and Aaron!"
26|49| (The Pharaoh) said: "What! Do you believe in Him before I give you permission? For sure he is your chief who has taught you sorcery. But in time you will certainly come to know. I will most certainly have your hands and feet cut off alternately, and then I will most certainly have you crucified all together."
26|50| They responded: "There is no hurt (in what you threaten us with). For surely to our (true and everlasting) Lord we are bound to return."
26|51| "We ardently desire that our Lord will forgive us our sins for we are the first to believe."
26|52| (Events developed to the point that) We revealed to Moses: "Set forth with My servants by night: surely, you will be pursued."
26|53| Then the Pharaoh sent heralds to the cities (to mobilize his troops),
26|54| (Saying:) "Those people are indeed a paltry band;
26|55| "And (forgetting their lack in numbers and power), they have offended against us (and so provoked our wrath).
26|56| "As for us, we are assuredly a numerous host, ever on guard."
26|57| Thus did We drive them out of (all that they had enjoyed of) gardens and springs,
26|58| And treasures, excellent dwellings, and noble status.
26|59| Things happened thus, and We made the Children of Israel survive them and inherit (the same kind of bounties).
26|60| At sunrise, the Pharaoh set off in pursuit of them. tyrant tyrannical
26|61| When the two hosts came in view of each other, the companions of Moses said: "We are certainly overtaken!"
26|62| He replied: "Certainly not. My Lord is surely with me; He will guide me (to deliverance)."
26|63| We revealed to Moses: "Strike the sea with your staff." Thereupon the sea split, and each part became like a towering mountain.
26|64| We brought the others (the Pharaoh and his host) close to the same spot.
26|65| And We saved Moses and all those who were with him.
26|66| Afterwards, We caused the others to drown.
26|67| Surely in that (which took place between Moses and Pharaoh) there is a sign (a great, important lesson). Most of them (the Pharaoh’s people) were not believers.
26|68| And surely your Lord is indeed the All-Glorious with irresistible might (able to punish whoever goes against His Glory), the All-Compassionate (especially towards His believing servants).
26|69| Now recite to them this exemplary history of Abraham.
26|70| When he said to his father and his people: "What is it that you worship?"
26|71| They said: "We worship idols; and (even though they are made of wood and stone) we are ever devoted to them (as they are our deities)."
26|72| (Abraham) said: "Do they hear you when you invoke them?
26|73| "Or do they benefit you (when you worship them) or harm (you when you do not)?
26|74| They replied: "But we found our forefathers doing the same."
26|75| (Abraham) said: "So, have you considered what you have been worshipping?
26|76| "You and all your forefathers that have passed (before you)?
26|77| "I see that they (all that you worship) are enemies to me, but the Lord of the worlds is not.
26|78| "He Who has created me and so guides me (to whatever is to my benefit in both this world and the next).
26|79| "And He it is Who gives me food and drink;
26|80| "And Who, when I fall ill, heals me.
26|81| "And Who will make me die and then will give me life again.
26|82| "And Who, I hope, will forgive me my faults on Judgment Day."
26|83| "My Lord! Grant me true, wise judgment, and join me with the righteous.
26|84| "And grant me a most true and virtuous renown among posterity.
26|85| "And make me one of the inheritors of the Garden of bounty and blessing.
26|86| "And forgive my father, for he is among those who have gone astray.
26|87| "And do not disgrace me on the Day when all people will be raised up to life.
26|88| "The Day when neither wealth will be of any use, nor offspring,
26|89| "But only he (will prosper) who comes before God with a sound heart (free of all kinds of unbelief, hypocrisy, and associating partners with God)."
26|90| And Paradise (on that Day) will be brought near for the God-revering, pious;
26|91| And the Blazing Flame will be laid open before those who rebelled (against God) and went astray.
26|92| They will be asked: "Where are all those (idols or revered human beings, or angels, or jinn) that you used to worship
26|93| "Apart from God? Can they be of any help to you, or even to themselves?"
26|94| Then they will be hurled into the Flame headlong, one upon another – they (the idols), and the rebellious (who worship them).
26|95| And so too the hosts of Iblis, all together.
26|96| Blaming one another therein, they (the rebellious) will say (to the others):
26|97| "By God, assuredly, we were lost in obvious error,
26|98| "When we held you as equals (in worship and obedience) to the Lord of the worlds.
26|99| "It is none but the criminals (the leaders in associating partners with God) who led us astray.
26|100| "And now we have none to intercede (on our behalf),
26|101| "Nor any intimate friend.
26|102| "If only we had a second chance (in the world), so that we might be among the believers!"
26|103| Surely in that (which took place between Abraham and his people) there is a sign (a great, important lesson). Most of them were not believers.
26|104| And surely your Lord is indeed the All-Glorious with irresistible might (able to punish whoever goes against His Glory), the All-Compassionate (especially towards His believing servants).
26|105| The people of Noah denied (Noah and thereby meant to deny all) the Messengers.
26|106| (Recall) when their brother Noah said to them (by way of timely warning): "Will you not keep from disobedience to God in reverence for Him and seek refuge with His protection?
26|107| "Surely I am a Messenger to you, trustworthy.
26|108| "So keep form disobedience to God in reverence for Him, and obey me.
26|109| "I ask of you no wage for that (for conveying God’s Message); my wage is due only from the Lord of the worlds.
26|110| "So keep from disobedience to God in reverence for Him, and obey me."
26|111| They responded: "Shall we believe in you, when the lowliest (among the people) follow you!"
26|112| (Noah) said: "What knowledge could I have about what they were engaged in doing (before they became believers)?
26|113| "Indeed their reckoning rests with none but my Lord; if only you could understand!
26|114| "And it is not expected of me that I should repel the believers.
26|115| "I am but a plain warner (responsible for no other duty than the duty to warn)."
26|116| They said: "If you do not desist, O Noah, you will certainly be stoned to death in utter abjection."
26|117| (After ages of struggle) he said (in supplication): "My Lord! Indeed, my people have denied me.
26|118| "So judge between me and them a conclusive (and everlasting) separation, and save me and the believers in my company."
26|119| So We saved him and those who were with him in the laden Ark.
26|120| And then, following their rescue, We caused the rest to drown.
26|121| Surely in that (which took place between Noah and his people) there is a sign (a great, important lesson). Most of them were not believers.
26|122| And surely your Lord is indeed the All-Glorious with irresistible might (able to punish whoever goes against His Glory), the All-Compassionate (especially towards His believing servants).
26|123| The ‘Ad denied (Hud and thereby meant to deny all) the Messengers.
26|124| (Recall) when their brother Hud said to them (by way of timely warning): "Will you not keep from disobedience to God in reverence for Him and seek refuge with His protection?
26|125| "Surely I am a Messenger to you, trustworthy.
26|126| "So keep from disobedience to God in reverence for Him and obey me.
26|127| "I ask of you no wage for that (for conveying God’s Message); my wage is only due from the Lord of the worlds.
26|128| "Will you continue to build on every high spot monumental buildings for fun and show;
26|129| "And make for yourselves great castles (as if) hoping that you might live for ever;
26|130| "And when you strike and seize (others and their goods), strike and seize in the style of tyrants?
26|131| "So keep from disobedience to God in reverence for Him and obey me.
26|132| "Keep from disobedience to Him Who has amply provided you with (all that) you are well-aware of;
26|133| "Amply provided you with flocks and herds and children,
26|134| "And gardens and springs.
26|135| "Indeed I fear for you the punishment of an awesome Day."
26|136| They responded: "It is all the same to us whether you preach or are not of those who preach.
26|137| "This (what we do) is the pattern of conduct of (all our) predecessors.
26|138| "And (so) we are not going to be subject to any punishment."
26|139| So they denied him and, in consequence, We destroyed them. Surely in that (which took place between Hud and his people) there is a sign (a great, important lesson). Most of them were not believers.
26|140| And surely your Lord is indeed the All-Glorious with irresistible might (able to punish whoever goes against His Glory), the All-Compassionate (especially towards His believing servants).
26|141| The Thamud denied (Salih and thereby meant to deny all) the Messengers.
26|142| (Recall) when their brother Salih said to them (by way of timely warning): "Will you not keep from disobedience to God in reverence for Him and seek refuge with His protection?
26|143| "I am indeed a Messenger to you, trustworthy.
26|144| "So keep from disobedience to God in reverence for Him and obey me.
26|145| "I ask of you no wage for that (for conveying God’s Message); my wage is only due from the Lord of the worlds.
26|146| "(Do you think) you will be left secure forever in what is here before us,
26|147| "Amidst gardens and springs,
26|148| "Cornfields and date-palms with heavy bunches (of dates);
26|149| "And that you will (continue to) skillfully hew dwellings out of mountains?
26|150| "So keep from disobedience to God in reverence for Him and obey me;
26|151| "And do not follow the commands of those who are wasteful (of God-given faculties) and commit excesses,
26|152| "Those who cause disorder and corruption on the earth, without setting things right."
26|153| They responded: "You are only one of those who are bewitched.
26|154| "You are but a mortal like us, so produce a sign if you are truthful (in your claim of Messengership)."
26|155| (Salih) said: "This is a she-camel, one day is for her to drink and one day is for you to get water.
26|156| "Do not touch her with evil lest the punishment of an awesome Day should seize you."
26|157| But (after a time, being unable to put up with it any longer,) they cruelly slaughtered her, and then became regretful,
26|158| For the (shocking) punishment seized them. Surely in that (which took place between Salih and his people) there is a sign (a great, important lesson). Most of them were not believers.
26|159| And surely your Lord is indeed the All-Glorious with irresistible might (able to punish whoever goes against His Glory), the All-Compassionate (especially towards His believing servants).
26|160| The people of Lot denied (Lot and thereby meant to deny all) the Messengers.
26|161| (Recall) when their brother Lot said to them (by way of timely warning): "Will you not keep from disobedience to God in reverence for Him and seek refuge with His protection?
26|162| "I am indeed a Messenger to you, trustworthy.
26|163| "So keep from disobedience to God in reverence for Him and obey me.
26|164| I ask of you no wage for that (for conveying God’s Message); my wage is only due from the Lord of the worlds.
26|165| "What! Do you, of all the world’s people, approach men (with lust),
26|166| "And leave aside what your Lord has created (and made lawful) for you in your wives? No, indeed! you are a people exceeding all bounds (of decency)."
26|167| They responded: "If you do not desist, you will most certainly be cast out (from our land)."
26|168| (Lot) said: "I am indeed one who abhors your practice."
26|169| (And he prayed:) "My Lord! Save me and my family from (the consequences of) what they have been doing."
26|170| So We saved him and his family, all of them,
26|171| Except an old woman, who was among those who stayed behind (and were destroyed).
26|172| Then We annihilated the others.
26|173| We poured upon them a (destructive) rain (of stones). How evil was the rain of those who had been warned!
26|174| Surely in that (which took place between Lot and his people) there is a sign (a great, important lesson). Most of them were not believers.
26|175| And surely your Lord is indeed the All-Glorious with irresistible might (able to punish whoever goes against His Glory), the All-Compassionate (especially towards His believing servants).
26|176| The dwellers of al-Aykah denied (Shu‘ayb and thereby meant to deny all) the Messengers.
26|177| (Recall) when Shu‘ayb said to them (by way of timely warning): "Will you not keep from disobedience to God in reverence for Him and seek refuge with His protection?
26|178| "I am indeed a Messenger to you, trustworthy.
26|179| "So keep from disobedience to God in reverence for Him and obey me.
26|180| "I ask of you no wage for that (for conveying God’s Message); my wage is only due from the Lord of the worlds.
26|181| "Give full measure (in all your dealings) and be not one of those who (by cheating and giving less) cause loss to others.
26|182| "And weigh with the straighta true, accurate balance.
26|183| "Do not wrong people by depriving them of what is rightfully theirs, and do not go about acting wickedly in the land, causing disorder and corruption.
26|184| "Keep from disobedience to Him in reverence for Him Who has created you and all the earlier generations."
26|185| They responded: "You are only one of those who are bewitched.
26|186| "You are but a mortal like us, and we have become convinced that you are certainly one of the liars.
26|187| "So cause lumps from the sky to fall down upon us, if you are truthful in your claim (of Messengership)."
26|188| (Shu‘ayb) said: "My Lord knows well all that you do." (Thus he referred their matter to God.)
26|189| So they denied him and in consequence, the punishment of the Day of the Overshadowing seized them. It surely was the punishment of an awesome day.
26|190| Surely in that (which took place between Shu‘ayb and his people) there is a sign (a great, important lesson). Most of them were not believers.
26|191| And surely your Lord is indeed the All-Glorious with irresistible might (able to punish whoever goes against His Glory), the All-Compassionate (especially towards His believing servants).
26|192| This (Qur’an) is indeed the Book of the Lord of the worlds being sent down by Him (in parts).
26|193| The Trustworthy Spirit brings it down
26|194| On your heart, so that you may be one of the warners (entrusted with the Divine Revelation),
26|195| In clear Arabic tongue.
26|196| It has certainly been (prefigured) in the previous Scriptures.
26|197| Is it not an evidence enough for them that the scholars of the Children of Israel know it (to be so)?
26|198| But even if We had sent it down on any of the non-Arabs,
26|199| And he had recited it to them, they would still not have believed in it .
26|200| Thus (because of their willful persistence in unbelief and injustices) have We caused it (the Qur’an) to pass unheeded through the hearts of the disbelieving criminals:
26|201| (Despite irrefutable proofs of its truth,) they will not believe in it until they see the painful punishment.
26|202| So it will come on them all of a sudden, when they are unaware (and incapable of awareness) of its coming.
26|203| Then they say: "Are we to be granted some respite (so that we might reform ourselves?"
26|204| (This being so,) do they still wish for Our punishment to be hastened?
26|205| Have you considered that, if We let them enjoy life for many (more) years (– something they will desperately wish for when they face the punishment),
26|206| And the punishment they were promised comes upon them after that,
26|207| It will be of no avail to them at all (that their lives of enjoyment were prolonged).
26|208| We have never destroyed any township except that it had warners (sent to it),
26|209| To remind and admonish them. We have never been unjust.
26|210| It is not the satans who have brought down this (Book).
26|211| It is neither (permitted nor proper) for them, nor is it within their power (to do that).
26|212| Indeed they are utterly debarred even from hearing it (during its Revelation).
26|213| Hence, never take to you any other deity to invoke besides God, lest you should become of those condemned to the punishment.
26|214| And (O Messenger) warn your nearest kinsfolk.
26|215| Spread your wings (to provide care and shelter) over the believers who follow you (in practicing God’s commandments in their lives).
26|216| But if they disobey you (your kinsfolk by refusing your call, or those who have newly believed by not giving up their former way of life), then say (to them): "I am free of (responsibility for) what you do."
26|217| And (taking no account of any earthly power in performing your mission) put your trust in the All-Glorious with irresistible might (able to do whatever He wills), the All-Compassionate (especially towards His believing servants),
26|218| He Who sees you when you rise (in the Prayer, and in readiness to carry out Our commands),
26|219| As well as your strenuous efforts in prostration among those who prostrate (to be able to fulfill your duty of servanthood and help the believer to reform their lives).
26|220| Surely, He is the All-Hearing, the All-Knowing.
26|221| (O people!) Shall I inform you upon whom the satans descend?
26|222| They descend upon everyone addicted to inventing falsehoods, addicted to sinning.
26|223| They (the satans) give ear eagerly (to the conversations of the angels, and whisper to every forger lost in sin as if they received something), but they (both the satans and their sinful agents) are liars in most of their words.
26|224| As for poets, only the misguided follow them.
26|225| Do you not see that they roam confusedly through all the valleys (of falsehoods, thoughts, and currents).
26|226| And they say what they themselves do not do.
26|227| Except those who believe and do good, righteous deeds, and remember God much, and vindicate themselves when they have been wronged. The wrongdoers will come to know by what a (great) reverse they will be overturned.
27|1| Ta. Sin. These are the Revelations of the Qur’an, (and) a Book clear in itself and clearly showing the truth;
27|2| Guidance and glad tidings for the believers,
27|3| Who establish the Prayer in conformity with its conditions and pay the Prescribed Purifying Alms, and in the Hereafter they have certainty of faith.
27|4| As for those who do not believe in the Hereafter, We have surely decked out their deeds to be appealing to them (because of their unbelief), and so they wander in anxiety (about their worldly lives with deadened hearts).
27|5| Those are the ones for whom is the worst of punishment (in the world and in the Hereafter), and they will be the greatest losers in the Hereafter (as they will be left with no good deeds forwarded for acceptance).
27|6| And to you (O Messenger) the Qur’an is being conveyed from the Presence of One All-Wise, All-Knowing.
27|7| (Remember and recount to them) when Moses (while traveling in the desert saw a fire and) said to his family: "I perceive a fire far off. (Wait here,) I will bring you from there some information (about where we are and the way we should take), or bring you at least a burning brand so that you may (kindle a fire and) warm yourselves."
27|8| When he came to it, he was called: "Blessed is he who is at the fire and those who are around it; and All-Glorified is God (above having any resemblance with the created), the Lord of the worlds.
27|9| "O Moses! It is I, God, the All-Glorious with irresistible might, the All-Wise.
27|10| "Now, throw down your staff." (He threw it, and) when he saw it slithering as if a snake, he turned his back to flee. "O Moses, have no fear. The Messengers (those who enjoy nearness to Me and therefore absolute security) do not (have any reason to) feel fear in My Presence.
27|11| "Only those who have done wrong (should fear). But if (they repent and) substitute good in place of evil – surely I am All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate.
27|12| "Put your (right) hand into your bosom: it will come forth shining white without flaw. It is (one) among the nine signs (miracles for you to show) to the Pharaoh and his people. Surely, they are a transgressing people."
27|13| But when Our signs came to them in plain sight and clear enough to have opened their eyes to truth, they said: "This is clearly nothing but sorcery."
27|14| They rejected them out of mere iniquity and self-exaltation, although their consciences were convinced of their being true. So see how was the outcome for those given in to spreading disorder and corruption.
27|15| (On the other hand, We saved the Children of Israel whom the Pharaohs had persecuted for centuries, and granted them great triumph. And in time,) We granted David and Solomon (special) knowledge. Both used to thank and praise God, saying: "All praise and gratitude are for God, Who has favored us more than many of His believing servants."
27|16| Solomon succeeded David. He would say (citing in gratitude God’s favors to him): "O people! We have been taught the language of birds and we have been granted (some portion) of everything (which God provides for His servants). Surely this is a conspicuous favor.
27|17| One day his hosts of jinn, and of human beingsmen, and of birds were assembled before Solomon (upon his command), and were led forth under full control
27|18| Until, when they reached a valley of ants, one of the ants said: "O you ants! Get into your dwellings lest Solomon and his army crush you unawares."
27|19| Smiling at her words (in humble contentment with God’s favors to him), he said: "My Lord! Inspire and guide me so that I may thank You for Your favor which You have bestowed on me and on my parents, and so that I may act righteously in a manner that will please You; and include me (out of Your mercy) among Your righteous servants."
27|20| (On another occasion) he inspected the birds and said: "How is it that I cannot see the hoopoe? Or is he among the absentees?
27|21| "I will certainly inflict a severe punishment on him or maybe even kill him unless he comes to me with a convincing reason (for his absence)."
27|22| Before long the hoopoe came up and said: "I have obtained (some important information) which you do not have, and have come to you from Sheba with reliable news.
27|23| "I found there a woman ruling over them, one who has been granted everything (that a ruler is expected to have), and who has a mighty throne.
27|24| "However, I found her and her people prostrating to the sun rather than God. Satan has decked out their deeds to be appealing to them, and thus has barred them from the (unique straight) way, so they are not rightly guided,
27|25| "So that they do not prostrate before God, Who brings to light what is hidden in the heavens and the earth (Who brings into the light of existence all things and beings in the heavens and the earth from the veil of non-existence), and knows what you keep secret and what you disclose.
27|26| "God – there is no deity but He, the Lord of the Mighty Throne."
27|27| (Solomon) said: "We will see whether you are speaking the truth or are one of the liars.
27|28| "Go with this letter of mine, and drop it to them; then draw back from them and see how they will deal with it among themselves, and return."
27|29| She (the Queen, when the letter reached her) said: "O you nobles! See, an honorable letter has been cast to me.
27|30| "It is from Solomon, and it is: ‘In the Name of God, the All-Merciful, the All-Compassionate.
27|31| ‘Do not act towards me in defiance, but come to me in submission.’
27|32| "O you nobles! Let me have your counsel in this matter. (You know well that) I never conclude a decision on a matter unless you are present with me."
27|33| They said: "We dispose great power and we dispose great daring but the decision is yours, so consider what you will command."
27|34| She said: "When kings enter a country, they cause destruction and corruption in it, and make the noble (ones of its inhabitants) abased. This is what they really do.
27|35| "Now I will send them a present and see with what (answer) the envoys return."
27|36| When he (the envoy with the present) came to Solomon, he (Solomon) said: "Do you mean to help me with wealth? What God has granted me (of Prophethood, kingdom, and wealth) is much more and better than all that He has given you. It is only (people such as) you who would rejoice in this gift of yours.
27|37| "Go back to them (who sent you, and inform them that, if they do not come to us in submission), we will certainly come upon them with hosts which they have no power to resist. We will assuredly drive them from there in disgrace, and they will be humbled."
27|38| (The Queen, having received his message, decided to visit Solomon in Jerusalem. Knowing of her journey,) Solomon said (to his council): "O you nobles! Who among you can bring me her throne before they come to me in submission?"
27|39| One strong and cunning among the jinn said: "I can bring it to you before you rise from your council. Surely I have the strength and skill to do so and I am trustworthy."
27|40| And one who had some knowledge of the Book said: "I can bring it to you in the twinkling of your eye." When Solomon saw the throne set in his presence, he said: "This is out of the pure grace of my Lord that He may try me whether I give thanks or act with ingratitude. Whoever gives thanks gives thanks only for (the good of) his own soul; and whoever acts with ingratitude – (let him be aware that) my Lord is surely All-Wealthy and Self-Sufficient, All-Munificent."
27|41| He said: "Disguise her throne, and let us see whether she is able to find guidance or remains one of those who are not guided."
27|42| When she (the Queen) arrived, she was asked: "Is your throne like this?" She said: "It is as if it were the same. We were given knowledge (about the magnificence of Solomon’s rule and his extraordinary power) before all this (we have seen here), and we have already decided to submit."
27|43| That she had been worshipping other than God kept her back (from the Straight Path); for she belonged to a disbelieving people.
27|44| It was said (to her): "Enter the palace." When she saw it, she thought it was a pool of water and bared her calves (in order to hold her robes above the water). He (Solomon) said: "This is a palace paved with crystal." (Having now concluded that Solomon must truly be a Prophet,) she said: "My Lord, surely I have wronged myself (by worshipping false gods). But now I submit myself, in Solomon’s company, to God, the Lord of the worlds."
27|45| And certainly We sent to the Thamud their brother Salih (with the message): "Worship God alone." (When he conveyed the Message) they split into factions in dispute with each other.
27|46| He (Salih) said (to them): "O my people! Why do you seek to hasten the coming (upon you) of evil instead of good? Why do you not seek God’s forgiveness for your sins so that you may be shown mercy (to be granted a good, virtuous life in the world and eternal happiness in the Hereafter)?"
27|47| They said: "We augur ill of you and those who are with you." (Salih) answered: "What you describe as augury is (something ordained) by God. But the truth is that you are a people who are being tried."
27|48| There were nine ringleaders in the city, causing disorder and corruption in the land and not setting things right.
27|49| They said, swearing in God’s Name: "We will certainly swoop on him and his family by night suddenly and kill them all. Then we will assuredly say to his heirs that we did not witness the destruction of his family (nor of Salih himself); indeed we speak the truth."
27|50| And so they devised a scheme, and indeed We put Our will into force (to give them their just deserts), while they were not aware.
27|51| So see how was the end of their scheme! We utterly destroyed them and their people all together.
27|52| Those then are their houses, all lying in utter ruins because they were lost in wrongdoing. Surely in this is a sign (an important lesson) for a people seeking knowledge.
27|53| And We saved those who believed and kept from disobedience to God in reverence for Him and piety.
27|54| We also sent Lot as Messenger. He warned his people: "Will you do that abhorrent indecency in plain view (of one another)?
27|55| "Will you go with lust to men in place of women? You are indeed an ignorant people with no sense (of decency and right and wrong).
27|56| But his people’s only reply was nothing but to say (to one another): "Expel Lot’s family (as well as himself) from your land. They are a people who make themselves out to be pure!"
27|57| Then We saved him and his family except his wife. We decreed that she should be among those who stayed behind (and were destroyed).
27|58| We poured upon them a (destructive) rain (of stones). How evil was the rain of those who had been warned.
27|59| Say: "All praise and gratitude are for God and peace be upon those of His servants whom He has chosen (and made pure)." Is God better or all that they associate as partners (with Him)?
27|60| Or He Who has created the heavens and the earth, and sends down for you water from the sky? –We cause to grow with it gardens full of loveliness and delight: it is not in your power to cause their trees to grow. Is there another deity besides God? No, but they are a people who veer away (from truth). –
27|61| Or He Who has made the earth as a fixed abode, and has caused rivers to flow in its fissures, and has set for it firm mountains, and has placed a barrier between the two large bodies of water? Is there another deity besides God? No, but most of them do not know.
27|62| Or He Who answers the helpless one in distress when he prays to Him, and removes the affliction from him, and (Who) has made you (O humankind) vicegerents of the earth (to improve it and rule over it according to God’s commandments)? Is there another deity besides God? How little you reflect!
27|63| Or He Who guides you through the veils of the darkness of land and sea, and Who sends forth the (merciful) winds as a glad tiding in advance of His mercy? Is there another deity besides God? Absolutely exalted is He above all that they associate with Him as partners.
27|64| Or He Who originates creation in the first instance and then reproduces it, and Who provides you from the heaven and the earth? Is there another deity besides God? Say: "Produce your evidence, if you are truthful!"
27|65| Say: "None in the heavens and on the earth knows the Unseen (all that lies in the hidden realms and beyond any created being’s perception), but only God knows it. Neither do they (or their false deities) know when (the world will be destroyed and) they will be raised to life (after their death)."
27|66| No, indeed. Their knowledge does not attain to the Hereafter (as they have desired only the worldly life and wasted their faculties of learning in pursuit of worldly knowledge). No, indeed, for (despite being informed about it through Revelation) they remain in doubt about it. No, indeed, for they remain blind to (all the arguments about) it.
27|67| Those who obstinately persist in unbelief say: "What! is it when we have already become dust – is it then that we and our forefathers will be brought forth (to a new life)?
27|68| "We have certainly been threatened with this before, we and our forefathers. This is nothing but fables of the ancients!"
27|69| Say: "Go about the earth and see how was the outcome for the disbelieving criminals!"
27|70| Do not grieve over them (because of their negative response toward your mission), nor be distressed because of all that they scheme (to void your mission and bar people from God’s way).
27|71| They also say: "(So tell us) when is this threat to be fulfilled, if you are truthful?"
27|72| Say: "It may well be that something of that which you ask to be hastened has already drawn quite near behind you."
27|73| Indeed your Lord is most Bountiful to humankind but most of them do not give thanks.
27|74| Your Lord certainly knows whatever their bosoms conceal and whatever they disclose.
27|75| There is nothing hidden (from them as from all creatures) in the heaven or on the earth but is in a Manifest Book.
27|76| Surely this Qur’an explains to the Children of Israel most of the matters on which they differ.
27|77| And most certainly it is guidance (in all matters) and mercy (full of blessings) for the believers.
27|78| Indeed your Lord will judge between them (the believers and the unbelievers) according to His decree. He is the All-Glorious with irresistible might, the All-Knowing.
27|79| So put your trust in God. You surely stand on the truth, which is clear and doubtless.
27|80| Indeed you cannot make the dead hear nor can you make the deaf hear the call once they have turned their backs, going away.
27|81| Nor can you guide the blind out of their error. You can make none hear save those who (being unprejudiced, are willing to) believe in Our Revelations and signs (in the outer world as well as in their inner world), and are (therefore) ready to submit (to the truth).
27|82| When the time for the fulfillment of the word (of punishment) about them comes, We will bring forth for them a living creature from the earth who will speak to them – that people have no certainty of faith in Our signs and Revelations.
27|83| A Day (will come) when We will raise up and gather from every community a host of those who denied Our Revelations and signs (which establish the truth of all the essentials of faith), and they will be set in array (and driven to the place of reckoning)
27|84| Until they arrive there, when He will say to them: "Did you deny My Revelations and signs even without even having full, certain knowledge about them? If that is not so, what else were you doing?"
27|85| The word (of punishment) will be fulfilled against them because they did wrong (including especially associating partners with God). They will then not (be able to) speak (a single word of excuse and defense).
27|86| Have they not noticed that We have made the night so that they may rest in it, and the day sight-giving (for them to work in)? Surely in this are signs for people who will believe.
27|87| On the Day when the Trumpet is blown all who are in the heavens and all who are on the earth will be stricken with shock and terror, except those whom God wills to exempt. All will come to His Presence, utterly humbled.
27|88| You see the mountains, thinking them to be firmly fixed, but in reality they (are in constant motion) and pass by (with the movement of the earth) like the passing of the clouds. (And so will they be crumbled on Doomsday so as to take on the form particular to the other world.) This is the pattern of God Who has perfected everything. He is fully aware of all that you do.
27|89| Whoever comes (on Judgment Day) with good (and purified of sin) will have better than its worth, and such will be safe from any shock and terror on that Day.
27|90| But whoever comes with (unforgivable) evil, such will be flung down upon their faces into the Fire. "Are you recompensed for anything but what you used to do?"
27|91| (Say, O Messenger:) "I am ordered only to worship the Lord of this city (Makkah, where the first house of worship dedicated to God was built, and) which He has made sacred and to Whom all things belong. And I am ordered to be of the Muslims (those who submit to Him in all His orders).
27|92| And (I am ordered) to recite the Qur’an (to convey His messages). Whoever, therefore, chooses to follow the right way, follows it but for (the good of) his soul. And if any wills to go astray, say: "I am but one of the Messengers sent to warn."
27|93| Also say: "All praise and gratitude are for God. Soon He will show you His signs (which will prove that whatever He has decreed is true), and you will come to know them." Your Lord is never heedless and unmindful of whatever you do.
28|1| Ta. Sin. Mim.
28|2| These are the Revelations of the Book clear in itself and clearly showing the truth.
28|3| We now convey to you with truth some of the exemplary events which took place between Moses and the Pharaoh, for people who will believe.
28|4| The Pharaoh turned into an arrogant tyrant in the land (of Egypt) and divided its people into castes. One group of them he humiliated and oppressed, slaughtering their sons and letting live their womenfolk (for further humiliation and suffering). He surely was one of those spreading disorder and corruption.
28|5| But We willed to bestow Our favor upon those who were humiliated and oppressed in the land, and make of them exemplary leaders (to guide people on the way to God and in their lives), and make them inheritors (of the glory of the Pharaoh and the land in which We produced blessings for people).
28|6| And to establish them in the land with power, and let the Pharaoh and Haman and their hosts experience what they feared from them (the people they had oppressed).2
28|7| We inspired the mother of Moses, saying: "Suckle him (for a time, without anxiety for his life), then when you have cause to fear for him, put him in the river, and do not fear or grieve. We will surely return him to you and make him one of our Messengers."
28|8| Then the family of Pharaoh picked him up only to be an adversary and a source of grief for them. Indeed the Pharaoh, Haman and their hosts were habitually in the wrong (sinful in their treatment of people and especially of the Children of Israel).
28|9| The Pharaoh’s wife said (to him): "(Here is a child that will be) a means of happiness for me and for you. Do not kill him. Maybe he will prove useful for us, or we may adopt him as a son." They were unaware (of how the events were being prepared and how their outcome would turn to be in the end).
28|10| A void grew in the heart of the mother of Moses, and she would almost have disclosed all about him (in the hope that he would be returned to her) had We not strengthened her heart so that she might have faith (in Our promise).
28|11| She said to his sister: "Follow him (secretly)." So she watched him from afar, while the others were not aware.
28|12| We had forbidden wet-nurses for him from before (so that he refused the milk of the nurses called by the Queen to suckle him). Then his sister (who was able to get into the palace) said: "Shall I guide you to a family that will nurse him for you and they will take care of him?"
28|13| And thus We returned him to his mother, so that she might rejoice and forget her grief, and that she might certainly know that God’s promise was true. But most people do not know this.
28|14| When Moses reached his full manhood and grew to maturity, We granted him sound, wise judgment, and special knowledge. Thus do We reward those devoted to doing good as if seeing God.
28|15| (One day he left the palace where he was living and) he entered the city at a time when he was unnoticed by its people, and found therein two men fighting, one of his own people and the other of their enemies (the native Copts). The one from his people called on him for help against the other, who was from their enemies. So Moses struck him with his hand and caused his death (unintentionally). He said: "This (enmity and fighting) is of Satan’s doing. Surely he is manifestly a misleading enemy."
28|16| He said (in supplication): "My Lord! Indeed I have wronged myself, so forgive me." So He forgave him. Surely He is the One Who is the All-Forgiving, the All-Compassionate (especially toward His believing, repentant servants).
28|17| "My Lord!" Moses said, "Forasmuch as You have blessed me with favors, I will never be a supporter of the guilty."
28|18| Now in the morning he was in the city, apprehensive and watchful. And the man who had sought his help on the day before (turned up) and cried out to him again for help. Moses said to him: "You are indeed, obviously, an unruly hothead."
28|19| But then, when he was about to fall upon the man who was an enemy of them both, he (the Israelite who thought that Moses would attack him because he had chided him severely) said: "Moses, do you intend to kill me as you killed a person yesterday? You want only to become a tyrant in this land; you do not want to be of those who set things right!"
28|20| Then a man (from the royal court) came running from the farthest end of the city (where the court was) and said: "Moses, now the chiefs are deliberating upon your case to kill you, so leave the city. I am surely one of your sincere well-wishers."
28|21| So he left the city, apprehensive and looking around. He said (in supplication): "My Lord, save me from these wrongdoing, oppressive people!"
28|22| As he headed towards Midian (the nearest territory independent of Egyptian rule), he said: "I hope my Lord will guide me on the right way (so as to avoid capture by Egyptian forces)."
28|23| When he arrived at the wells of Midian, he found there a group of people watering their flocks, and he found, apart from them, two women (maidens) holding back their flock. He said: "What is the matter with you?" The two (women) said: "We do not water our flock until the shepherds take their flocks away. (It is we who do this work because) our father is a very old man."
28|24| So Moses watered their flock for them, and then he withdrew to the shade and said (in supplication): "My Lord! Surely I am in need of whatever good you may send down to me."
28|25| Thereafter one of the two (maidens) approached him, walking bashfully, and said: "My father invites you, so that he may reward you for watering our flock for us." So when he came to him and told him the whole of his story, he said: "Worry no longer! You are now safe from the wrongdoing, oppressive people."
28|26| One of the two daughters said: "Father, employ him, for the best whom you could employ should be one strong and trustworthy (as he is)."
28|27| (The father) said to Moses: "I want to marry one of these two daughters of mine to you if you serve me for eight years (according to the lunar calendar). But if you should complete ten years, that would be an act of grace from you. I do not mean to impose any hardship on you. You will find me, God willing, one of the righteous."
28|28| (Moses) answered: "So let it be between me and you. Whichever of the two terms I fulfill, let there be no ill-will against me. God is a Guarantor over what we say."
28|29| When Moses fulfilled the term and was traveling with his family (in the desert) he perceived a fire from the direction of the Mount (Sinai). He said to his family: "Wait here! For I perceive a fire far off; I may bring you from there some information (about where we are and the way we should take), or a burning brand from the fire so that you may (kindle a fire and) warm yourselves."
28|30| When he came to the fire, he was called from the right bank of the valley in the blessed ground, from the tree: "O Moses! Surely it is I, I am God, the Lord of the worlds.
28|31| "Throw down your staff. (He threw it, and) when he saw it slithering as if a snake, he turned his back to flee. "O Moses, come forward and have no fear. You (chosen as a Messenger) are indeed of those who are secure.
28|32| Put your (right) hand into your bosom: it will come forth shining white without flaw, and now hold your arms close to yourself free of awe (and ready to receive My command). These are two evidences (of your Messengership) from your Lord (for you to demonstrate) to the Pharaoh and his chiefs. Surely, they are a transgressing people."
28|33| (Moses) said: "My Lord! I killed a person among them, so I fear that they will kill me (and not let me convey Your Message).
28|34| "And my brother Aaron – he is one more eloquent in speech than me, so (appointing him also as a Messenger) send him with me as a helper to confirm my truthfulness, for indeed I fear that they will deny me."
28|35| He said: "We will strengthen you through your brother and will invest both of you with power and authority; and they will not be able to reach you (with any harm they intend) from awe of Our signs (miracles). You two, and all who follow you, will be the victors."
28|36| When Moses came to them (the Pharaoh and his chiefs) with Our manifest signs, they said: "This (that you show as miracles to prove your Messengership) is nothing but sorcery contrived. And we never heard this (the call to Him Whom you call the Lord of the worlds) in the time of our forefathers of old."
28|37| (Moses) said: "My Lord knows best who has come with the true guidance from Him, and to whom the ultimate abode of happiness will belong (both in the world and in the Hereafter). Surely, the wrongdoers do not prosper, (nor attain their goals)."
28|38| The Pharaoh (turned to the chiefs and) said: "O you nobles! I do not know that you have another deity than me. Well, then, O Haman, kindle (the furnace) for me to bake bricks, and make me a lofty tower so that I may have a look at the God of Moses, though I surely think that he is a liar."
28|39| He grew arrogant in the land, he and his hosts, against all right, and they thought that they would never be brought back to Us (for judgment).
28|40| So We seized him and his hosts, and cast them into the sea. Then see how was the outcome for the wrongdoers!
28|41| We have made them leaders (exemplary patterns) of misguidance calling (those who would follow them) to the Fire. And (even though they employ many in their service in this world) on the Day of Resurrection they will not be helped.
28|42| We have caused a curse to pursue them in this world (and increase them in sin because of their being leaders in misguidance misleading those who followed them), and on the Day of Resurrection they will be among the spurned (those utterly deprived of God’s Mercy).
28|43| And indeed, after We had destroyed those earlier (wrongdoing) generations, We granted Moses the Book (the Torah) as lights of discernment and insight for people, and as guidance and mercy, so that they might reflect and be mindful.
28|44| (All that We have told you about Moses and the Book granted to him is a Revelation We reveal to you, O Muhammad, for) you were not present on the spot lying to the western side (of the valley) when We decreed the Commandment (the Torah) to Moses, nor were you a witness (to what happened there).
28|45| But (after them) We brought into being many generations and long indeed were the ages that passed over them. (The information you give about them is also that which We reveal to you, just as what you tell about what happened concerning Moses in Midian is also a Revelation. For) neither did you dwell among the people of Midian so that you are conveying to them (the Makkan people) Our Revelations (about what Moses did in Midian). Rather, We have been sending Messengers (to convey Our Revelations).
28|46| And neither were you present on the side of the Mount Sinai when We called out (to Moses), but (We reveal all this to you) as a mercy from your Lord so that you may warn a people to whom no warner has come before you, so that they may reflect and be mindful.
28|47| (We have sent you as Messenger) lest they say when a disaster befalls them (either in the world or in the Hereafter) because of what they themselves with their own hands have forwarded, "Our Lord! If only you had sent a Messenger to us, we would have followed Your Revelations and been among the believers."
28|48| And yet, now that the truth has come to them from Us (through a Messenger), still they say (by way of an excuse for their denial of it), "Why has he not been granted the like of what Moses was granted (all at once)?" Did they not preject previously belief refuse to believe in what had been granted to Moses? They said: "Both are sorcery, each supporting the other." They also said: "In each we are unbelievers."
28|49| Say (to them): "Then bring another Book from God which would offer better guidance than either of these two so that I may follow it, if you are truthful (in your claim that they are both sorcery)."
28|50| If they cannot respond, then know that they are merely following their whims and caprices. Who can be more astray than he who follows his lusts and fancies deprived of all guidance from God. God surely does not guide people given to wrongdoing and injustice.
28|51| Assuredly We have conveyed to them the Word (one verse after the other, and one chapter after the other for their good) so that they may reflect and be mindful.
28|52| Those to whom We granted the Book before it do believe in it.
28|53| When it is recited to them, they say: "We believe in it. Surely it is the truth from our Lord. Even before this We were such as submitted (to the Divine Will)."
28|54| These will be granted their reward twice over because they have remained steadfast (in following their religion free of falsehood and so keeping themselves above all prejudices to believe in and follow the Qur’an and Muhammad); and they repel evil with good and out of what We have provided for them (of wealth, knowledge, power, etc.) they spend (in God’s cause and for the needy, and purely for the good pleasure of God).
28|55| When they hear any vain (useless or aggressive) talk, they turn away from it, without reciprocating it, and say (to those who are engaged in it): "To us are accounted our deeds, and to you, your deeds. Peace be upon you! We do not seek to mix with the ignorant (those unaware of God, true guidance and right and wrong)."
28|56| You cannot guide to truth whomever you like but God guides whomever He wills. He knows best who are guided (and amenable to guidance).
28|57| They say: "Should we follow this Guidance in your company, we would be annihilated in our land." Have We not established them in a secure sanctuary to which, as a provision from Us, products of all kinds are brought? But most of them do not know (that it is We Who protect and provide for them, and assume that it is their worshipping idols that attracts other Arab tribes to Makkah for trade and that protects them from being attacked by those tribes).
28|58| How many a township have We destroyed that exulted insolently on account of their affluence. Those are their dwellings – except for few people for a short time only, they have never been dwelt in after them. It is always We Who are the inheritors (Who remain as the Ever-Living when all else have passed away).
28|59| Yet Your Lord never destroys townships without first raising up in their mother-town a Messenger who conveys to them Our messages. We never destroy townships, save that their people are wrongdoers (who associate partners with God and are given to many injustices).
28|60| Whatever thing you are granted (of the world) is but for the passing enjoyment of the present, worldly life and its adornment. Whereas what God keeps for you (as the reward for your good deeds and which He will give you in excess of your deserving) is much better and more enduring. Will you not use your reason and understand?
28|61| Is, then, he to whom We have given a fair promise (forgiveness and Paradise) which he will obtain, like him whom We have let enjoy for a time the good things of the present, worldly life, but who will be, on the Day of Resurrection, among those who are arraigned (for punishment)?
28|62| On that Day God will call to them and say: "Where now are those (beings, things, and powers) that you alleged to be My partners?"
28|63| Those (who led others to associate partners with God, and) against whom God’s judgment of punishment has been realized will say: "Our Lord! Those whom we led astray, we led them astray just because we ourselves were astray (– they imitated us out of their free will, we never coerced them to it). Now in Your Presence we declare our innocence (of their taking us for partners with You). It was not us that they worshipped. (Rather, they worshipped their own carnal souls.)"
28|64| And it will be said (to those who associated them as partners with God): "Call for help now upon your associate-deities!" And they will call upon them, but they will not answer them, and they will see the punishment in front of them. If only they had followed the right guidance!
28|65| On that Day God will call to them (once more) and ask: "How did you respond to the Messengers?"
28|66| That Day (all ways and means of finding) information will be darkened to them, and they will not (even) be able to ask one another.
28|67| But as for those who repent and believe and do good, righteous deeds, they may well hope to be among the prosperous.
28|68| Your Lord creates whatever He wills and chooses and decrees (for His servants) whatever way of life He wills. They have no freedom of choice (in respect of what God has chosen and commanded). All-Glorified is He, and infinitely Exalted above their association of partners with Him.
28|69| Your Lord knows whatever their bosoms conceal and whatever they disclose.
28|70| He is God, there is no deity but He (only He is owed worship). (As all beauties, perfections, accomplishments, and favors are essentially from Him,) for Him are all praise and gratitude at the beginning and at the end (of every accomplishment, both in the world and in the Hereafter). His alone is judgment and authority, and to Him you are being brought back.
28|71| Say: "Have you ever considered that if God should make the night perpetual over you until the Day of Resurrection, is there a deity other than God who can bring you light? Will you not, then, give ear (to the truth and take heed)?"
28|72| Say: "Have you considered that if God should make the day perpetual over you until the Day of Resurrection, is there a deity other than God who can bring you the night, that you may rest in it? Will you not, then, see (the truth and take heed)?"
28|73| It is out of His Mercy that He has made for you the night and the day so that you may rest (during the night) and seek after His bounty (during the day), and that you may give thanks (to Him for both).
28|74| A Day will come and He will call to those who associate partners with Him, saying: "Where now are those (beings, things, and powers) that you alleged to be My partners?"
28|75| And We will take out from every community a witness (the Messenger sent to them), and will say (to those who rejected the Messengers): "Produce your evidence (for your claim that God has partners)!" Then they will know that all truth rests with God and that it is only God Who has the absolute right (to Divinity and Lordship); and all (the false deities) that they fabricated besides God will fail them.
28|76| Qarun (Korah) was one of Moses’ people, but he betrayed and oppressed them. We had granted him such great treasures that their very keys alone were too heavy a burden for a company of strong people. Even his people warned him: "Do not exult in your wealth; surely God does not love those who exult.
28|77| "But seek, by means of what God has granted you, the abode of the Hereafter (by spending in alms and other good causes), without forgetting your share (which God has appointed) in this world. Do good to others as God has done good to you (out of His pure grace). Do not seek corruption and mischief in the land, for God does not love those who cause corruption and make mischief."
28|78| He said: "All this has been given to me only by virtue of a certain knowledge that I have." Did he not know that God had destroyed among the generations before him men who were greater than him in power, and greater in wealth amassed? In fact, the criminals committed to accumulating sin are not asked about their sins (before they are destroyed so that they can defend themselves).
28|79| (Korah) showed off before his people in all his pomp. Those who cared only for the life of this world said: "Ah, if we but had the like of what Korah has been given! Indeed he is one of tremendous good fortune!"
28|80| But those who had been granted (true) knowledge said: "Woe to you! God’s reward for any who believes and does good, righteous deeds is better by far. But none save the patient (who persevere through adversities, in obedience to God and avoidance of sins) can ever attain to it."
28|81| Then We caused the earth to swallow him and his dwelling. There was then no host to help him against God, nor (for all his possessions) was he himself able to come to his own aid.
28|82| And on the morrow, those who had longed to be in his place the day before began to say: "Woe to us! (We had forgotten that) God enlarges provision for whom He wills of His servants, and straitens it (for whom He wills). Had God not been gracious to us, He would have made us too swallowed up. Woe to us! (for we had forgotten that) the unbelievers do not prosper."
28|83| As for the abode of the Hereafter, We will assign it to those who do not seek arrogant power on earth nor cause corruption and disorder. The (truly desirable) outcome is for the God-revering, pious.
28|84| Whoever comes to God with a good deed will have better than it, and whoever comes with an evil deed – those who do evil deeds will not be recompensed save only for what they have done.
28|85| Surely He Who has entrusted you (O Messenger) with the (duty of conveying) the Qur’an, will certainly bring you round to the fulfillment of the promise (– you will be returned in victory to the home you were compelled to abandon). Say: "My Lord knows best who has the (true) guidance and who is lost in obvious error."
28|86| You did not expect that this Book would be revealed to you; but it is being revealed to you as a mercy from your Lord, so do not lend any support to the unbelievers.
28|87| And never let them divert you away from conveying God’s Revelations after they have been sent down to you. Call (people) to your Lord, and do not be of those who associate partners with God.
28|88| Do not call upon another deity along with God. There is no deity but He. Everything is perishable (and so perishing) except His "Face" (His eternal Self and what is done in seeking His good pleasure). His alone is judgment and authority, and to Him you are being brought back.
29|1| Alif. Lam. Mim.
29|2| Do people reckon that they will be left (to themselves at ease) on their mere saying, "We believe," and will not be put to a test?
29|3| We certainly tested those who preceded them. (This is Our unchanging way) so that God will certainly mark out those who prove true (in their profession of faith) and He will certainly mark out those who prove false.
29|4| Or do those who do evil deeds (and persecute the believers) reckon that they can frustrate Us and escape Our punishment? How evil is the judgment they have reached!
29|5| Whoever looks forward to meeting with God: the term set by God (for His meeting) will certainly come. He is the All-Hearing, the All-Knowing.
29|6| And whoever strives hard (against his carnal, evil-commanding soul and Satan to be a good Muslim and to resist all persecutions in God’s cause) strives for the good of his own soul only. Surely God is Self-Sufficient in absolute independence of all the worlds.
29|7| Those who believe and (in striving hard to be good Muslims) do good, righteous deeds, We will most certainly blot out from them their evil deeds, and will most certainly reward them in accordance with the best of what they used to do.
29|8| (As the requirement for being good Muslims) We have enjoined on human to be kind and good to his parents; but if they endeavor to make you associate with Me anything as partner, about whose being so you impossibly have no knowledge, do not obey them. To Me is your return, so I will make you understand what you were doing (and call you to account for it).
29|9| Those who believe and do good, righteous deeds, We will most certainly include them among the righteous (who enter Paradise).
29|10| Among the people are such as say, "We believe in God," but when (such a person) is subjected to persecution (for his confession of faith) in God, he construes persecution at the hands of people as God’s punishment (and rejects his faith); but if a victory comes from your Lord (to the believers), (such people) will most certainly say, "Surely we have always been with you." Or (do they think that) God is not fully aware of what is in the bosoms of all creatures (that He created)?
29|11| God will most certainly mark out those who truly believe and He will most certainly mark out the hypocritical ones.
29|12| Those who disbelieve say to those who believe: "If you follow our way (of religion and life), we will take your sins upon us, yet they cannot take upon them anything of their sins. They are liars indeed.
29|13| They will most certainly have to bear their own burdens, and other burdens together with their own; and most certainly they will be called to account on the Day of Resurrection for what they were busy fabricating (against God and other truths of faith).
29|14| Indeed, We sent Noah to his people (as Messenger), and he remained among them a thousand years save fifty years, and in the end the Flood overtook them as they were wrongdoers (who persisted in associating partners with God and committing grave injustices).
29|15| Yet We saved him and those who were together with him on the Ark, and We made this event as an exemplary sign (full of lessons) for all the people (to come after).
29|16| And Abraham, too, (We sent as Messenger). He said to his people (in conveying this message): "Worship God alone and keep from disobedience to Him in reverence for Him and piety. Doing so is the best for you, if you would know (the truth of the matter).
29|17| "You worship only idols instead of God, and thus you invent a mere falsehood (by deifying some things and beings such that it is impossible for them to be Deity). Surely those (beings whom you deify and make statutes of, and idols) that you worship instead of God do not have power to provide for you; so seek all your provision from God, and worship Him and be thankful to Him. To Him you are being brought back."
29|18| If you deny Our Messenger, know that many communities before you denied (the Messengers sent to them, but their denial was of no avail to them). What rests with the Messenger is no more than to convey the Message fully and clearly.
29|19| Have they not considered how God originates creation in the first instance, and then reproduces it? This is indeed easy for God.
29|20| Say: "Go about on the earth and see how God originated creation. Then God will bring forth the other (second) creation (in the form of the Hereafter). Surely God has full power over everything.
29|21| (He will bring forth the Hereafter, where) He punishes whom He wills and has mercy on whom He wills. To Him you are being returned.
29|22| You cannot frustrate Him (in the execution of His Will even if you penetrate the depths) in the earth or in the heaven. And you have none to protect you, and none to help you, except God.
29|23| Those who disbelieve in the signs of God (in the universe and in themselves) and His Revelations, and in the meeting with Him (in the Hereafter), they have no hope and expectation of a share in My Mercy. (God has forbidden them Paradise.) And for them there is a painful punishment.
29|24| But the response of his (Abraham’s) people was only to say: "Kill him, or burn him," but God saved him from the fire (that they kindled to burn him). Surely in this are signs (important lessons) for people who will believe and who will deepen in faith.
29|25| He (Abraham) said to them: "You have taken to yourselves idols to worship instead of God, for no other reason than to have a bond of love and attachment between you only in the life of this world. But then, on the Day of Resurrection you will deny one another (disowning any relation between you), and curse one another. Your final refuge will be the Fire, and you will have no helpers.
29|26| Lot believed in him, and he (Abraham) said: "I am emigrating to my Lord (leaving my land and people for a place where I can practice my Religion). Surely, He is the All-Glorious with irresistible might (whomever He helps cannot be debased, and whomever He preserves does not fail), the All-Wise (in whatever He does and decrees there are many instances of wisdom).
29|27| We bestowed upon him (a son) Isaac and (a grandson) Jacob, and caused Prophethood and the revelation of the Book to continue among his offspring, and We granted him his reward in this world also; and he surely is among the righteous in the Hereafter.
29|28| And Lot too (We sent as Messenger). He said (to his people in conveying this message): "Indeed you (the men of this whole community) commit an indecency such as none people in all the world has have ever done before you.
29|29| (After such severe warnings of God) will you continue to go come to men with lust, waylay (travelers) on the road (especially male travelers), and commit shameful deeds in your assemblies? The response of his people was only that they said (mocking and challenging him): "Bring down upon us the punishment of God with which you threaten us, if you are truthful!"
29|30| He (Lot) said (in supplication): "My Lord, help me against these people given to spreading corruption."
29|31| And so, when Our (heavenly) envoys came to Abraham with the glad tidings (of the birth of Isaac), they said to him: "We are going to destroy the people of that township. For its people are wrongdoers (who exceed all bounds in indecency)."
29|32| He said: "But Lot is there." They said: "We know very well who is there. We will certainly save him and his family (by allowing them to leave the place), except his wife, who (as has been decreed) is among those who will stay behind (and be destroyed)."
29|33| And when Our messengers came to Lot, he was troubled on their account and felt himself powerless to protect them. They said: "Do not be worried, nor be grieved. We are going to save you and your family except your wife who (as has been decreed) is among those who will stay behind (and be destroyed).
29|34| "We are going to bring down on the people of this township a scourge from the sky because they have persistently been transgressing (all bounds of decency and equity)."
29|35| Assuredly We have left behind a clear sign for a people who use theirwill reason and understand.
29|36| And to Midian We sent their brother Shu‘ayb (as Messenger), and he said (to them in conveying this message): "O my people! Worship God alone and be prepared for the Last Day (in certain expectation that you will be asked to account for all your deeds in the world), and do not go about acting wickedly in the land, causing disorder and corruption."
29|37| But they denied him, and in consequence a shocking catastrophe seized them, so that they lay prostrate (and lifeless) in their dwellings.
29|38| And the Ad and Thamud – (their fate) is manifest to you from their dwellings (still lying in ruins). Satan decked out their (evil) deeds to be appealing to them, and so debarred them from the right way, though they were intelligent (enough to see the truth).
29|39| And Korah, Pharaoh, and Haman – indeed Moses came to them with clear proofs of the truth, but they were arrogant and oppressive in the land. Yet they could not outrun (Our punishment).
29|40| Each of them (of the communities mentioned) We seized in their sins. Of them are those upon whom We sent a hurricane (of stones), and of them are those whom the awful blast seized, and of them is him whom We caused to be swallowed by the earth, and of them those whom We caused to drown. God would never wrong them, but it was they who wronged themselves.
29|41| The parable of those who take to them other than God for guardians (to entrust their affairs to) is like a spider: it has made for itself a house, and surely the frailest of houses is the spider’s house. If only they knew this!
29|42| God surely knows what they deify and invoke apart from Him and that their doing so is not based on any truth. He is the All-Glorious with irresistible might (Who never accepts any partner in Divinity, Lordship and Sovereignty), the All-Wise (in Whose creation and rule there are many instances of wisdom).
29|43| Those parables – We strike them for people (so that they may see the truth and mend their ways). But none reasons to understand (their true meaning and purpose) save the knowledgeable.
29|44| He has created the heavens and the earth with truth (meaningfully and for definite, wise purposes, and on solid foundations of truth). Surely in this is a sign for the believers.
29|45| Recite and convey to them what is revealed to you of the Book, and establish the Prayer in conformity with its conditions. Surely, the Prayer restrains from all that is indecent and shameful, and all that is evil. Surely God’s remembrance is the greatest (of all types of worship and not restricted to the Prayer). God knows all that you do.
29|46| Do not argue with those who were given the Book save in the best way, unless it be those of them who are given to wrongdoing (and therefore not accessible to courteous argument). Say (to them): "We believe in what has been sent down to us and what was sent down to you, and your God and our God is one and the same. We are Muslims wholly submitted to Him."
29|47| It is in this way (upon the principle of submission to God and as a confirmation of all the previous Books and Prophets) that We have sent down the Book to you. So those who were given the Book before (and are sincere with respect to the Divine Revelation) believe in it, and among those (people of Makkah, also) there are some who believe in it. None could oppose and reject Our Revelations except unbelievers (those who knowingly cover them with falsehood).
29|48| You did not (O Messenger) read of any book before it (the revelation of this Qur’an), nor did you write one with your right (or left) hand. For then those who have ever sought to disprove the truth might have a reason to doubt (it).
29|49| It (the Qur’an) is indeed self-evident, enlightening Revelations (revealed by God and so able to impress themselves) in the hearts of those endowed with knowledge. None oppose and reject them except wrongdoers (those who cannot determine with justice and so act arrogantly in response to them).
29|50| They say: "Why have no miraculous signs been sent down on him from his Lord?" Say: "The miraculous signs are but at the Will and in the Power of only God. I am but a plain warner (with no freedom and power to be able to do whatever I wish)."
29|51| Is it not enough for them (as a miraculous sign) that We have sent down to you the Book which is recited to them? Surely in it there is great mercy and (instructive) reminder for a people who believe.
29|52| Say: "God suffices as a witness between me and you. He knows whatever is in the heavens and on the earth. As for those who believe in the falsehood and disbelieve in God (by rejecting His Revelation and Messenger), they are the losers (who have ruined themselves)."
29|53| They challenge you to hasten the punishment (with which they are threatened by God). Had it not been for the term appointed by God, the punishment would have come upon them (already). And it will come upon them all of a sudden, when they are unaware.
29|54| They challenge you to hasten the punishment (with which they are threatened by God). Surely Hell will encompass the unbelievers (with the reasons for them to enter it, and is bound to have them in it).
29|55| On that Day the suffering will overwhelm them from above them and from beneath their feet, and (God) will say to them: "Taste now what you used to do (in the world)!"
29|56| O My servants who believe (but are prevented from living according to your belief)! My earth is vast, so worship Me alone.
29|57| Every soul is bound to taste death, and then to Us you will be brought back.
29|58| Those who believe and do good, righteous deeds, We will most certainly lodge them in high, lofty mansions in Paradise through which rivers flow, therein to abide. How excellent is the reward of those who always do good deeds!
29|59| They are patient (in the face of the adversities they suffer for the sake of worshipping God only), and in their Lord they put their trust (expecting no support from any other power or authority).
29|60| How many a living creature there is that does not carry its own provision (in store), but God provides for them, and indeed for you. He is the All-Hearing, the All-Knowing.
29|61| If you ask them, "Who is it that has created the heavens and the earth, and made the sun and the moon subservient to His order (thereby sustaining life)?" they will most certainly say, "God." How then are they (who oppose this Revelation) turned away from the truth and make false claims?
29|62| God enlarges provision for whom He wills of His servants, and straitens it (for whom He wills). Surely God has full knowledge of everything.
29|63| If you ask them, "Who is it that sends down water from the sky, and revives with it the earth after its death?" they will most certainly say, "God." Say (you, also): "All praise and gratitude are for God." But most of them do not use their reason (to know the truth and distinguish it from falsehood).
29|64| The present, worldly life is nothing but a pastime and play, but the abode of the Hereafter is truly alive. If they but knew.
29|65| When they embark on a ship (and find themselves in danger), they call upon God sincerely believing in Him alone (as the only Deity, Lord, and Sovereign). But when He brings them safe to land, see, they begin again to associate partners with God!
29|66| And so let them show ingratitude for all that We have granted them, and so let them give themselves up to the enjoyment of the worldly life; but they will come to know.
29|67| Do they not consider that We have established (them in) a secure sanctuary while people are ravaged all around them? (How then) do they believe in falsehood and (show such ingratitude as) to disbelieve in God’s greatest blessing (of the Qur’an and Islam)?
29|68| Who is more in the wrong than he who fabricates falsehood in attribution to God or denies the truth when it has come to him? Is there not a dwelling in Hell for the unbelievers?!
29|69| Those (on the other hand) who strive hard for Our sake, We will most certainly guide them to Our ways (that We have established to lead them to salvation). Most assuredly, God is with those devoted to doing good, aware that God is seeing them.
30|1| Alif. Lam. Mim.
30|2| The Byzantine Romans have been defeated,
30|3| In the lands close-by, but they, after their defeat, will be victorious
30|4| Within a few (nine) years – to God belongs the command (the absolute judgment and authority) both before and after (any event) – and at the time (when the Romans are victorious), the believers will rejoice,
30|5| Because of God’s help leading them to victory. He helps whom He wills to victory. He is the All-Glorious with irresistible might, the All-Compassionate (especially towards His believing servants).
30|6| (This is) God’s promise. God never fails His promise, but most people do not know this (as they have no true knowledge about God).
30|7| They only know (what reaches to their senses from) the outward aspect of the life of this world, but they are heedless and unaware of (what lies beyond it and) the Hereafter.
30|8| Do they not reflect upon themselves (even once)? God has not created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them save with truth (meaningfully and for definite, wise purposes, and on solid foundations of truth), and for an appointed term. But surely many among the people are in unbelief about the meeting with their Lord.
30|9| Have they never traveled about the earth and seen what was the outcome for those before them (who also obstinately disbelieved in Our signs)? They were greater than them in power. They cultivated the soil and mined it (for minerals and water resources), and built it up more and better than these have done. And in time their Messengers came to them with clear proofs of the truth (which they rejected to their own doom). God would never wrong them, but it was they themselves who were wronging themselves.
30|10| In consequence, the outcome for those who were lost in evil was evil, as they denied God’s Revelations and signs, and were mocking them.
30|11| God originates creation in the first instance, and then reproduces it, (and will bring it back in the Hereafter), and then you will be returned to Him.
30|12| When the Last Hour stands forth and the Judgment is established, the disbelieving criminals will be plunged into despair.
30|13| They will have no intercessors in the beings whom they associate (as partners with God), and they will no longer believe in their being partners with God.
30|14| When the Last Hour stands forth (and the Judgment is established) – on that Day all people will be separated from one another.
30|15| As for those who believe and do good, righteous deeds, they will be honored and made happy in a delightful Garden.
30|16| But those who disbelieve and deny Our Revelations and the final meeting (with Us) in the Hereafter, such will be arraigned for punishment (in Hell).
30|17| So glorify God when you enter the evening and when you enter the morning;
30|18| – And (proclaim that) all praise and gratitude in the heavens and on the earth are for Him – and in the afternoon and when you enter the noon time.
30|19| He brings forth the living out of the dead, and brings the dead out of the living, and revives the earth after its death. It is in the way (that He revives the dead earth that) you will be brought forth from the dead.
30|20| And among His signs is that He created you from earth, and (since) then you have grown into a human population scattered widely.
30|21| And among His signs is that He has created for you, from your selves, mates, that you may incline towards them and find rest in them, and He has engendered love and tenderness between you. Surely in this are signs for people who reflect.
30|22| And among His signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth, and the diversity of your languages and colors. Surely in this are signs indeed for people who have knowledge (of the facts in creation and who are free of prejudices).
30|23| And among His signs is your sleeping at night and in the day, and your seeking (livelihoods) out of His bounty. Surely in this are signs for people who listen (to the voice of God’s messages in creation and His provision for itall creatures).
30|24| And among His signs is His displaying before you the lightning, giving rise to both fear (of being struck) and hopeful expectation (of rain), and that He sends down water from the sky, and revives with it the earth after its death. Surely in this are signs for people who use theirwill reason and understand.
30|25| And among His signs is that the heaven and the earth stand firm (subsisting) by His Command. ThenIn the end, when He calls you forth from the earth (with a single, particular summons), then (at once) you will come forth.
30|26| To Him belongs all that is in the heavens and on the earth. All are obedient to Him in humble service.
30|27| He it is Who originates creation in the first instance and then reproduces it (in the world) and will bring it back (in the Hereafter): and that (reproduction and bringing back) is easier for Him. Whatever attribute of sublimity there is (like existence, life, power, knowledge, munificence, and might, etc.) in the heavens and the earth, it is His in the highest degree, and He is the All-Glorious with irresistible might, the All-Wise.
30|28| He strikes a parable from your selves: Do you recognize for those, over whom you hold possession and authority (slaves or animals), a share in what We have provided for you, so that you and they have equal shares in it, and do you hold them in fearful respect as you hold each other in fearful respect? Thus We set out in detail the signs (of Our Oneness) for people who will reason and understand.
30|29| No indeed! Those who do (the greatest) wrong (by associating partners with God) follow only their own desires and caprices, without (basing on any) knowledge. Who has power to guide him whom God has led astray (on account of following merely his lusts and fancies)? And such have none to help them (to salvation).
30|30| So set your whole being upon the Religion (of Islam) as one of pure faith (free from unbelief, polytheism, and hypocrisy). This is the original pattern belonging to God on which He has originated humankind. No change can there be in God’s creation. This is the upright, ever-true Religion, but most of the people do not know.
30|31| (Set your whole being, you and the believers in your company, on the upright, ever-true Religion) turning in devotion to Him alone, and keep from disobedience to Him in reverence for Him and piety, and establish the Prayer in conformity with its conditions; and do not be of those who associate partners (with Him),
30|32| Those who have made divisions in their religion (whereas they must accept it in its totality), and become split into different factions (following different guides to falsehood), each party rejoicing in what (portion) it has.
30|33| When affliction befalls people, they invoke their Lord turning to Him in contrition; then, no sooner does He favor them with a taste of mercy from Him, than some of them associate partners with their Lord, (Who has created them, and sustains and cares for them).
30|34| Thus (do they behave) with disbelieving ingratitude for all that We have granted them. Then: Enjoy (for a while the worldly favors He has granted you), but in time you will come to know!
30|35| Or have We sent down on them a document of authority which speaks in favor of their associating partners with Him?
30|36| When We favor people with a taste of mercy, they rejoice in it (without thinking of Him Who bestows it). But if an evil befalls them because of what they themselves have committed, look how they lose all hope!
30|37| Have they never considered that God enlarges provision for whom He wills, and straitens it (for whom He wills). Surely in this are signs for people who will believe and who will deepen in faith.
30|38| And so give their due to relatives, as well as to the destitute and the wayfarer. That is best for those who seek God’s "Face" (His approval and good pleasure); and those are they who are the prosperous.
30|39| Whatever you give to people in usurious hope that it may return to you increased by through the goods of (other) people, will bring no increase in God’s sight. Whereas whatever you give in charity seeking God’s "Face" (His approval and good pleasure) – for those there is increase (of recompense) multiplied.
30|40| God is He Who creates you, then He sustains you (by providing for you), and then He causes you to die and then He will bring you to life again. Are there any among the partners you associate (with God) that do anything of that? All-Glorified He is, and infinitely Exalted above what they associate (with Him).
30|41| Corruption and disorder have appeared on land and in the sea because of what the hands of people have (done and) earned (of evil deeds). Thus He causes them to taste the consequence of some of what they have done, so that they may (take heed, repent and reform, and so) return (to the right way).
30|42| Say: "Travel about on the earth and see what was the outcome for those who lived before themyou. Most of them were (obstinately given to) associating partners (with God)."
30|43| Set, then, your whole being on the upright, ever-true Religion before there comes a Day which God will not remove (from them) and none can prevent Him from bringing it. On that Day they will be sundered apart.
30|44| Whoever disbelieves, his unbelief is charged against him. Whereas those who (believe and) do good, righteous deeds, they make provision for themselves (of a happy, everlasting life),
30|45| That He (God) will reward those who believe and do good, righteous deeds out of His bounty. He does not love the unbelievers.
30|46| Among His signs is that He sends forth the merciful winds as glad tidings so that He may favor you with a taste of His mercy, and that ships may sail by His command (according to the laws He has established), and that you may seek of His bounty, and that (in recognition of all these favors of His) you may give thanks (to Him).
30|47| Indeed We sent before you (O Messenger, other) Messengers each to his own people, and they came to them with clear proofs (of the truth of God’s Unity and Sovereignty). Then, We took retribution from those who disbelieved and were committed to accumulating sin. We have bound Ourselves to rescue the believers.
30|48| God is He Who sends forth the merciful winds, so that they set clouds to move, and He spreads them in the heaven in the manner that He wills, and makes them aggregated particles, and there! you see rain issue issuing from their midst. When He has caused it to fall on such of His servants as He wills, they rejoice,
30|49| Even though a short while before, just before it was sent down upon them, they had been in despair.
30|50| Look, then, at the imprints of God’s Mercy – how He revives the dead earth after its death: certainly then it is He Who will revive the dead (in a similar way). He has full power over everything.
30|51| But if We send forth a scorching wind (against their land) and they see it (being dust-laden) as yellow, they begin, straight after that (joy), to show disbelieving ingratitude (as if God were obliged to always treat them with mercy and it were not God Who provides for them).
30|52| Indeed you cannot make the dead hear, nor can you make the deaf hear the call when they have turned their backs, going away.
30|53| Nor can you guide the blind out of their error. None can you make hear save those who (being capable of reflection without prejudice) believe in Our Revelations and signs (in the outer world as well as in their inner world), and are (therefore) ready to submit (to the truth).
30|54| God is He Who creates you in a state of weakness, and then gives you strength after weakness, and then, after a period of strength, ordains weakness (of old age) and grey hair. He creates however He wills. He is the All-Knowing, the All-Powerful.
30|55| When the Last Hour stands forth and the Judgment is established, the disbelieving criminals swear that they stayed in the world no longer than a short while (of the day). Thus were they habitually turned away from the truth, (having always depended on their sense-perceptions, false reasoning and defective knowledge).
30|56| But those who were endowed with knowledge (of the truth) and faith say: "For certain, you have stayed until the Day of Raising according to how God decreed in His Book (of Creation and Life). And now this is the Day of Raising but you were (persistent in) refusing true knowledge (about it).
30|57| On that Day their excuses will be of no avail to the wrongdoers (who denied God or associated partners with Him), nor will they be allowed to make amends (nor offer regrets to escape the punishment).
30|58| Assuredly We have set forth for humankind in this Qur’an all kinds of parables and comparisons (to help them understand the truth). Even though you bring them a miracle (of the kind they demand), those who (pay no heed to these parables and comparisons and obstinately) disbelieve will certainly say (to the believers): "You are only seeking a false way."
30|59| Thus does God seal the hearts of those who have no (attachment to) knowledge.
30|60| So be patient; surely God’s promise (that He will help the believers to victory) is true. And do not let those who lack certainty (of this truth) shake your firmness.
31|1| Alif. Lam. Mim.
31|2| These are the Revelations of the Book full of wisdom,
31|3| A guidance and mercy for those devoted to doing good, aware that God is seeing them.
31|4| They establish the Prayer in conformity with its conditions, and pay what is due to the needy out of their belongings, and in the Hereafter they have certainty of faith.
31|5| Those stand on true guidance (originating in this Book) from their Lord; and they are those who are the prosperous.
31|6| Among the people is one who pays for idle tales and diverting talk to lead people astray from (the Qur’an, which is) God’s way, without knowledge, and makes a mockery of it (the Qur’an). For such (a man) there is a shameful, humiliating punishment.
31|7| When our Revelations are recited to such a one, he turns away in arrogance as if he had not heard them, as if there were heaviness in his ears. So give him the glad tidings of a painful punishment.
31|8| As against this, those who believe and do good, righteous deeds, for them are Gardens of bounty and blessing,
31|9| To abide therein. This is a promise of God in truth. He is the All-Glorious with irresistible might, the All-Wise.
31|10| He has created the heavens without pillars you can see; and He has set up firm mountains on earth lest it should shake you with its movement, and dispersed thereon all kinds of living creatures. We also send down water from the sky, and cause every noble kind of vegetation rich (in color, scent, flavor, and fruit) to grow on earth in pairs.
31|11| This is God’s creation; now show Me what is there that others besides Him have created. No indeed, but the wrongdoers (who deny God or associate partners with Him) are lost in obvious error.
31|12| We surely granted wisdom to Luqman and said: "Give thanks to God." Whoever gives thanks to God, gives thanks but for (the good of) his own soul; and whoever is ungrateful, surely God is the All-Wealthy and Self-Sufficient (absolutely independent of the whole creation), All-Praiseworthy.
31|13| (Remember) when Luqman said to his son by way of advice and instruction: "My dear son! Do not associate partners with God. Surely associating partners with God is indeed a tremendous wrong."
31|14| We have enjoined on human in respect with his parents: his mother bore him in strain upon strain, and his weaning was in two years. (So, O human,) be thankful to Me and to your parents. To Me is the final homecoming.
31|15| But if they strive with you to make you associate with Me something of which you certainly have no knowledge (and which is absolutely contrary to the Knowledge), do not obey them. Even then, treat them with kindness and due consideration in respect of (the life of) this world. Follow the way of him who has turned to Me with utmost sincerity and committed himself to seeking My approval. Then, (O all human beings,) to Me is your return, and then I will make you understand all that you were doing (and call you to account).
31|16| "My dear son! Whether good or evil, if a deed should have the weight of only a mustard-seed, and though it be kept hidden in a rock, in the heavens or in the earth, God brings it to light (for judgment). Surely God is All-Subtle (penetrating to the most minute dimensions of all things), All-Aware.
31|17| "My dear son! Establish the Prayer in conformity with its conditions, enjoin and promote what is right and good and forbid and try to prevent the evil, and bear patiently whatever may befall you. Surely (all of) that is among greatly meritorious things requiring great resolution to fulfill.
31|18| "Do not turn your face from people in scornful pride, nor move on earth haughtily. Surely God does not love anyone proud and boastful.
31|19| "Be modest in your bearing, and subdue your voice. For certain the most repugnant of voices is braying of donkeys."
31|20| Do you not see that God has made all that is in the heavens and all that is on the earth of service to you, and lavished on you His favors, outward and inward? And yet, among people are those who dispute about God without having any true knowledge or any true guidance or an enlightening Divine Book.
31|21| When such people are told to follow what God has sent down, they say: "No, but we follow that (the traditions, customs, beliefs, and practices) which we found our forefathers in.." What! even if Satan is inviting them to the punishment of the Blaze (by suggesting to them the way of their forefathers)?
31|22| (The truth is that) whoever submits his whole being to God and is devoted to doing good, aware that God is seeing him, he has indeed taken hold of the firm, unbreakable handle. With God rests the outcome for all matters.
31|23| Then whoever disbelieves, let his unbelief not grieve you. To us is their final return and We will make them understand all that they did (and call them to account for it). Surely God has full knowledge of what lies hidden in the bosoms.
31|24| We will (continue to) provide for them to enjoy themselves for a short while (in this life), then We will compel them to a harsh punishment.
31|25| If you should ask them who has created the heavens and the earth, they would certainly say, "God." Say: "All praise and gratitude are for God," (seeing that even those who associate partners with God feel compelled to acknowledge Him as the Creator; that recognition indeed destroys the foundations of polytheism). But most of them do not know (what that recognition of theirs implies).
31|26| To God belongs whatever is in the heavens and on the earth (over which He has full and exclusive authority, and therefore He alone is to be worshipped and none other). God is He Who is the All-Wealthy and Self-Sufficient (absolutely independent of the whole creation), All-Praiseworthy (to Whom all praise and thanks belong and are due).
31|27| If all the trees on the earth were pens, and all the sea (were ink), with seven more seas added thereto, the words of God (Hic decrees, the acts of all His Names and Attributes manifested as His commandments, and the events and creatures He creates) would not be exhausted in the writing. Surely God is the All-Glorious with irresistible might (Whom none can frustrate and Whom nothing can tire), the All-Wise.
31|28| Your creation and your resurrection are but as (the creation and resurrection) of a single soul. Surely God is All-Hearing, All-Seeing.
31|29| Do you not consider that God makes the night pass into the day and makes the day pass into the night, (and so makes each grow longer or shorter), and that He has made the sun and the moon subservient to His command (at your service), each running its course for a term appointed (by Him)? And surely God is fully aware of all that you do.
31|30| That (is so) because God is He Who is the Absolute Truth and Ever-Constant (Whose decrees and deeds are all true and in absolute accord with one another), and all that they invoke (as deities) apart from Him is sheer falsehood. And because God is He Who is the All-Exalted, the All-Great.
31|31| Do you not consider that the ships run on the sea by God’s favor, that He may show you some of His signs? Surely in that are signs (to know Him for His Munificence, Knowledge, Power, Wisdom and way of acting) for all who are greatly patient (in adversity) and greatly grateful (for His favors).
31|32| When the waves overwhelm them like a canopy (of dark clouds), they call upon God sincerely believing in Him alone (as the only Deity, Lord and Sovereign). But when He brings them safe to land, some of them are lukewarm, wavering between faith and unbelief. None opposes and rejects Our signs (knowingly) unless he is perfidious, ungrateful.
31|33| O humankind! Keep from disobedience to your Lord in reverence for Him to deserve His protection, and fear a Day when no parent will be able to avail his child, nor a child avail his parent, in anything. God’s promise (of the Last Judgment) is certainly true. So do not let the present, worldly life delude you, nor let any deluder (including especially Satan) delude you (in your conceptions) about God.
31|34| With God alone rests the knowledge of the Last Hour (when it will come). He sends down rain (just at the time and place He alone knows), and He alone knows what is in the wombs. No soul knows what it will reap tomorrow, and no soul knows in what place it will die. Surely God is All-Knowing, All-Aware.
32|1| Alif. Lam. Mim.
32|2| (This is) the Book which, it is beyond all doubt, is being sent down in parts from the Lord of the worlds.
32|3| Or do they say: he (Muhammad) has fabricated it? No, rather it is the truth from your Lord, that you may warn a people to whom no warner has come before you (during a long interlude during which no Messengers appeared), so that they may be guided (to find and follow the Straight Path).
32|4| God is He Who has created the heavens and the earth and what is between them in six days, then established Himself on the Supreme Throne.2 You have, apart from Him, no guardian (to whom you might refer the ultimate meaning and outcome of your affairs), nor any intermediary (who, without His leave, can cause anything of use to reach you). Will you not reflect and be mindful?
32|5| He directs the affair from heaven to the earth; then the affair ascends to Him in a day the measure of which is a thousand years of what you reckon.
32|6| Such is He, the Knower of the Unseen and the witnessed (all that lies in the hidden and visible realms and beyond and within the realm of any created being’s perception), the All-Glorious with irresistible might, the All-Compassionate:
32|7| He Who makes excellent everything that He creates; and He originated the creation of humankind from clay.
32|8| Then He made his reproduction dependent upon an extraction of humble fluid.
32|9| Then He fashioned him in due proportions, and breathed into him out of His Spirit; and He appointed for you (the faculty of) hearing, and eyes, and hearts (for understanding, feeling and insight). Scarcely do you give thanks!
32|10| Yet they say: "What! when we have been (dead and) lost in the earth, will we then be created anew?" No, (they do not really regard being created anew as impossible; rather,) they are unbelievers in the meeting with their Lord.
32|11| Say: "The Angel of Death who is charged with taking your souls will take your souls; then you will be returned to your Lord."
32|12| If you could but see those disbelieving criminals when they hang their heads before their Lord (pleading): "Our Lord! Now we have seen and heard (the truth and are ready to be obedient). So return us (to the world): we will certainly do good, righteous deeds. Now we are certain (of the truth)."
32|13| (That is no more than a vain desire.) If We had so willed, We would have given every soul its guidance (the route to salvation particular to it); but (many choose unbelief, and) the word from Me has proven true that I would most certainly fill Hell with jinn and humankind, all together.
32|14| "So, (you who willingly chose and followed the way of unbelief in the world despite Our warnings,) taste the punishment because you acted in oblivious heedlessness of (the appointment I gave you for) this Day. We are (now) oblivious and heedless of you. Taste the abiding punishment for what you used to do."
32|15| Only they (truly) believe in Our signs and Revelations who, when they are mentioned of them (by way of advice and instruction), fall down in prostration, and glorify their Lord with His praise, and they do not behave with haughtiness.
32|16| Their sides forsake their beds at night, calling out to their Lord in fear (of His punishment) and hope (for His forgiveness, grace, and good pleasure), and out of what We have provided for them (of wealth, knowledge, power, etc.,) they spend (to provide sustenance for the needy and in God’s cause, purely for the good pleasure of God and without placing others under obligation).
32|17| No soul knows what joyous means of happiness are kept hidden (reserved) for them as a reward for what they have being doing.
32|18| Is, then, he who is a believer like him who is a transgressor? They are not equal.
32|19| As for those who believe and do good, righteous deeds, for them are Gardens of Refuge and Dwelling, as a welcome (from God, in return) for what they have been doing.
32|20| But as for those who transgress (the bounds set by God in belief and action), their refuge and dwelling is the Fire. Every time they desire to come out of it, they will be returned to it and they will be told, "Taste the punishment of the Fire which you used to deny."
32|21| However (before that supreme punishment) We will most certainly make them taste the lower kinds of punishment (in the world), so that they may (repent their ways) and return.
32|22| Who is more in wrong than he who has been reminded (repeatedly) of his Lord’s Revelations and signs, yet turns away from them in aversion. We will surely requite the criminals (committed to accumulating sins).
32|23| And We surely granted Moses the Book (as We are sending you the Qur’an), so be not in doubt of its reaching you (from your Lord, and your final meeting with Him in the Hereafter). And We made it (the Book We granted to Moses) a guidance for the Children of Israel.
32|24| And so long as they remained patient (in adversity they met on the path of God) and they had certainty of faith in Our Revelations, We appointed from amongst them leaders guiding by Our command (in accordance with Our ordinances).
32|25| Surely your Lord will judge between them on the Day of Resurrection concerning the matters on which they (subsequently) differed (and about which they continue to be at variance).
32|26| Is it not (enough as a means of) guidance for them (the unbelievers) how many a generation We have destroyed before them, amidst whose dwelling places they travel? Surely in this are signs. Will they still not listen (and pay heed to warnings revealed directly and in these signs)?
32|27| Do they not consider that We drive the rain to the dry land (bare of vegetation), and bring forth with it crops, of which their cattle and they themselves eat? Will they still not see (the truth)?
32|28| Instead, they say (throwing out a challenge): "When will this judgment take place (which will cause everything to appear in all clarity), if you are truthful (in your threats)?"
32|29| Say: "On the day of the judgment (when everything will appear in all clarity), their faith (then) will be of no use to those who disbelieve (now), nor will they be reprieved.
32|30| So withdraw from them (do not care what they do and say), and wait (for the judgment to come); they too are waiting.
33|1| O (most illustrious) Prophet! Keep your duty to God in utmost reverence for Him and piety, and pay no heed to (the offers of) the unbelievers and hypocrites. Surely God is All-Knowing, All-Wise.
33|2| Follow what is revealed to you from your Lord. Surely God is fully aware of all that you do.
33|3| And put your trust in God. God suffices as One on Whom to rely (and to Whom to refer all affairs).
33|4| God has not made for any man two hearts within his body (one to be assigned for belief in and worship of Him and the other to belief in and worship of others). Nor has He made your wives whom you may declare to be (unlawful to you) as your mothers’ back (to mean you divorce them ) your mothers (in fact). Nor has He made your adopted sons your sons (in fact). Those are only expressions you utter with your mouths. Whereas God speaks the truth and He guides to the right way.
33|5| Call them (the children you have adopted) after their (real) fathers: doing so is more equitable in the sight of God. If you do not know who their fathers are, then (they are) your brothers in religion and your proteges (so observe the duties of brotherhood between you and them). However, there is no blame on you because of the mistakes you may make unintentionally (in naming them), but what your hearts have premeditated (matters greatly). God is All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate.
33|6| The Prophet has a higher claim on the believers than they have on their own selves, and (seeing that he is as a father to them) his wives are (as) their mothers. Those who are bound by blood have a greater right (in inheritance and charity) upon one another according to God’s Book than other believers and the Emigrants – except that you must (nevertheless) act with kindness toward your friends (and bequeath some of your goods to them). That is what is written in the Book (of God’s Decree).
33|7| And (remember) when We took from the Prophets their covenant, and from you (O Muhammad), and from Noah, Abraham, Moses, and Jesus son of Mary. We took from them a solemn covenant
33|8| So that He may question the truthful concerning their truthfulness (and all that which was entrusted to them); and He has prepared a painful punishment for the unbelievers.
33|9| O you who believe! Remember God’s favor on you when hosts (of the enemy) came down on you, and We sent against them a fierce, (freezing) wind and (heavenly) hosts that you could not see. And God saw all that you did.
33|10| (Remember) when they came upon you from above you (from the east) and from below you (from the west), and when (your) eyes turned dull and (your) hearts came up to the throats; and (those of weak faith among) you were harboring vain thoughts about God.
33|11| There (amid those circumstances) the believers were tried, and shaken with a mighty shock.
33|12| And (remember) when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts was a disease (at just that point in the situation) were saying: "God and His Messenger promised us nothing but delusion."
33|13| And when a group among them said: "O people of Yathrib! You cannot withstand the enemy (here), therefore go back (to your homes)." And a party among them asked for leave of the Prophet, saying, "Surely our houses are exposed (to attack)," though they were not exposed (indeed). They desired nothing but to flee.
33|14| Now if they (and their houses) had been invaded from all sides (of the city) and they had been asked to betray (their faith), they would certainly have done so with but little hesitation.
33|15| Yet before that they had (in swearing allegiance to God’s Messenger) made a covenant with God, that they would never turn their backs (in the face of the enemy). Covenants with God will certainly be accounted for.
33|16| Say: "Flight will be of no avail to you if you flee from death or being killed (in battle). However you fare, you are not allowed to enjoy life more than a little while (only until your appointed time)."
33|17| Say: "Who is there that can hinder God from it, if He wills evil for you, or if He wills mercy for you?" They will not find for themselves, apart from God, either guardian or helper.
33|18| God certainly knows those of you who are bent on diverting (others from fighting), as well as those who (being hypocrites) say to their brothers, "(Give up risking your life, so) come and join with us," and they do not join the struggle (of battle) except only a little,
33|19| Being very miserly (in joining you and reluctant to help you in God’s cause). So when (danger threatens in battle and) fear comes, you see them (O Messenger) looking to you (for help), their eyes rolling (in terror) like the eyes of one who swoons to death. But once (the battle subsides and) fear departs, they assail you with sharp tongues, being avaricious for (a share in) the goods thereof (the gainings of victory). Those have never (truly) believed, and therefore God has caused their deeds to come to nothing. That is ever easy for God.
33|20| (They are so fearful that) they think that the Confederates have not (really) retreated. Should the Confederates come once more, they would much rather be among the Bedouins in the deserts and ask for news about you (than remain in Madinah and face the battle). Even if they were among you, they would fight only a little.
33|21| Assuredly you have in God’s Messenger an excellent example to follow for whoever looks forward to God and the Last Day, and remembers and mentions God much.
33|22| When the (true) believers saw the Confederates before them, they said: "This is what God and His Messenger promised us, and God is true and so is His Messenger. This has but increased them in faith and submission.
33|23| Among the believers are men (of highest valor) who have been true to their covenant with God: among them are those who have fulfilled their vow (by remaining steadfast until death), and those who are awaiting (its fulfillment). They have never altered in any way.
33|24| In consequence God will reward the truthful ones for having been true to their covenant, and punish the hypocrites if He wills or turn to them in lenience and accept their repentance (if they repent). Surely God is All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate.
33|25| God repulsed those who disbelieved still in their rage without gaining any good. God sufficed for the believers in the fighting. Surely God is All-Strong, All-Glorious with irresistible might.
33|26| And He brought down from their strongholds those of the People of the Book who had supported them (the Confederates in their attack on Madinah), and cast fright in their hearts: some of them you killed, and others you took as prisoners of war.
33|27| And He made you heirs to their lands, their habitations, and their possessions, and a land (Khaybar) on which you never yet set foot. God has indeed full power over everything.
33|28| O (most illustrious) Prophet! Say to your wives: "If you desire the present, worldly life and its charms, then come and let me make the necessary provision for you (in return for divorce), and release you with a handsome release.
33|29| But if you desire God and His Messenger, and the abode of the Hereafter, then it is a fact that God has prepared a tremendous reward for those among you who act in a good manner, aware that God is seeing them."
33|30| O wives of the Prophet! If any of you were to commit a manifestly sinful deed, the punishment would be doubled for her. That is easy for God.
33|31| But if any of you devoutly obeys God and His Messenger and does good, righteous deeds, We will give her reward doubly; and We have prepared for her an honorable, generous provision (in Paradise).
33|32| O wives of the Prophet! You are not like any of the other women, provided that you keep from disobedience to God in reverence for Him and piety (and therefore act with awareness of your special status). So (even more than other believing women) do not be complaisant in your speech (when addressing men), lest he in whose heart is a disease should be moved to desire, but speak in an honorable way.
33|33| And (prefer to) remain in your homes (unless there is a need. If you do go out for a need) do not go out flaunting your charms as (women used to do) in the former times of Ignorance. And establish the Prayer in conformity with its conditions, and pay the Prescribed Purifying Alms, and obey God and His Messenger (in whatever they command). God only wills to remove from you, O members of the (Prophet’s) household, all that may be loathsome, and to purify you to the utmost of purity.
33|34| Keep in mind and study what is recited in your homes of God’s Revelations and the Wisdom (which especially includes the Sunnah of His Messenger). Surely God is All-Subtle (penetrating down into the innermost part of people’s heart and mind), All-Aware.
33|35| Surely all men and women who submit to God (whose submission is attested by their words and deeds), and all truly believing men and truly believing women, and all devoutly obedient men and devoutly obedient women, and all men and women honest and truthful in their speech (and true to their words in their actions), and all men and women who persevere (in obedience to God through all adversity), and all men and women humble (in mind and heart before God), and all men and women who give in alms (and in God’s cause), and all men and women who fast (as an obligatory or commended act of devotion), and all men and women who guard their chastity (and avoid exposing their private parts), and all men and women who remember and mention God much – for them God has prepared forgiveness (to bring unforeseen blessings) and a tremendous reward.
33|36| When God and His Messenger have decreed a matter, it is not for a believing man and a believing woman to have an option insofar as they themselves are concerned. Whoever disobeys God and His Messenger has evidently gone astray.
33|37| (Remember) when you (O Messenger) said to him whom God has favored (with guidance to Islam and close companionship with the Prophet), and whom you have favored (with kind treatment, special consideration, and emancipation): "Retain your wife in marriage and fear God (concerning your treatment of her)." You were hiding within yourself what God (had already decreed and) would certainly bring to light: you were feeling apprehensive of people (that they might react in a way harmful to their faith), while God has a greater right that you should fear Him (lest you err in the implementation of His commands). So, when Zayd had come to the end of his union with her (and she had completed her period of waiting after the divorce), We united you with her in marriage, so that there should be no blame (or legal impediment) for the believers in respect of (their marrying) the wives of those whom they called their sons (though they really were not), when the latter have come to the end of their union with them. And God’s command must be fulfilled.
33|38| There is no hindrance for the Prophet with respect to what God has ordained and made lawful for him. This was God’s way with those (Prophets) who passed before. The command of God is a decree determined (in due measures for every thing, event and individual).
33|39| (The Prophets are those) who convey God’s Messages and feel great awe of Him; and they hold none but God in awe. God suffices as One Who reckons and settles the accounts (of His servants).
33|40| O believers, (know) that Muhammad is not the father of any man among you, but he is the Messenger of God and the Seal of the Prophets. God has full knowledge of everything.
33|41| O you who believe, remember and mention God much;
33|42| And glorify Him (in that He is absolutely above all defects and having partners) in the morning and in the evening (day and night).
33|43| He it is Who (in return for your remembrance of Him) bestows His special blessings upon you, with His angels (praying and asking His forgiveness for you), that He may lead you out of (all kinds of intellectual, spiritual, social, economic, and political) darkness into light (and keep them firm therein). He is All-Compassionate toward the believers.
33|44| On the Day when they meet Him, their greeting (from those who welcome them will be), "Peace" (the promise of eternal security from punishment). And He has prepared for them an honorable, generous reward.
33|45| O (most illustrious) Prophet! We have surely sent you (with the mission of Messengership) as a witness (to the truth through your life, and through your testimony on Judgment Day for your community concerning their deeds), and as a bearer of glad tidings (of prosperity in return for faith and righteousness) and a warner (against the consequences of misguidance);
33|46| And as one who calls (all humankind and jinn) to God by His leave, and a light-diffusing lamp (enlightening minds and hearts, and showing the way to those who follow that light).
33|47| And (so) give the believers the glad tidings that surely for them is a great bounty from God (in addition to what they may have merited by their faith and good deeds).
33|48| And pay no heed to (the offers of) the unbelievers and the hypocrites, and do not mind the sufferings they cause you, and put your trust in God. God suffices as the One to rely on and to Whom affairs should be referred.
33|49| O you who believe! When you have made a marriage contract with any of the believing women (including those belonging to the People of the Book), and then divorce them before you have touched them, you have no reason to ask them to observe any waiting-period for you. Make some provision for them and release them in fair manner.
33|50| O (most illustrious) Prophet! We have made lawful for you your wives to whom you have already paid their bridal-due, as well as those whom your right hands possess from among the captives of war that God has granted you, and the daughters of your paternal uncles and paternal aunts, and the daughters of your maternal uncles and maternal aunts, who have emigrated (to Madinah) for God’s cause as you did; and any believing woman who offers herself to the Prophet (freely, without demanding any bridal-due) if the Prophet wants to marry her – a rule (of privilege) for you exclusively, not for the believers (in general) – We have (already decreed and) made known what We have enjoined on them with regard to their wives and those whom their right hands possess. (This exceptional privilege is) in order that there may not be any hindrance to you (in fulfilling your mission because of marriage relationships). God is All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate.
33|51| You can put off whomever among them (who offer themselves to you freely) you please, and accept to yourself whomever you please, as you can defer the turn of visiting any of them (your wives) you please, and take to you whomever you please. There is no blame on you if you give precedence to one whom you deferred before. It will make it more likely that they are pleased, and do not grieve (when they are deferred), and that all of them will be content with your treatment of them. God knows (O people) whatever is in your hearts. God is indeed All-Knowing, All-Clement.
33|52| Other women (than those just mentioned and those already married to you ) will not be lawful for you to take; nor, (seeing that they – your wives – have preferred God and His Messenger over the charms of the world) are you allowed to change them for other wives, even though their fineness should please you, except those whom your right hands possess. God is ever watchful over everything.
33|53| O you who believe! Do not enter the Prophet’s rooms (in his house) unless you have been given leave, (and when invited) to a meal, without waiting for the proper time (when the meal is to be served). Rather, when you are invited, enter (his private rooms) at the proper time; and when you have had your meal, disperse. Do not linger for mere talk. That causes trouble for the Prophet, and he is shy of (asking) you (to leave). But God does not shy away from (teaching you) the truth. When you ask something of them (his wives), ask them from behind a screen. Your doing so is purer for your hearts and for their hearts. It is not for you to cause hurt to God’s Messenger as it is unlawful for you ever to marry his widows after him. That (marrying his widows) would be an enormity in God’s sight.
33|54| Whether you reveal something or keep it secret, (know) that surely God has full knowledge of everything.
33|55| There is no blame on them (the wives of the Prophet, if they speak without a screen) with their fathers (including grandfathers and uncles both paternal and maternal), or their sons (including grandsons), or their brothers, or their brothers’ sons, or the sons of their sisters, or the Muslim women and women of good conduct with whom they associate, or those (bondsmaids) whom their right hands possess. Keep, (O wives of the Prophet,) from disobedience to God in reverence for Him and piety (observing this command as well as all of His other commands). God is indeed a witness over everything.
33|56| Surely God and His angels bless the Prophet (He always treats him with His special mercy, with the angels praying to Him to grant him the highest station of praise with Him and for the decisive victory of his Religion). O you who believe, invoke the blessings of God on him, and pray to God to bestow His peace on him, greeting him with the best greeting. (Love and follow him with utmost sincerity and faithfulness, and give yourselves to his way with perfect submission.)
33|57| Those who affront God and His Messenger (through disrespect for Him in words and acts and for His Messenger and Islamic values), God certainly curses them (excludes them from His mercy) in this world and the Hereafter, and has prepared for them a shameful, humiliating punishment.
33|58| And those who affront believing men and believing women without their having done any wrong to deserve it, they have surely burdened themselves with calumny and a blatant sin.
33|59| O (most illustrious) Prophet! Tell your wives and your daughters, as well as the women (wives and daughters) of the believers, to draw over themselves some part of their outer garments (when outside their homes and when before men whom they are not forbidden to marry because of blood relation). This is better and more convenient for them to be recognized (and respected for their decency and decorum) and not harrassed. God is indeed All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate.
33|60| Assuredly, if the hypocrites and those in whose hearts there is a sickness, and those scare-mongers in the City (given to spreading false rumors to cause disturbance in the heartland of the Islamic Community) do not desist, We will most certainly urge you against them, and then they will not be able to remain in it as your neighbors except a little while only,
33|61| Excluded from God’s Mercy for ever, and wherever they may be found they will be seized, and killed one and all.
33|62| (That was) the way of God with those who passed before. You will never find any change in God’s way.
33|63| People ask you about the Last Hour (when it will befall). Say: "Knowledge of it rests with God alone." For all you know, the Last Hour may well be near.
33|64| Surely God has cursed (eternally excluded from His Mercy) the unbelievers, and has prepared for them the Blaze,
33|65| To abide therein forever. They will find neither guardian nor helper.
33|66| On the Day when their faces are turned over and over in the Fire, they will exclaim, "Oh, woe to us! Would that we had obeyed God and obeyed the Messenger!"
33|67| And they will say: "Our Lord! Surely we obeyed our chiefs and our great ones, and they caused us to follow a misleading path.
33|68| "Our Lord! Cause them to suffer the punishment doubled, and curse them with a mighty curse (so that they are utterly excluded, absolutely and eternally, from Your Mercy)!"
33|69| O you who believe! Do not be like those (among the Children of Israel) who affronted Moses, and (be mindful that) God proved him to be innocent of all that they alleged against him. He was of great honor in God’s sight.
33|70| O you who believe! Act in reverence for God and piously, without doing anything to incur His punishment, and always speak words true, proper and straight to the point,
33|71| That He will make your deeds good and upright and forgive you your sins. Whoever obeys God and His Messenger has surely attained to a mighty triumph.
33|72| We offered the Trust to the heavens, and the earth, and the mountains, but they shrank from bearing it, and were afraid of it (fearful of being unable to fulfill its responsibility), but human has undertaken it. He is indeed prone to doing great wrong and misjudging, and acting out of sheer ignorance.
33|73| (As a consequence of the choice of each individual) God will punish the hypocrites, men and women, and those men and women who associate partners with God, and He will turn to the believing men and women with forgiveness (and compassion in return for their repentance for any wrong they do). God is indeed All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate.
34|1| All praise and gratitude are for God to Whom belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth (for it is He Who has created them and sustains them); and for Him are all praise and gratitude in the Hereafter (as it is He alone Who will found it as an eternal abode for His servants). He is the All-Wise, the All-Aware.
34|2| He knows whatever enters into the earth and whatever comes out of it, and whatever descends from the heaven and whatever ascends to it. He is the All-Compassionate, the All-Forgiving.
34|3| The unbelievers say: "The Last Hour will not come upon us." Say: "No indeed! By my Lord – and He is the Knower of the unseen – it most certainly will come upon you." Not an atom’s weight of whatever there is in the heavens or in the earth escapes Him, nor is there anything smaller than that, or greater, but it is (recorded) in a Manifest Book.
34|4| (That is so, so) that He may reward those who believe and do good, righteous deeds. It is they for whom there is forgiveness (to bring unforeseen blessings) and an honorable, generous provision.
34|5| Whereas those who strive against Our Revelations, seeking to frustrate and void (them), for those (who have thus distanced themselves from their Lord) is a painful punishment of loathsome kind (earned by their own loathsome deeds).
34|6| Those to whom the knowledge (of the truth) has been granted are well aware that what is sent down to you from your Lord (the Qur’an) is the truth (and what it declares of the afterlife is therefore true also), and that it guides to the Path of the All-Glorious with irresistible might, the All-Praiseworthy.
34|7| But those who disbelieve say (in ridicule): "Shall we show you a man who will inform you that after you have been scattered entirely to dust, you will, even then, be raised in a new creation?
34|8| "Does he fabricate something false in attribution to God or is there a madness in him?" No! (The truth is that) those who disbelieve in the Hereafter are in torment (of mind and heart) and lost far in error.
34|9| Do they never consider that it is the heaven and the earth that are (extended) before and after them (so they are entirely and inescapably enclosed within His Kingdom)? If We so will, We can cause the earth to swallow them, or cause lumps of the heaven to fall down upon them. Surely in this is a sign for every servant of God who (being sincere in quest of the truth) will turn (to Him) in contrition.
34|10| Assuredly We graced David with a great favor from Us: "O mountains! Sing the praises of God with him, and likewise you birds!" And We also made iron supple for him;
34|11| (So that he was enabled to obey the command): "Make long coats-of-mail (to cover more of the body) and order with care the sequence (of actions in the process)". And (O family and followers of David,) do good, righteous deeds. Surely I see very well all that you do."
34|12| And to Solomon We (subjugated) the wind: its morning course covered the distance of a month’s journey (at normal pace), and its evening course, a month’s journey. And We caused molten cupper to flow for him (like a fountain). Among the jinn were some who, by the leave of his Lord, worked under him. Whoever of them swerved away from Our command (by disobeying him), We would make him taste the punishment of a fiery blaze.
34|13| They made for him whatever he wished – sanctuaries, and figures (of inanimate objects), and carvings, as well as basins like ponds and boilers built into the ground. "Work, O family of David, in thankfulness to Me!" Few are the truly thankful among My servants.
34|14| Then, when We executed Our decree for his death, nothing showed them (the jinn who had been laboring at the tasks he assigned to them) that he was dead, except that a termite had been gnawing away his staff (until it broke). Then when he fell to the ground, it became clear to the jinn that if they had known the Unseen, they would not have continued in the tormenting toil that humiliated them.
34|15| Indeed, there was a sign (a meaningful lesson) for the people of Sheba to take from their abode –two (lovely, vast expanses of) gardens, on the right and on the left. "Eat of the provision your Lord has granted you, and give thanks to Him: a land most wholesome and a Lord All-Forgiving."
34|16| But they turned away (from thanksgiving to the sins of luxury and heedless self-indulgence). So We sent upon them the flood of (waters released from) the dams, and converted their two (lovely) gardens into a couple of gardens yielding bitter produce, tamarisks, and sparse lote-trees.
34|17| Thus We recompensed them for their (sins originating in persistent) ingratitude. Do We ever punish any but the ingrate?
34|18| We had set between them and the lands We blessed (Palestine and Damascus, with great blessings for their people) many towns within sight of one another, and We had established the journey distances (between them for ease and safety): "Travel therein by night or by day in security!"
34|19| But (this comfort and security spoiled them, and) they said: "Our Lord! Make the distances between our travel-stages longer!" , and they wronged themselves (by committing sins). So We caused them to become one of the legends (to circulate among later generations about the distant past), and dispersed them around in numerous fragments. Surely in that are signs (important lessons) for all who are greatly patient and perseverant (in obedience to God and in adversity for His sake), and greatly thankful (for His favors).
34|20| Iblis certainly found his conjecture (about humankind) true in what they (the people of Sheba) did. (He called them, and) they followed him, all but a group of true believers.
34|21| And yet, he had no authority over them (to compel them to do anything), except in that (by testing humankind through him) We distinguish those who truly believe in the Hereafter from those who are in doubt concerning it. Your Lord keeps watch and record of all things.
34|22| Say: "Call upon those (things or beings) whom you fancy to be deities besides God: they have no ownership or authority over an atom’s weight (of anything) either in the heavens or on the earth (so that they could benefit you therewith or avert from you any harm), nor do they have any share in (governing), nor does He (God) have any aide from among them.
34|23| Besides, no intercession (for the fulfillment of any demand and for the accomplishment of any deed) is of any avail before Him, except that it be made for him (and by him) whom He permits. Yet, when the dread and awe (the angels whose intercession those polytheists hope for feel before God’s commands) is removed from their hearts, (other angels) ask: "What has your Lord commanded?" They answer: "The truth (that which is always and unalterably true)." He is the All-Exalted, the All-Great.
34|24| Say: "Who is it that provides for you out of the heavens and the earth?" Say: "It is God! Surely then, either we (who believe in His Oneness as the Deity, Lord, and Supreme Sovereign) or you (who associate partners with Him in His Divinity, Lordship, and Sovereignty) follow the right guidance or are in obvious error."
34|25| Say: "(If you consider us to be committing a wrong in believing in and worshipping the One God, then know that) you will not be called to account for what we have done, nor will we be called to account for what you do."
34|26| Say: "Our Lord will bring us all together and then He will judge between us with truth and separate us. He is One Who judges between people with truth and separates them, the All-Knowing."
34|27| Say: "Show me those beings that you have joined with Him as partners (so that I may see whether any among them deserve worship!) No! (You cannot do it because it is impossible!) But He alone is God, the All-Glorious with irresistible might (Who never needs and admits any partnership), the All-Wise (Whose Divine Wisdom rejects partnership with Him)."
34|28| We have not sent you but to all humankind as a bearer of glad tidings (of prosperity for faith and righteousness) and a warner (against the consequences of misguidance). But most of humankind do not know (this, nor do they appreciate what a great blessing it is for them).
34|29| They say: "When is this promise (of judgment) to be fulfilled, if you are truthful (in your claim)?"
34|30| Say: "You have the promise of a Day which you can neither delay by a single moment nor advance."
34|31| Those who disbelieve say: "We will not believe in this Qur’an, nor in any (Message) that came before it." If you could but see when such wrongdoers are made to stand before their Lord, throwing back blame at one another! Those who (in the world) were oppressed (and did not oppose being oppressed, humiliated, and misled) say to those who acted in arrogance and oppressed others: "Had it not been for you, we would have been true believers."
34|32| The arrogant oppressors retort to those who were oppressed: "What! did we (forcibly) bar you from following the guidance after it had reached you? No, but you yourselves were the criminals (committed to accumulating sins)?"
34|33| Those who were oppressed and humiliated say to the arrogant (who oppressed them): "No! Rather, (it was your) scheming night and day (that kept us away from the guidance); you were constantly commanding us to blaspheme against God and set up rivals to Him." When they all face the punishment, they will be unable to express their remorse. We will put fetters around the necks of those who disbelieved (and keep them in the Fire). Will they have been recompensed for anything other than what they used to do?
34|34| We never sent a warner to any township but those of its people who had been lost in the pursuit of pleasures without scruples reacted, saying: "Surely we are unbelievers in that with which you have been sent."
34|35| And they said: "We are more abundant (than you) in wealth and children and so we are not (the ones) to be punished (as you tell us to happen in the Hereafter)."
34|36| Say: "Surely my Lord God enlarges provision for whom He wills, and straitens it (for whom He wills); but most of humankind do not know."
34|37| And it is neither your wealth nor your children which will bring you near to Us; but only one who believes and does good, righteous deeds (can come near to Us), and it is those whose reward for their deeds is multiplied, and they will dwell in high, lofty mansions (of Paradise), secure (from any suffering).
34|38| Whereas those who strive hard against Our Revelations, seeking to frustrate them, such will be arraigned for punishment (in Hell).
34|39| Say: "Surely God enlarges provision for whom He wills of His servants, and straitens it (for whom He wills). Whatever you spend (in God’s cause and in alms), He will replace it. He is the Best to be sought as provider with the ultimate rank of providing."
34|40| And a Day (will come and) He will gather those (who strive against Our Revelations and those beings or things they worshipped in the world) all together, and will ask the angels, "Was it you that those used to worship (within your knowledge and to your pleasure)?"
34|41| They will answer: "All-Glorified You are (in that You are absolutely above having partners). You alone are our Guardian (Whom We worship,) having no such relation with them." Rather, they were worshipping jinn; most of them believed in them (jinn as beings deserving worship)."
34|42| So on this Day you will have no power over one another to benefit or harm. And We will say to those who have persistently committed wrong (by following misleading paths): "Taste the punishment of the Fire, (the existence of) which you used to deny!"
34|43| When Our Revelations clear as evidence and in meaning are recited to them (the Makkan polytheists), they say: "This is but a man who wants to bar you from what your forefathers used to worship." They also say (of the Qur’an): "This is nothing but a fabrication falsely attributed to God." Those who disbelieve say of the truth when it has reached them (in willful defiance of its clarity): "This is clearly nothing but sorcery."
34|44| But We did not grant them any Book which they studied (so that they should dare pretend to be able to discriminate between true and false scripture). Nor did We send them a warner before you (so that they should dare pretend to be able to distinguish you as being a fabricator and a sorcerer).
34|45| Many of those who lived before them also denied the truth. These have not attained a tenth of what We granted to those (of knowledge, as well as power and means); and yet they denied My Messengers – then how awesome was My disowning them!
34|46| Say: "I exhort you to one thing: Pull yourselves together and draw aside purely for God’s sake, together with another person or alone, and then reflect (on this issue, leaving aside all your prejudices). There is no madness in your companion (God’s Messenger). He is but a warner to you (sent) prior to a severe punishment."
34|47| Say: "(I ask of you no wage, yet, even so) whatever you may think I might ask you for by way of wage, it is yours. My wage is only due from God. He is indeed a witness over everything."
34|48| Say: "Surely my Lord sends down the truth, hurling it (against falsehood to destroy it). (My Lord:) He alone is the All-Knowing of the whole of the unseen (all that is beyond human perception)."
34|49| Say: "The truth has come (and manifested itself); and falsehood cannot originate (anything even if its followers try to keep it going), nor can it restore anything (of that which it has lost)."
34|50| Say: "Were I to go astray, it would be to my own harm (and due to my own self). And if I am rightly guided, it is by virtue of what my Lord is revealing to me. Surely He is All-Hearing, All-Near."
34|51| If you could but see when they quake with dread (of death), with no escape, and are seized from a position very near.
34|52| They say: "We have believed in it (the Qur’an)!" But how can they hope to attain to faith and salvation from a position so far away,
34|53| (Seeing that) they certainly disbelieved in it before. They have been aiming at the Unseen (the Hereafter) from far away (with words all untrue and without any basis in true knowledge).
34|54| And a barrier has been placed between them and what they had appetite for (while in the world), as was done with the likes of them before. Surely they were (lost) in hopeless doubt.
35|1| All praise and thanks are for God, the Originator of the heavens and the earth (each with particular features and ordered principles), Who appoints the angels as messengers (conveying His commands) having wings, two, or three, or four (or more). He increases in creation what He wills. Surely God has full power over everything.
35|2| Whatever God opens up for human beings out of (the treasures of) His Mercy, none is able to withhold; and whatever He withholds, none is able to release. He is the All-Glorious with irresistible might (Whom none can prevent Him from doing what He wills), the All-Wise (in Whose every act there are many instances of wisdom).
35|3| O humankind! Remember and reflect on God’s favors upon you. Is there any Creator, other than God, that provides for you from the heaven and the earth? There is no deity but He: How then are you turned away from the truth and make false claims?
35|4| If they deny you (O Messenger), even so Messengers were denied before you. (So do not grieve:) to God all affairs are ultimately referred (and whatever He wills occurs).
35|5| O humankind! (Know well that) God’s promise (of the Last Judgment) is surely true; so do not let the present, worldly life delude you, nor let any deluder (including especially Satan) delude you in (your conceptions) about God.
35|6| Surely Satan is an enemy to you, so treat him as an enemy (do not follow him, and be alert against him). He calls his party (of followers) but that they may become companions of the Blaze.
35|7| Those who persist in unbelief, for them is a severe punishment. As for those who believe and do good, righteous deeds, for them is a forgiveness (to bring unforeseen blessings), and a noble, generous reward.
35|8| Is one whose evil deeds is decked out to be appealing to him so that he considers it as good (like him who follows God’s guidance)? God leads astray whom He wills and guides whom He wills. So do not let yourself perish in bitter regrets on their behalf (because they refuse faith). Surely God has full knowledge of all that they do.
35|9| God is He Who sends forth the merciful winds, so that they set clouds to move, and We drive them towards a dead land and (thereby) We revive the earth after its death (with the rain carried in the clouds by the wind). Even so will the Resurrection be.
35|10| Whoever seeks might and glory should know that all might and glory is for God (so let him seek from Him alone). To Him ascends only the pure word (as the source of might and glory), and the good, righteous action (accompanying it) raises it. But those who are devising evil actions, for them there is a severe punishment, and their devising is bound to come to nothing.
35|11| (O humankind:) God created you from earth (in the beginning, and the material origin of every one of you is also earth), and then from a drop of (seminal) fluid, and then He has fashioned you in pairs (as either of the two sexes, making you mates of one another). And no female carries or gives birth, save with His knowledge. No one long-lived has been granted a long life, nor another one not so long-lived has been appointed a shorter life but is recorded in a Book. Surely that is easy for God.
35|12| Nor are the two seas (large bodies of water) alike: this one is sweet and palatable, and pleasant to drink, but that one, salty and bitter. You obtain from both fresh meat (for your nourishment), and precious stones to wear as ornament. And you see ships plowing through (both kinds of water), so that you may seek of His bounty, and that you may give Him thanks.
35|13| He makes the night pass into the day and He makes the day pass into the night (and so makes each grow longer or shorter); and He has made the sun and the moon subservient to His command, each running its course for a term appointed. Such is God, your Lord: His is the Sovereignty (the absolute ownership and dominion of all things). Whereas those whom you deify and invoke, apart from Him, own not so much as the pellicle of a date-stone.
35|14| If you invoke them, they do not hear your call; and even if they heard, they would not able to respond to you. And on the Day of Resurrection they will disown your having associated them (with God). And none can inform you (and thereby lead you to understand the truth) like One All-Aware.
35|15| O humankind! You are all poor before God and in absolute need of Him, whereas He is the All-Wealthy and Self-Sufficient (absolutely independent of the creation), the All-Praiseworthy (as your Lord, Who provides for you and all other beings, supplying all your needs).
35|16| If He so wills (in order for the fulfillment of His purpose for creation), He can put you away and bring a new generation (in your place, who will acknowledge their poverty and praise God in return for His favors).
35|17| That is surely no great matter for God.
35|18| And no soul, as bearer of burden, bears (and is made to bear) the burden of another; and if one weighed down by his burden calls to (another for help to) carry it, nothing of it will be carried by that other, even if he be his near of kin. You can warn (in a profitable way) only those who stand in awe of their Lord though unseen (beyond their perception), and establish the Prayer in conformity with its conditions. And whoever is purified (of his wrong ideas or actions), is only purified for the good of his own soul. And to God is the homecoming.
35|19| The blind and the seeing are not equal;
35|20| Nor are the depths of darkness and the light.
35|21| Nor the shade and the scorching heat.
35|22| And nor are equal the living and the dead. Surely God makes hear whomever He wills; and you are not one to make hear those who are in the graves.
35|23| You are only a warner (not accountable for their being guided).
35|24| Surely We have sent you as Messenger with the truth, as a bearer of glad tidings (of prosperity in return for faith and righteousness) and a warner (against the consequences of misguidance); and there has never been a community but a warner lived among them.
35|25| If they deny you, even so denied those before them (to whom a Messenger was sent). Their Messengers came to them with the clear proofs (of their Messengership), Scriptures (full of wisdom and advice), and the Book enlightening (their mind and hearts, and) illuminating (their way.)
35|26| Then I have seized those who insisted on unbelief. How awesome was My disowning them!
35|27| Do you not see that God sends down water from the sky? Then We bring forth with it produce of various colors (shapes and taste); and in the mountains there are streaks of white and red, of various colors (due to the flora or the variety of stone and rock), as well as raven-black;
35|28| And likewise human beings, and beasts, and cattle, diverse are their colors. Of all His servants, only those possessed of true knowledge stand in awe of God. Surely God is All-Glorious with irresistible might, All-Forgiving.
35|29| Those who recite God’s Book (and thereby glorify, praise, and exalt God, and declare His absolute Oneness), and establish the Prayer in conformity with its conditions, and spend out of what We have provided for them (in God’s cause and for the needy) secretly and openly, hope for a trade which will never perish.
35|30| For God will pay them their rewards in full, and give them yet more out of His bounty. Surely He is the All-Forgiving, the All-Responsive (to the gratitude of His creatures).
35|31| That which We reveal to you of the Book is the truth, confirming (the Divine origin of and the truths that are still contained by) the Revelations prior to it. Surely God is fully aware of His servants and sees (them) well.
35|32| Then (after every Messenger), We have made those of Our servants whom We chose heirs to the Book (to preserve and teach it, and secure its practice in daily life). However, among them are those who (in fulfilling their duty as heirs to the Book) wrong their own selves (on account of certain failings and sins), and among them are those who follow a moderate way, and among them are those who, by God’s leave, are foremost in doing good deeds. That (the inheriting of the Book) is the great favor.
35|33| (So) Gardens of perpetual bliss will they enter, therein adorned with armbands of gold and pearls, and their garments therein will be of silk.
35|34| And they will say: "All praise and gratitude are for God, Who has removed grief from us (such as we had suffered until we were admitted here). Surely Our Lord is All-Forgiving, All-Responsive (to the gratitude of His creatures),
35|35| Who, out of His grace, has made us settle in the abode of eternal residence, wherein no toil touches us, and wherein no weariness afflicts us."
35|36| As for those who disbelieve, for them is the fire of Hell: they will not be sentenced to death so that they can die (and so be relieved), nor will its suffering be lightened for them. Thus do We recompense every ungrateful one who disbelieves.
35|37| And therein they will cry aloud: "O our Lord! Take us out, we will do good, (righteous deeds), not (the wrong) we used to do before." "Did We not grant you a life long enough for whoever would reflect and be mindful to reflect and be mindful? In addition, a warner came to you (to warn against this punishment). Taste then (the consequences of your heedlessness); for the wrongdoers have none to help them (against it)."
35|38| Surely God is the Knower of the unseen of the heavens and the earth. And He surely has full knowledge of what lies hidden in the bosoms (so that He treats you according to your beliefs and intentions).
35|39| He it is Who has made you vicegerents on the earth. So whoever disbelieves (in ingratitude, rejecting this truth and attributing God’s deeds to others than Him), his unbelief is charged against him. The unbelief of the unbelievers does not increase them in the sight of their Lord in anything but abhorrence; and the unbelief of the unbelievers does not increase them in anything but loss.
35|40| Say: "Have you considered those (beings and things) that you associate with God and, apart from God, invoke? Show me what it is that they have created of the earth. Or do they have a share in the (process of creation in the) heavens?" Or have We granted those people a Book so that they are (in associating partners with God) based on a clear evidence from it? No! Rather, the wrongdoers promise each other nothing but delusion.
35|41| Surely God alone upholds the heavens and the earth, lest they cease to be. If they should start to fail, there is none that could uphold them (if He were to let them fail. That He does not let them fail, despite all the wrongdoing of His servants, is because) He is All-Clement (showing no haste to punish the errors of His servants), All-Forgiving.
35|42| They swore by God with their most solemn oaths that if a warner came to them, they would most certainly follow his guidance more than any of the communities (to whom a warner came). Yet, now that a warner has come to them, it has increased them in nothing but aversion;
35|43| Growing in arrogance in the land and devising evil schemes. But an evil scheme overwhelms none but its own authors. So, can they expect anything other than the pattern of (events and outcomes that overtook) the people of old times (whom God destroyed)? You will never find in God’s way any change; you will never find in God’s way any alteration.
35|44| Have they never traveled about the earth that they may see what was the outcome for those before them (who obstinately disbelieved in Our signs)? They were greater than them in power. By no means is God One Whom anything whatever in the heavens or on earth can frustrate (in His decrees). Surely He is All-Knowing, All-Powerful.
35|45| If God were to take people to task for whatever wrong they commit (and accumulate to their account), He would not leave on earth any living creature. But He grants them respite to a term appointed (by Him). When the end of their term falls, (He treats each as He wills according to his deserts), for surely He sees His servants well.
36|1| Ya. Sin.
36|2| By the Wise Qur’an,
36|3| You are indeed one of the Messengers (commissioned to convey God’s Message);
36|4| Upon a straight path.
36|5| (This is) the Book which is being sent down by the All-Glorious with irresistible might, the All-Compassionate,
36|6| So that you may warn a people whose (near) forefathers were not warned, and who are therefore heedless (of the truth and falsehood).
36|7| The word (of God’s judgment) has assuredly proved true against most of them (humankind from the very first day), for they do not believe.
36|8| We have surely put chains around the necks (of the unbelievers among your people), right up to their chins, so that their heads are forced up.
36|9| And We have set a barrier before them and a barrier behind them, and (thus) We have covered them (from all sides), so that they cannot see.
36|10| So, it is alike to them whether you warn them or do not warn them; (although it is your mission to warn them and you do it without any neglect) they will not believe.
36|11| You can (profitably) warn only him who (is unprejudiced and) follows the Message and feels awe of the All-Merciful though unseen (beyond their perception). To him, then, give the glad tiding of forgiveness and an honorable, generous provision.
36|12| Surely it is We Who will bring the dead to life; and We record what they send ahead (to the Hereafter) and what they leave behind (of good and evil). Everything We have written down and kept in a Manifest Record.
36|13| Set out to them, by way of a parable, the (story of the) people of that township, when the Messengers came there;
36|14| When We first sent them two (Messengers) and they denied them, We reinforced them with a third, and they said: "Surely we are Messengers sent to you (with God’s Message)."
36|15| They said: "You are but mortals like us. The All-Merciful has never sent down anything (by way of Book, as you claim). You are only telling lies."
36|16| (The Messengers) said: "Our Lord knows that we certainly are Messengers sent to you.
36|17| "And what rests with us is but to convey (God’s Message) fully and clearly; (we do not compel faith)."
36|18| They said: "We augur ill of you. If you do not desist, we will most certainly stone you, and a painful punishment will most certainly afflict you at our hands."
36|19| (The Messengers) said: "What you describe as augury lies with you. What? (Do you consider it an ill augury) to be reminded (of the truth) and admonished? No, indeed! Rather, you are a people committing excesses and wasteful of your God-given faculties."
36|20| A man came running from the farthest end of the city and said: "O my people! Follow those who have been sent (to you as Messengers of God).
36|21| "Follow those who ask of you no wage (for their service), and are themselves rightly guided.
36|22| And what reason do I have that I should not worship Him Who originated me with a nature particular to me, and to Whom you all (as well as I) are being brought back (to give an account of our lives)?
36|23| "Shall I take, apart from Him, deities whose intercession (that you claim they can make on our behalf) will not avail me anything, if the All-Merciful should will a harm for me, nor can they bring deliverance?
36|24| "I would indeed, if I were to do so, be in obvious error.
36|25| "But surely, I have believed in (the Lord Who is, in fact,) the Lord of you all, so listen to me (heedfully)!"
36|26| (But they killed him, and this word of welcome) was said to him: "Enter Paradise!" He said: "Would that my people knew,
36|27| "That my Lord has forgiven me and made me one of those honored (with particular favors)!"
36|28| We did not send down upon his people after him any hosts (of angels) from heaven (to destroy them): it is not Our way to send down such.
36|29| It was but a single blast only, and see! they were extinguished.
36|30| Ah! Alas for the servants (of God who fail to serve Him)! Every time there has come to them a Messenger, they have but mocked him.
36|31| Have they not considered how many a generation We have destroyed before them; they never return to them (nor to their life of the world).
36|32| Instead, every generation, all without exception, will be arraigned before us (for judgment).
36|33| A clear sign for them (of God’s Oneness and Lordship) is the dead earth: We revive it and bring forth from it grain, and (following the necessary preparatory processes) they eat of it.
36|34| And We have set therein gardens of palms and vines, and We have caused springs to gush forth in it;
36|35| So that they may eat of the fruit of all (that He produces) – and they did not make it with their own hands. Will they not, then, give thanks?
36|36| All-Glorified is He (in that He is absolutely exalted above having any peer or partner), Who has created the pairs all together out of what the earth produces, as well as out of themselves, and out of what they do not know.
36|37| A(nother) clear sign for them is the night: We withdraw the day from it, and see, they are plunged in darkness.
36|38| And the sun runs the course appointed for it for a term to its resting-place for the stability of it(s system). This is the measured determining of the All-Glorious with irresistible might (to Whose omnipotent ordering the whole universe is submitted), the All-Knowing.
36|39| And for the moon We have determined mansions till it returns like an old shriveled palm-leaf.
36|40| It is not for the sun to overtake the moon, nor does the night outstrip the day. All (the celestial bodies and systems) float in an orbit (determined for each).
36|41| A(nother) sign for them is that We bear their generations on the ship laden (with them and their cargo, and yet sustained in the water, without sinking).
36|42| And We have created for them the like of it (for land travel) on which they ride.
36|43| If We will, We cause them to drown, and there is no help for them (against Our will), nor can they be saved (from drowning)
36|44| Unless by a mercy from Us and (Our allowing them) to enjoy life for some time more until a term (determined).
36|45| When they are told: "Beware of and guard against what lies before you and what lies behind you (of unforgivable sins and punishment they will bring in the world or the Hereafter, and brought about in the past when committed by former peoples), so that you may be shown mercy (a good, virtuous life in the world and eternal happiness in the Hereafter)."
36|46| Yet there does not come to them a clear sign from among the signs of their Lord (a Revelation from among His Revelations), but they turn away from it (being averse to the admonition given therein).
36|47| And when they are told: "Spend (for the needy) out of what God has provided for you," those who disbelieve say to those who believe, "Shall we then feed those whom God would feed if He willed? You are but in obvious error."
36|48| And they say (intending mockery): "So, when is this promise (of Resurrection and Judgment), if you are truthful?"
36|49| They should await only a single blast that will seize them unawares even as they are disputing (heedlessly among themselves about their worldly concerns).
36|50| Then they will not be able even to make a bequest (so suddenly will the blast seize them), nor return to their families.
36|51| And the Trumpet will be blown, and see, out of the graves they rush forth to their Lord.
36|52| They will cry: "Woe to us! Who has raised us from our place of sleep? (We have come to know that) this is what the All-Merciful promised, and that the Messengers spoke the truth!"
36|53| It is but one single blast, and see, they will all have been (raised and) arraigned together before Us (for judgment).
36|54| On that Day, no soul will be wronged in the least, and you will not be recompensed for anything but what you used to do.
36|55| Surely the companions of Paradise will on that Day be in happy occupations enjoying the blessings (of Paradise that God will grant them abundantly out of His grace, in return for their good deeds).
36|56| They and their spouses are in pleasant shade (safe from any troubling weather), reclining on thrones.
36|57| They will have therein the fruit (of their good deeds in the world), and they will have whatever they call for.
36|58| "Peace!" is the word (of welcome for them and of safety from any trouble) from the Lord All- Compassionate (toward His believing servants).
36|59| "And you, O disbelieving criminals! Get you apart this Day!
36|60| "Did I not make a covenant with you, O children of Adam, that you should not worship Satan? Indeed he is a manifest enemy to you.
36|61| "And that you should worship Me alone. This is a straight path (for you to follow).
36|62| "Yet he has assuredly caused great multitudes of you to go astray. Should you not reason and take heed?
36|63| "This is Hell, with which you were threatened (repeatedly ).
36|64| "Enter it this Day to roast because you persistently disbelieved."
36|65| That Day We will set a seal upon their mouths, and their hands will speak to Us, and their feet will bear witness to what they earned (in the world).
36|66| If We had so willed, We could certainly have blotted out their eyes, and they would rush around for the right path. How then would they be able to see their way?
36|67| If We had so willed, We could have fixed them in their places (immobilized where they are), unable to go forward or turn back.
36|68| Whomever We cause to live long, We may also reverse him in nature (so that he returns to weakness after strength, to ignorance after knowledge, to forgetting after remembering). So will they not reason and take heed?
36|69| We have not taught him (the Messenger) poetry; further, it is not seemly for him. This is but a Reminder (teaching and admonishing), a Qur’an recited and conveyed (from God), clear in itself and clearly showing the truth.
36|70| So that the Messenger may warn with it those who are (truly) alive (and so can reason, and see, and hear the truth), and that the word (of Divine judgment after evidence and admonition) may be completed against the unbelievers.
36|71| Have they not considered how (as signs of Our Lordship), out of what Our Hands have originated and fashioned, We have created for them cattle, and so they are their owners?
36|72| We have subdued them to them, so that among them (they find) their mounts and from them they obtain food.
36|73| And they have many other benefits in them and (diverse) things to drink. Will they not then give thanks?
36|74| Yet they have taken deities for worship apart from God, (expecting) that they may receive help (from them).
36|75| They (the false deities) are unable to help them; rather, they (the worshippers) are a (supportive) host for them (the false deities, and all will be arraigned for punishment on the Day of Judgment).
36|76| So do not let their (slanderous) words (against God and you) grieve you (O Messenger). Surely We know whatever they keep concealed (of speech or deeds) and whatever they disclose.
36|77| Has human not considered that We have created him from (so slight a beginning as) a drop of (seminal) fluid? Yet, he turns into an open, fierce adversary (selfishly disputing against the truth).
36|78| And he coins a comparison for Us, having forgotten his own origin and creation, saying, "Who will give life to these bones when they have rotten away?"
36|79| Say: "He Who produced them in the first instance will give them life. He has full knowledge of every (form and mode and possibility of) creation (and of everything He has created He knows every detail in every dimension of time and space)."
36|80| He Who has made for you fire from the green tree, and see, you kindle fire with it.
36|81| Is not He Who has created the heavens and the earth able to create (from rotten bones) the like of them (whose bones have rotted under the ground)? Surely He is; He is the Supreme Creator, the All-Knowing.
36|82| When He wills a thing to be, He but says to it "Be!" and (in the selfsame instant) it is.
36|83| So, All-Glorified is He in Whose Hand is the absolute dominion of all things, and to Him you are being brought back.
37|1| By those (the angels) who align themselves in ranks;
37|2| (Some) driving away with reproof,
37|3| (And others) reciting the Reminder (revealed from God).
37|4| Most surely your Lord is One;
37|5| The Lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them, and the Lord of all the easts.
37|6| We have indeed adorned the lowest heaven (the heaven of the world) with an ornament – the stars;
37|7| And for guard against every devil persistent in haughty rebellion.
37|8| They cannot hear anything from the High Assembly (of the angels) – and (whenever they attempt to hear) become targets of missiles from all directions;
37|9| Repelled, and for them is a perpetual punishment –
37|10| Excepting one who snatches something by stealth, and is pursued (and destroyed) by a piercing shooting-star.
37|11| So ask them (the polytheists): "Are they more formidable in structure or those that We have created (the heavens and the angels in them). Indeed, We have created them (human beings) from a sticky clay.
37|12| You find all God’s acts wonderful, and their denial strange, but they continue to mock (God’s Message and His Messenger).
37|13| And when they are reminded (of Divine truths and admonished by His Revelations), they pay no heed.
37|14| When they see an extraordinary evidence (of the truth, a miracle), they take it in mockery (and call others to do the same).
37|15| And they say, "This is clearly nothing but sorcery.
37|16| "What! After we have died and become dust and bones, will we then be raised from the dead?
37|17| "And also our forefathers of old?!"
37|18| Say: "Yes, indeed, and most humiliated you will be."
37|19| It will be only a single scaring cry, and then behold, they are staring (in dread),
37|20| And saying: "Woe to us! This is the Day of Judgment!"
37|21| (And it is said): "This is the Day of Judgment and Distinction (between truth and falsehood, between the righteous and the sinful – the Day) that you used to deny."
37|22| (God commands the angels:) "Gather together all those who committed the greatest wrong (by obstinately associating partners with God), and their (devilish) comrades, and all that they used to worship (of idols, and the rebellious among humankind and jinn),
37|23| "Apart from God, and lead them to the path of the Blazing Flame!
37|24| "And arrest them there, for they must be questioned (concerning their deeds in the world).
37|25| "But, what is the matter with you that you do not help one another (to escape punishment)?"
37|26| Instead, on that Day they will be in utter submission (without the least sign of arrogance).
37|27| And they turn to one another, exchanging words (of blame) with one another.
37|28| They (the ones led) say (to the leaders): "It was you who used to come to us affecting (pretending to be our well-wishers and offering falsehood as truth)."
37|29| They (the leaders) say: "No! Rather, you yourselves were not believers, (with no inclination and intention to believe).
37|30| "And we had no power over you (to compel you to disbelieve). But you yourselves were a rebellious people.
37|31| "So our Lord’s word (of punishment) has come true against us. (In justice) we are bound to taste it.
37|32| "So then, (though without power to compel, if) we did mislead you (and cause you to rebel), for surely we ourselves had been lost in error."
37|33| So, on that Day they will be associated together in (suffering) the punishment.
37|34| That is how We will deal with the disbelieving criminals.
37|35| For when they were told that there is no deity but God, they would grow arrogant and reject it.
37|36| And they would say, "Are we to give up our deities for the sake of a mad poet?"
37|37| No! Rather he has brought (you) the truth and confirms those (Messengers) sent (before him).
37|38| You are surely bound to taste the painful punishment (on account of your attitude and actions),
37|39| And you will not be recompensed but for what you were doing.
37|40| But not so God’s servants endowed with sincerity in faith and practicing the Religion.
37|41| For those there is (in Paradise) a provision specially prepared:
37|42| Fruits (as the reward of their life in the world); and they will be highly honored,
37|43| In Gardens of bounty and blessing;
37|44| Sitting on thrones, face to face,
37|45| A cup will be passed round among them with a drink from a pure, gushing spring;
37|46| Clear, delightful for those who drink it;
37|47| Free from any headiness or harm, and they will not suffer intoxication from it.
37|48| And with them will be pure, chaste-eyed spouses (whose glances are fixed on them only), most beautiful of eye;
37|49| (As free from any ugliness, and) untouched, as if they were hidden (ostrich) eggs.
37|50| They will turn to one another, indulging in friendly talk.
37|51| One of them speaks thus: "I had a close companion,
37|52| "Who used to ask me, ‘Are you really one of those who confirm the truth (of what the Messenger teaches us about the Last Judgment)?
37|53| ‘Will we, when we die and have become dust and bones – will we then really be (raised and) put under judgment?’ "
37|54| He (the speaker) will say: "Would you like to look (into Hell to see him)?"
37|55| He will look down and see him in the midst of the Blazing Flame.
37|56| He will say: "By God, you would nearly have caused me to perish:
37|57| "Had it not been for the grace of my Lord, I would certainly have been among those arraigned (in the Flame for punishment)."
37|58| (Then, turning to his companions, he will say:) "We are not to experience death any more, are we?
37|59| "Except the former death (that we experienced in leaving the world), and we are not to be punished.
37|60| "(Then) this is most certainly the supreme triumph."
37|61| For the like of this, then, let those who will labor (to a goal) labor.
37|62| Is this what is good as a welcome or the tree of Zaqqum?
37|63| We have made it (that tree) a means of trial and punishment for the wrongdoers (who associate partners with God).
37|64| It is a tree growing in the heart of the Blazing Flame.
37|65| Its fruits are like the heads of satans.
37|66| So, most surely, they will eat of it and fill up their bellies with it.
37|67| Then, for them will be boiling water (to mix with the zaqqum in their bodies).
37|68| And afterwards, they are bound to return to the Blazing Flame again.
37|69| Assuredly they found their forefathers on the wrong path.
37|70| And yet, they rush (after them) in their footsteps.
37|71| Indeed, most of those (communities) that lived before them went astray,
37|72| Though We had sent among them warners (with Our guidance).
37|73| So see how was the outcome for those who were warned (but paid no heed),
37|74| Except God’s servants, endowed with sincerity in faith and practicing the Religion.
37|75| And Noah (just such a servant and warner) had called upon Us (for help), and how excellent We are in answering (prayer)!
37|76| We saved him and (his true followers among) his family and people from the mighty distress.
37|77| And We caused his offspring to endure (on the earth).
37|78| And We left for him among later-comers (until the end of time this greeting and remembrance of him and his Message):
37|79| "Peace be upon Noah among all beings."
37|80| Thus do We reward those devoted to doing good as if seeing God.
37|81| Surely he was one of Our truly believing servants.
37|82| As for the others (who opposed him), We caused them to drown.
37|83| Abraham was surely one who followed the same way as his.
37|84| He had turned to his Lord with a heart sound and pure (from any trace of insincerity of faith).
37|85| (Remember) when he said to his father and his people, "What is that you worship?
37|86| "Is it a fabrication that you pursue, worshipping deities apart from God?
37|87| "So, what do you think about the Lord of the worlds (that you dare to do so)?"
37|88| Then (when invited to participate in the religious ceremonies of the people on a festival day) he cast a glance at the stars;
37|89| And he said: "Indeed I am sick."
37|90| So they (the others) turned away from him and departed.
37|91| Thereupon he approached their deities, and said, "Will you not eat (of the offerings put before you)?
37|92| "What is the matter with you that you do not speak?"
37|93| Then he fell upon them, striking them with his right hand (with all his strength).
37|94| Then, the other people headed towards him hurriedly.
37|95| He said: "Do you worship things that you yourselves have carved,
37|96| "While it is God Who has created you and all that you do?"
37|97| They (consulted among themselves and) said: "Build him a pyre and throw him into the blazing flames!"
37|98| So they intended a scheme against him (to destroy him), but We made them the ones brought low.
37|99| And he said: "Now I am going to my Lord (to quit my homeland purely for His sake, in the full conviction that) He will guide me (to a land where I will be able to worship Him freely).
37|100| (And he prayed): "My Lord, Grant me (the gift of a child who will be) one of the righteous."
37|101| So We gave him the glad tidings of a boy (who was to grow as one) mild and forbearing.
37|102| Then, when (his son) grew alongside him to the age of striving (for the necessities of life), he said: "O my dear son! I have seen in my dream that I should offer you in sacrifice. So think about this and tell me your view!" He said (unhesitatingly): "O my dear father! Do as you are commanded. You will find me, by God’s will, one of those who show steadfast patience (in obeying God’s commands)."
37|103| Then when both had submitted to God’s will, and Abraham had laid him down on the side of his forehead,
37|104| (At just that moment,) We called out to him: "O Abraham!
37|105| "You have already fulfilled the dream (which tested your loyal obedience to the command; so you no longer have to offer your son in sacrifice.) Thus do We reward those devoted to doing good as if seeing God."
37|106| Behold, all this was indeed a trial, clear.
37|107| And We ransomed him with a sacrifice tremendous in worth.
37|108| And We left for him among later-comers (until the end of time this greeting and remembrance of him and his Message):
37|109| "Peace be upon Abraham."
37|110| Thus do We reward those devoted to doing good as if seeing God.
37|111| Surely he was one of Our truly believing servants.
37|112| We gave him the glad tidings of Isaac to be a Prophet among the righteous.
37|113| We showered Our blessings on both him (Ishmael) and on Isaac; and among the offspring of both there have been those devoted to doing good, aware that God is seeing them, and those who have plainly been wronging themselves (by sinning).
37|114| We assuredly bestowed Our favor also upon Moses and Aaron;
37|115| And We saved them and their people from the mighty distress (of slavery and persecution).
37|116| And We helped them, so they became the victors.
37|117| And We granted them both (Moses and Aaron) the clear Book (which explained the matters that had been secret, and which the people needed for the happiness of their life in both worlds).
37|118| We showed them the Straight Path (enabling them to follow it in every matter without any deviance).
37|119| And We left for them among later-comers (until the end of time, this greeting and remembrance of them and their Message):
37|120| "Peace be upon Moses and Aaron."
37|121| Thus do We reward those devoted to doing good as if seeing God.
37|122| Surely those two were among Our truly believing servants.
37|123| And surely Ilyas (Elijah) was one of the Messengers.
37|124| (Remember) when he said to his people: "Will you not keep from disobedience to God in reverence for Him and piety?
37|125| "Will you continue to invoke Ba‘l (as deity) and forsake the Creator Who creates everything in the best and most appropriate form and has the ultimate rank of creativity –
37|126| "God, your Lord and the Lord of your forefathers?"
37|127| But they denied him, and so they are surely bound to be arraigned (for judgment).
37|128| Except God’s servants, endowed with sincerity in faith and practicing the Religion.
37|129| And We left for him among later-comers (until the end of time this greeting and remembrance of him and his Message):
37|130| "Peace be upon Il-Yasin."
37|131| Thus do We reward those devoted to doing good as if seeing God.
37|132| Surely he was one of Our truly believing servants.
37|133| And surely Lot was one of the Messengers.
37|134| (Remember) when We (ordered him to leave the land of sinners and) saved him and his family all together,
37|135| Except an old woman among those who stayed behind;
37|136| Then We annihilated the others.
37|137| Indeed, you pass by them (the ruins of their dwellings) at morning-time (during your travels for trade),
37|138| And by night. Will you not, then, use your reason and take heed?
37|139| And surely Jonah was one of the Messengers.
37|140| (Remember) when he left like a runaway slave for a ship fully laden.
37|141| And then he (agreed to) cast lots, and he was one of those who lost;
37|142| (They threw him into the sea, and) the big fish swallowed him, while he was accused (by his conscience).
37|143| Had it not been that he was one who always glorified God, (declaring Him absolutely above having any defects and partners),
37|144| He would certainly have remained in its belly (serving as his grave) until the Day when all will be raised (from the dead).
37|145| But We caused him to be cast forth on a desert shore, sick as he was;
37|146| And caused a gourd plant to grow over him.
37|147| And We sent him once again to (his people, numbering) a hundred thousand, rather they tended to increase.
37|148| And they believed in him (this time), and so, (sparing them,) We allowed them to enjoy life for a term allotted to them.
37|149| So ask them, (O Messenger,) whether your Lord has daughters while sons are allotted for them?
37|150| Or that We created the angels female and they were witnesses?
37|151| Beware, it is surely one of their fabrications that they say,
37|152| "God has begotten." Most certainly they are liars.
37|153| He has (made gender-discrimination and so) chosen daughters in preference to sons, has He?
37|154| What is the matter with you? How can you judge so?
37|155| Will you not still reflect and be mindful?
37|156| Or do you have a clear authority (of evidence)?
37|157| If so, produce your book (which), if you are truthful in your claim, (must have come from God)!
37|158| And they have concocted a kin-relationship between Him and the jinn (to excuse their worshipping the jinn); whereas the jinn know quite well that they (are created and sustained by God and) are bound to be arraigned (before Him for judgment).
37|159| All-Glorified is He, absolutely exalted above such as they attribute to Him.
37|160| But God’s servants endowed with sincerity in faith and practicing the Religion do not do so.
37|161| For sure you and those that you worship,
37|162| Cannot cause any to deviate concerning God,
37|163| Except those who have willfully adopted the way to the Blazing Flame.
37|164| (The angels whom they assert to be God’s daughters say): "There is none among us but has his duty and position assigned,
37|165| "And surely we are those ranged in ranks (ever-expecting God’s commands);
37|166| "And most certainly we are the ones glorifying Him (declaring Him to be above having any defects and partners)."
37|167| They (the polytheists) surely used to say:
37|168| "If only We had had a Reminder of the like those who lived before us had,
37|169| "Then we would certainly have been God’s servants endowed with sincerity in faith and practicing the Religion."
37|170| Yet (now the Qur’an has come to them) they disbelieve in it; so they will come to know.
37|171| Indeed Our word (of promise) has already gone forth in respect of Our servants sent with Our Message (of guidance and warning):
37|172| That they would surely be helped to victory,
37|173| And that surely Our host (the host of the true believers), they are certainly the victors.
37|174| So turn aside from them for a little while, (do not care what they do and say);
37|175| And watch them and see (to what end their denial will lead them), as they also will see it.
37|176| Or do they seek to hasten on Our punishment (that it befall them immediately)?
37|177| But when it descends encompassing them, then evil will be the morning of those who have been warned.
37|178| And ignore what they say and do for a little while.
37|179| And watch them and see (what the ultimate end of all people will be), as they also will see it.
37|180| All-Glorified is your Lord, the Lord of might and glory, exalted above all that they attribute (to Him).
37|181| And peace be upon the Messengers.
37|182| And all praise and gratitude are for God, the Lord of the worlds.
38|1| Sad. (I swear) by the glorious Qur’an bearing the Reminder (with guidance to the truth and warning, that you are one who has been sent to convey God’s Religion).
38|2| However, those who disbelieve are lost in self-glory and opposition.
38|3| We destroyed before them many generations (who likewise willfully persisted in unbelief and opposition). (In the end) they called out for help but only when it was too late for the punishment (they had earned) to be canceled.
38|4| They deem it strange that a warner from among them has come to them, and the unbelievers say: "This man is but a sorcerer, a fraud (who makes fabrications in attribution to God).
38|5| "What! has he made all the deities into One God. This is a very strange thing, indeed!"
38|6| The leaders among them went about inciting one another: "Move on, and remain constant to your deities. Surely that (to which this man calls) is the very thing that is certainly intended (deliberately plotted by him and those who follow him).
38|7| "We have not heard of this in recent ways of faith. This is surely nothing but a concoction.
38|8| "From among all of us has the Reminder been sent down on him?" No! Rather, (on account of their self-glory) they are lost in doubts concerning My Reminder. No indeed! they have not yet tasted My punishment (so that they might abandon their arrogance and recognize the truth).
38|9| Or do they own and control the treasures of the Mercy of your Lord, the All-Glorious with irresistible might, the All-Bestowing, (that they presume to object to your being chosen as the Messenger)?
38|10| Or do they own the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them? Then let them ascend to the heavens by ropes (and see if they can prevent the Message from being sent to you).
38|11| They are no more than a routed band of (disunited) parties there (awaiting a defeat as certain as the defeat of the hordes of old times who rejected the Messengers and were utterly abased).
38|12| Before them the people of Noah denied (their Messenger), and the Ad, and the Pharaoh with formidable strongholds.
38|13| And also the Thamud, and the people of Lot, and the people al-Aykah. Those are the hordes (of old times).
38|14| Not one of them but denied the Messengers (sent to them), and therefore My retribution was their just, inevitable due.
38|15| These wait but for a single blast, which will tolerate no delay (to give them respite).
38|16| Yet, they say: "Our Lord! Hasten on to us our share before the Day of Reckoning!"
38|17| Bear patiently all that they say, and remember Our servant David, powerful (in his glorification of God, in knowledge, in kingdom, and in fighting). Surely he was one ever turning to God in penitence.
38|18| We subdued the mountains to glorify (their Lord) along with him in the afternoon and bright morning;
38|19| And the birds assembled; all were turned to Him (in devotion and glorification).
38|20| We strengthened his kingdom, and granted him wisdom and decisive speech (to inform, and convince, and lead).
38|21| Now, has the report of the litigants come to you, when they climbed over the wall into the royal chamber?
38|22| When they entered in upon David, and so he was taken aback by them. They said: "Do not be alarmed! (We are) two litigating parties; one party trespassed against the right of the other. So judge between us with truth; do not be unjust; and guide us to the level path."
38|23| (One of them explained the case): "This is my brother: He has ninety-nine ewes, and I have but one. Then he said, ‘Make it over to me,’ and he overpowered me in (force of) speech."
38|24| David said: "He has undoubtedly wronged you in demanding your single ewe to add to his own ewes. Truly many are the partners in business who trespass against the right of one another, except such as believe and do good, righteous deeds, and how few they are!" David came to understand that We had tried him, so he appealed to his Lord for forgiveness, and fell down in prostration, and turned to God in contrition.
38|25| So We forgave him that. Indeed he enjoyed nearness to Us and an excellent place of final return.
38|26| "O David! We have appointed you a vicegerent in the land (to rule according to Our commandments); so judge among people with the truth and do not follow personal inclination, lest it leads you astray from the path of God. Surely, those who wander astray from God’s path – for them there is a severe punishment because they have forgotten the Day of Reckoning.
38|27| We have not created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in vain (so that people should think themselves at liberty to act each according to his own desires and inclinations). That is the mere conjecture of those who disbelieve. Woe to those who disbelieve because of the Fire!
38|28| Or (do they think that) We treat those who believe and do good, righteous deeds the same as those who provoke disorder and corruption on earth, or (that) We treat the pious, God-revering ones the same as the shameless, dissolute ones?
38|29| This is a Book, which We send down to you, full of blessings, so that they (all conscious, responsible beings) may ponder its verses and that the people of discernment may reflect on it and be mindful.
38|30| We granted to David (who was perfectly righteous in his Caliphate) Solomon. How excellent a servant Solomon was! Surely he was one ever-turning (to God) in penitence.
38|31| Once, in the afternoon, there were brought before him nobly-bred horses (trained for fighting in God’s cause, steady when standing, swift when running).
38|32| (Having watched them for some time,) he said: "Indeed my love for these horses is (not on their own behalf, but) because they serve for the remembrance of my Lord (and conveying His Name to other lands)." And the horses were hidden by the veil of distance.
38|33| (He commanded): "Bring them back to me." Then, he rubbed down their legs and their necks.
38|34| Indeed, We tried Solomon and placed a lifeless body upon his throne. Afterwards, he turned (to God) in contrition.
38|35| He prayed: "My Lord, forgive me, and bestow on me a kingdom which will not suit anyone after me. Surely You are the All-Bestowing."
38|36| We (accepted his prayer and) subdued the wind to his service, so that it coursed gently by his command wherever he willed;
38|37| And of the satans (devils) (We made subservient to him) every builder (on earth) and diver (to extract precious stones from the sea);
38|38| And others (of the rebellious jinn) linked together in fetters.
38|39| "This is Our gift, so either bestow (from it), or withhold (from it), without reckoning (that it may diminish or that you will be held to account for it).
38|40| Surely he enjoyed nearness to Us and an excellent place of final return.
38|41| And remember Our servant Job, when he called out to his Lord: "Surely Satan has caused me to be afflicted with distress and great suffering."
38|42| (We told him:) "Strike the ground with your foot: here is cool water to wash with and to drink.
38|43| We granted him his household and the like thereof along with them as a mercy from Us, and as a reminder (with guidance and instruction) for the people of discernment.
38|44| (We also told him): "Take in your hand a bundle of rushes and strike with it: do not break your oath." Surely, We found him full of patience and constancy. How excellent a servant! He was surely one ever-turning to God in penitence.
38|45| And remember Our servants Abraham and Isaac and Jacob, endowed with power (in obedience to God and doing good deeds), and insight (to discern the truth in things and events).
38|46| We made them perfectly pure and sincere by virtue of a characteristic most pure: their constant remembrance of the Abode (of the Hereafter).
38|47| They are in Our sight among the perfectly purified, chosen ones, the truly good.
38|48| And also remember Ishmael and al-Yasa‘a (Isaiah), and Dhu’l-Kifl. Every one of them is of the truly good.
38|49| All this is a remembrance (of the excellence of those We have mentioned and an instruction for people). For the God-revering, pious there is an excellent abode of return:
38|50| Gardens of perpetual bliss whose gates are wide-open to them,
38|51| In which they will recline (on thrones), calling therein for many a fruit and drink.
38|52| And with them will be pure, chaste-eyed spouses, well-matched, (whose glances are fixed on them only).
38|53| This is what you are promised for the Day of Reckoning.
38|54| This is certainly Our provision (for you) with no diminishing (nor end) in it.
38|55| All this (for the God-revering, pious); but for the rebellious is an evil abode of return:
38|56| Hell, where they will enter to roast: how evil a cradle.
38|57| This (then is for them), so let them taste it: boiling water and intensely-cold, dark fluid.
38|58| And paired with that, another (torment) of similar nature.
38|59| "(O rebellious ones!) Here is the crowd of people who rushed blindly into sin in your company (while in the world, and now they will rush into the Fire together with you)!" (The rebellious ones cry out:) "No welcome for them! They will indeed enter the Fire to roast."
38|60| They (who had blindly followed) say: "No! rather for you, there is no welcome for you! It is you who forwarded this for us (from the world)!" Then, how evil a place to abide in!
38|61| And they say (in supplication): "Our Lord! Whoever forwarded this for us, increase him in punishment doubled in the Fire!"
38|62| And (the rebellious ones) say: "What is it with us that we cannot see the men (the poor and weak believers) whom we used to count among the wicked,
38|63| "Whom we used to take in mockery? Or is it that (they are here with us, but) our eyes have missed them (just as we turned our eyes from them in contempt in the world)?"
38|64| Such will in truth be the mutual wrangling of the people of the Fire.
38|65| Say: "I am but a warner. There is no deity save God, the One (with no-one and nothing like or comparable to Him), the All-Overwhelming (with absolute sway over all that exists).
38|66| The Lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them, the All-Glorious with irresistible might, the All-Forgiving.
38|67| Say: "This (Qur’an) is a supreme message.
38|68| "You turn away from it in aversion.
38|69| "I had no knowledge of the High Assembly (in the heavens) when they were arguing.
38|70| "I (follow only what is revealed to me and) it is revealed to me that I am but a plain warner."
38|71| (Remember) when your Lord said to the angels: "I am creating a mortal out of clay (to set him on the earth as vicegerent).
38|72| "When I have fashioned him fully and breathed into Him out of My Spirit, then fall down prostrating before him (as a sign of respect for him and his superiority)."
38|73| So the angels prostrated, all of them together,
38|74| But Iblis did not (in defiance of God’s explicit order to him); he grew arrogant and displayed himself as an unbeliever.
38|75| (God) said: "O Iblis! What prevents you from prostrating before the being whom I have created with My two Hands? Are you too proud (to bow down before any created being in defiance of My command), or are you (of those who think themselves) so high in honor (that they cannot be ordered to prostrate before anyone)?"
38|76| (Iblis) answered: "I am better than him. You have created me from fire and him You have created from clay."
38|77| (God) said: "Then get you down out of it; surely You are one eternally rejected (from My Mercy).
38|78| And My curse is on you until the Day of Judgment."
38|79| He said: "My Lord, grant me respite till the Day when they are raised (from the dead)!"
38|80| (God) said: "You are of the ones granted respite
38|81| "Until the Day of the Time Appointed."
38|82| (Iblis) said: "Then (I swear) by Your Glory, I will certainly cause them all to rebel and go astray,
38|83| "Except Your servants among them, endowed with sincerity in faith and worshipping You."
38|84| (God) said: "(Whatever I do and command is) the truth itself, and the truth I speak:
38|85| "I will most certainly fill Hell with you (and your kind), and those (of humankind) who follow you, all together."
38|86| Say (O Messenger): "I ask of you no wage for this (conveying the Qur’an to you), and I am not of those who claim to be what they are really not and make fabrications of their own.
38|87| "This (Qur’an) is only a Reminder (with guidance and admonishment) for all conscious beings.
38|88| You will most certainly come to know what it informs of after a time (as appointed for you).
39|1| (This is) the Book being sent down in parts from God, the All-Glorious with irresistible might, the All-Wise.
39|2| We have sent down to you the Book with the truth (embodying it, and with nothing false in it), so worship God, sincere in your faith in Him and practicing the Religion purely for His sake.
39|3| Beware! it is to God alone that all sincere faith, worship, and obedience are due. Yet, those who take, apart from Him, others (angels, jinn, or humans) for guardians and confidants (to entrust their affairs to) say: "We worship them for no other reason than they may bring us nearer to God." God will judge between them (between those who worship and obey God exclusively and those who associate partners with Him) concerning all on which they differ. God does not guide anyone who is a determined liar and ingrate.
39|4| Had God willed to take to Himself a child, He could certainly have chosen whatever He willed out of all that He has created. All-Glorified is He (in that He is exalted above having any children). He is God, the One, the All-Overwhelming (with absolute sway over all that exists).
39|5| He has created the heavens and the earth with truth (meaningfully and for definite purpose, and on solid foundations of truth). He wraps the night around the day and He wraps the day around the night (until one covers the other completely). And He has made the sun and the moon subservient (to His command), each running its course for a term appointed (by Him). Be aware! He is the All-Glorious with irresistible might (able to punish those who oppose Him), the All-Forgiving (Who forgives those who turn to Him in repentance).
39|6| He has created you from a single human self, and then He has made from it its mate, and He has sent down for you eight in pairs of cattle. He creates you in the wombs of your mothers, one act and phase of creation after another, in three veils of darkness. This is God, your true Lord (Who creates, and sustains you): To Him belongs the sovereignty (absolute ownership and dominion of everything). There is no deity but He. How, then, are you turned about (to different kinds of belief)?
39|7| If you disbelieve in Him (in ingratitude), yet surely God is absolutely independent of you. He is not pleased with ingratitude and unbelief from His servants; whereas, if you give thanks (and believe), He is pleased with it from you. And no soul, as bearer of burden, bears (and is made to bear) the burden of another. Then, to your Lord is your return so that He will make you understand all that you were doing (and call you to account). Surely He has full knowledge of what lies hidden in the bosoms.
39|8| When an affliction befalls human, he calls upon his Lord turning to Him (in contrition); then when He bestows a favor upon him, he forgets what he prayed to Him for before, and sets up rivals to God so that he (himself goes astray and) misleads (others) from His way. Say (to such a one): "Enjoy life in your unbelief for a while! You are for sure one of the companions of the Fire."
39|9| Is he who worships God devoutly in the watches of the night prostrating and standing, who fears the Hereafter and hopes for the mercy of his Lord (to be likened to that other)? Say: "Are they ever equal, those who know and those who do not know?" Only the people of discernment will reflect on (the distinction between knowledge and ignorance, and obedience to God and disobedience,) and be mindful.
39|10| Say (quoting Me): "O My servants who believe: Keep from disobedience to your Lord in reverence for Him and piety. For those devoted to doing good in this world, aware that God is seeing them, there is good (by way of recompense). And God’s earth is vast (enabling worship). Those who are patient (persevering in adversity, worshipping God, and refraining from sins) will surely be given their reward without measure."
39|11| Say: "I am commanded to worship God, sincere in faith in Him and practicing the Religion purely for His sake.
39|12| "And I am commanded to be the first and foremost in being Muslim (in faith in and submission to what I am commanded to convey to you)."
39|13| Say: "I fear, if I disobey my Lord, the punishment of an awesome Day."
39|14| Say: "I worship God, sincere in my faith in Him and practicing the Religion purely for His sake.
39|15| "(As for those of you who reject my call,) worship then whatever you will apart from Him (you are forewarned of the consequences)!" Say: "Surely the losers are those who will ruin themselves and their families on the Day of Resurrection." Beware! this indeed is the obvious loss.
39|16| For them will be dark layers of the Fire above them, and dark layers below them. With this does God warn off His servants. O My servants, keep from disobedience to Me in reverence for Me and piety and so deserve My protection.
39|17| As for those who keep away from false deities and powers of evil (who institute patterns of faith and rule in defiance of God) – away from worshipping them, and turn toward God in penitence, for them are glad tidings, so give the glad tidings to My servants,
39|18| Who, when they hear speech, follow the best of it (in the best way possible, and even seek what is better and straighter). Those are the ones whom God has guided, and those are the ones who are people of discernment.
39|19| Is he, against whom the word of (God’s) punishment has been justified and realized (to be likened to one who will be rewarded with Paradise)? Could you, then, deliver one who is in the Fire?
39|20| But those who keep from disobedience to God in reverence for Him and piety, for them are lofty mansions built one above another, beneath which rivers flow. (This is) God’s promise. God never fails to fulfill His promise.
39|21| Have you not considered that God sends down water from the sky, and leads it into springs in the earth to flow therein; then He causes to grow with it produce of various colors; then it withers so that you see it grow yellow; then He makes it break and fade away. In this, for sure, is a reminder for people of discernment.
39|22| Is he (who derives lessons from God’s acts in the universe and so) whose breast God has expanded to Islam, so that he follows a light from his Lord (– is such a one to be likened to one whose heart is closed up to any remembrance of God and therefore to Islam)? So woe to those whose hearts are hardened against the remembrance of God (and who learn nothing from His signs and Revelations)! Those are lost in obvious error.
39|23| God sends down in parts the best of the words as a Book fully consistent in itself, and whose statements corroborate, expound and refer to one another. The skins of those who stand in awe of their Lord tingle at (the hearing and understanding of) it. Then, their skins and their hearts come to rest in the Remembrance of God (the Qur’an). This is God’s guidance, by which He guides whomever He wills. And whoever God leads astray, there is no guide for him.
39|24| Is he who (thrown into the Fire upon his face with his hands chained around his neck,) tries to guard himself with his face (by trying to keep it away) from the evil punishment on the Day of Resurrection (to be likened to one who will be safe from the punishment that Day)? It will be said to the wrongdoers: "Taste (this Day) what you used to earn (in the world)!"
39|25| Those before them denied (the Revelation), and so the punishment came upon them without their having perceived from where it came.
39|26| Thus God made them taste disgrace in the life of this world, but the punishment of the Hereafter is greater. If only they had known!
39|27| Assuredly We have struck for humankind in this Qur’an all kinds of parables and comparisons, so that they may reflect and be mindful.
39|28| It is a Qur’an in Arabic with no crookedness (free from any contradiction and anything offensive to truth and righteousness and reason), so that they may keep from disobedience to God in reverence for Him and piety to deserve His protection.
39|29| God strikes a parable: a man in (the employment of) many partners who continuously dispute with one another, and another man employed by one person: are those two equal in likeness? All praise and gratitude are for God (the only Sovereign Lord of the creation). But most people have no knowledge (of the meaning of this truth).
39|30| You will surely die (one day), and surely they (too) will die.
39|31| Then, on the Day of Resurrection, you will stand in the Presence of your Lord as litigants.
39|32| Who, then, is more in the wrong than he who fabricates falsehood against God, and denies the truth when it comes to him? Is there not in Hell a dwelling for the unbelievers?!
39|33| As for him who has come with the truth and him who has confirmed it, those are the God-revering, pious ones.
39|34| For them is whatever they desire in the Presence of their Lord. That is the reward of those devoted to doing good, aware that God is seeing them.
39|35| For God will blot out from them (even) the worst of what they once did, and pay them their reward in accordance with the best of what they used to do.
39|36| Is not God sufficient for His servant? Yet they seek to frighten you with those (whom they deify and worship) apart from God. Whoever God leads astray, there is no guide for him.
39|37| And whomever God guides, there is no one who can lead him astray. Is not God All-Glorious with irresistible might, Able to Requite?
39|38| Indeed, if you ask them who has created the heavens and the earth, they will certainly say, "God." Say: "Have you, then, ever considered what it is that you invoke apart from God? If God wills some harm for me, are they the ones that can remove His harm (from me), or if He wills for me a mercy, are they the ones that can withhold it?" Say: "God is sufficient for me. In Him do those who trust (and know the worth and meaning of putting one’s trust) put their trust.
39|39| Say: "O my people! Do all that may be within your power, surely I (too) am doing (the work asked of me). In time you will come to know
39|40| Who they are upon whom (in the world) there will come a punishment that will abase them, and upon whom a lasting punishment will descend (in the Hereafter)."
39|41| Surely We have sent down the Book to you with the truth for humankind (embodying the truth, and with no falsehood in it). So, whoever chooses to go right, it is for his own soul’s good; and whoever chooses to go astray, goes astray but to its own harm. You are not one appointed as a guardian over them (to assume their responsibility for going right).
39|42| God takes the spirits at the time of the death of (the souls), and in their sleep those (of the ones) that have not died. He withholds (the spirits of) those for whom He has decreed death, and the rest He sends back (to their bodies to live on) for a term appointed by Him. Surely in that are signs (important lessons) for people who reflect and are mindful.
39|43| What! (Failing to recognize that God is the sole Authority over the universe in need of nothing) have they taken to themselves, apart from God, intercessors (whom they suppose capable of intervening for their souls or even in the operation of the universe)? Say: "Why – even though they have no share in the dominion of anything, nor (like idols) any sense or intelligence?
39|44| Say: "To God exclusively belongs the whole authority to intercede, (whether He grants any being permission to intercede with Him or not). To Him alone belongs the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth. Then, to Him you will be returned."
39|45| When God as One (and only God) is mentioned, the hearts of those who do not believe in the Hereafter recoil in aversion; but when those (whom they worship) apart from Him are mentioned, they are surely gladdened.
39|46| Say: "O God, Originator of the heavens and the earth, the Knower of the Unseen and the witnessed! You it is Who will judge among Your servants concerning that on which they differ."
39|47| Even if those who do the greatest wrong (by associating partners with God and refusing to believe in the Hereafter) could possess all that is on the earth and its like besides, they would certainly offer it as ransom to escape from the evil punishment on the Day of Resurrection. Something will confront them from God, which they never reckoned.
39|48| The evil deeds they earned (to their account) will become obvious to them, and what they used to mock (God’s promised punishment) will overwhelm them.
39|49| When an affliction befalls human he calls upon Us (to save him). Then, when We (from sheer grace) have bestowed a favor upon him from Us, he says: "I have been given this only by virtue of a certain knowledge that I have." No, indeed. Rather, this (favor bestowed on human) is a trial, but most of them do not know.
39|50| Those who lived before them (and adopted the same attitude and followed a similar way) said it (too); but all that they achieved (in the world) was of no avail to them.
39|51| The evil results of what they earned fell upon them. So also will the evil results of what they have earned fall upon these (new generations) who do wrong. And they will never be able to frustrate (Our will).
39|52| Do they still not know that God enlarges provision for whom He wills, and restricts it (for whom He wills). Surely in that are signs (of the clear truth) for people who will believe and who will deepen in faith.
39|53| Say: "(God gives you hope): ‘O My servants who have been wasteful (of their God-given opportunities and faculties) against (the good of) their own souls! Do not despair of God’s Mercy. Surely God forgives all sins. He is indeed the All-Forgiving, the All-Compassionate.’ "
39|54| Turn to your Lord in penitence and submit to Him wholly before the punishment comes upon you (when it will be too late, and acknowledgment of faith will no longer avail you); for after (that) you will not be helped.
39|55| Follow in the best way possible what has been sent down to you from your Lord, before the punishment comes upon you all of a sudden, without your being aware (of its coming);
39|56| Lest any soul should say, "Alas for me for that I have fallen short of my duty to God, and I was indeed among those who used to mock (at the truth)!"
39|57| Or (lest it) should say (by way of invalid excuse): "If only God had guided me, I would surely have been among the God-revering, pious!"
39|58| Or (lest it) should say when it sees the punishment, "If only I had a second chance (to live), so that I could be among those devoted to doing good, aware that God is seeing them!"
39|59| (But God will answer): "No, indeed! My Revelations and signs (of the truth) did come to you, but you denied them, and grew in arrogance (so as not to confirm them), and you proved yourself to be one of the unbelievers."
39|60| On the Day of Resurrection you will see those who fabricated falsehood in attribution to God with their faces darkened by grief and ignominy. Is there not in Hell a dwelling for those (too) arrogant (for faith)!
39|61| But God will save (from Hell) those who keep from disobedience to God in reverence for Him and piety by virtue of what they have achieved (in following God’s way). Evil will never touch them, nor will they grieve.
39|62| God is the Creator of all things, and He is the Guardian (with power of disposition) over all things.
39|63| His are the keys of (the treasures of) the heavens and the earth. So those who disbelieve in God’s Revelations and signs (of the truth) – such are they who are the losers.
39|64| Say: "(That being the truth) do you still call me to worship other than God, O ignorant ones?"
39|65| Indeed it has been revealed to you as well as to those (Messengers) sent before you: "Should you associate partners with God, your labor will most certainly come to nothing and you will most certainly be among the losers.
39|66| Rather: worship God alone, and be among the thankful."
39|67| They have no true judgment of God as His right, such as His being God requires, and (such is His Power and Sovereignty that) the whole earth will be in His Grasp on the Day of Resurrection, and the heavens will be rolled up in His Right Hand. All-Glorified is He, and absolutely exalted above what they associate with Him.
39|68| The Trumpet will be blown, and so all who are in the heavens and all who are on the earth will fall dead, except those whom God wills to exempt. Then it will be blown for the second time, and see, they have all stood upright, looking on (in anticipation).
39|69| And the earth (altered from what it was) will be bright and clearly visible throughout by the Light of its Lord, and the Record (of the deeds of responsible beings endowed with free will) will be laid out, and the Prophets and the Witnesses will be brought forward, and it will be judged among them (conscious, responsible beings) with truth (concerning that on which they used to differ), and they will not be wronged.
39|70| And every soul will be paid in full whatever (good or evil) it has done (in the world); and indeed He knows best all that they do.
39|71| Those who disbelieve (and die unbelievers) will be led to Hell in companies. Until when they arrive there, its doors will immediately be opened and its keepers will ask them: "Did there not come to you Messengers from among you, reciting to you the Revelations of your Lord and warning you of this Day that you were to encounter?" They will answer: "Yes, indeed!" But the word of (God’s) punishment upon the unbelievers is fulfilled.
39|72| They will be told: "Enter through the doors of Hell, to abide therein." How evil is the dwelling of those (too) arrogant (to believe).
39|73| Those who keep from disobedience to their Lord in reverence for Him and piety will be led to Paradise in companies. Until when they arrive there, its doors will be opened (as sheer grace from God), and its keepers will welcome them saying: "Peace be upon you! Well you have faired and are purified (from the foul residues of sin, and delivered from all suffering), so enter it (Paradise) to abide!"
39|74| And they say: "All praise and gratitude are for God, Who has fulfilled His promise to us, and has made us inheritors of this land (of bliss), so that We may dwell in Paradise as we please!" Then: how excellent is the reward of the doers (of good deeds in obedience and devotion to God)!
39|75| And you (O Messenger) will see the angels surrounding the Supreme Throne (of God), glorifying their Lord with His praise. It has been judged among them with truth and justice, and it will be said (by all the people of Paradise): "All praise and gratitude are for God, the Lord of the worlds!"
40|1| Ha. Mim.
40|2| (This is) the Book being sent down in parts from God, the All-Glorious with irresistible might, the All-Knowing.
40|3| The Forgiver of sins and the Accepter of repentance, and yet severe in retribution, and limitless in His bounty. There is no deity but He. To Him is the homecoming.
40|4| None dispute concerning God’s Revelations and signs (in creation, human life and history) but those who obstinately disbelieve. But let not their strutting about the land in pomp and apparent domination deceive you.
40|5| Before them the people of Noah denied (God’s Revelations and signs), and so did the communities who came after them (and who have been mentioned in the Qur’an). Every community plotted against the Messenger sent to them to capture him (then kill or expel him), and they struggled (against God’s Message) with falsehood, so as to render the truth void thereby; but then I seized them, and (see) how was My retribution!
40|6| And thus your Lord’s word has proven true against the unbelievers, that surely they are companions of the Fire.
40|7| Those (angels) who bear the Supreme Throne (of God), and the others around it glorify their Lord with His praise; and they believe in Him (as the Unique Deity, Lord, and Sovereign of all creation), and ask for His forgiveness for those (among His creation) who believe, saying: "Our Lord! You embrace all things with mercy and knowledge (having perfect knowledge of every creature’s need and answering that need with mercy), so forgive those who repent (of their sins) and follow Your way, and protect them from the punishment of the Blazing Flame.
40|8| "Our Lord! Admit them into the Gardens of perpetual bliss which You have promised them, and those who are righteous from among their forebears, and their spouses, and their offspring. Surely You are the All-Glorious with irresistible might, the All-Wise.
40|9| "And protect them from (doing) evil deeds (and the consequences thereof on the Day of Judgment). Whoever You protect from evils on that Day, You have surely had mercy on him; and that is the supreme triumph."
40|10| As for those who obstinately disbelieve (and die unbelievers), it is proclaimed to them (while they are in Hell): "God’s ‘abhorrence’ of you is greater than your (present) abhorrence of yourselves and each other (because of your being the cause of the punishment you suffer), for you used to be called to faith but you persistently refused to believe."
40|11| They will say: "Our Lord! You have made us die twice, and given us life twice, so (we have become fully convinced of the truth of all that You have informed us of, and) we acknowledge our sins (of unbelief). Is there, then, any way to get out (so that we may believe and do good, righteous deeds)?"
40|12| "That (your being in Hell) is so because when the One God alone is invoked, you obstinately refuse to believe, but when partners are associated with Him, you believe. Then (whatever you do), the judgment rests with God, the All-Exalted, the All-Great."
40|13| He it is Who shows you His signs (in the universe as well as within yourselves, your life, and in history, which demonstrate His Oneness), and sends down provision for you from the heaven. But none reflect and are mindful save those who (being without prejudice) turn to God in penitence.
40|14| So (O believers,) invoke God alone, sincere in your faith in Him and practicing the Religion purely for His sake, however hateful this may be to the unbelievers.
40|15| He is exalted above all degrees, Owner of the Supreme Throne. He conveys the Spirit (the life-giving Revelation, from the immaterial realm) of His command to whom He wills of His servants, so as to warn (conscious, responsible beings) of the Day of Meeting (when His servants will meet Him).
40|16| The Day when they will come forth (from death), with nothing of them being hidden from God. Whose is the absolute Sovereignty on that Day? It is God’s, the One, the All-Overwhelming (with absolute sway over all that exist).
40|17| On that Day every soul will be recompensed for what it has earned; no wrong (will be done to any) on that Day. God is Swift at reckoning.
40|18| Warn them of the Day that draws near, when the hearts will come right up to the throats, choking them. The wrongdoers will have no intimate friend, nor any intercessor who will be heeded.
40|19| God knows the treacheries of the eyes and all that the bosoms conceal.
40|20| God judges with truth, whereas those whom they invoke apart from Him do not judge at all. Surely God is He Who is the All-Hearing, the All-Seeing.
40|21| Have they never traveled about the earth that they may see what was the outcome for those (who obstinately disbelieved in Our signs) before them? They were greater than them in power and in the marks (they left) on the land. Then God seized them for their sins, and they had none to protect them against God.
40|22| That was because the Messengers sent to them came to them with clear proofs of the truth, but they obstinately disbelieved; and so God seized them. Surely He is All-Strong, Severe in retribution.
40|23| We surely sent Moses with clear signs from Us (including miracles to support him), and a manifest authority,
40|24| To the Pharaoh, and Haman, and Korah, but they said: "(This man is) a sorcerer, a liar!"
40|25| When he brought them the truth from Our Presence (so clearly that they could not deny it), they said: "Kill the sons of those who believe (in his Message) along with him and let live their womenfolk (for further humiliation and suffering)." But the scheming of unbelievers is but bound to fail.
40|26| The Pharaoh said (to his chiefs): "Let me kill Moses, and let him call upon his Lord! I fear lest he alter your religion (replacing it with his), or lest he provoke disorder in the land."
40|27| Moses said: "Indeed I seek refuge in my Lord, Who is your Lord as well, from every haughty one who disbelieves in the Day of Reckoning."
40|28| (At just that moment) a believing man from among the household of the Pharaoh, who until then had concealed his faith, (came forward and) said: "Would you kill a man only because he declares, ‘My Lord is God!’, when he has indeed come to you with clear proofs from your Lord? If he be a liar, then his lie will be (reckoned) against him; but if he is true (in his proclamations), then something of what he threatens you with will befall you. Surely God does not guide (either to truth or to any achievement) one who (transgressing all bounds) is wasteful (of his God-given faculties), and a liar.
40|29| "O my people! You enjoy the dominion today, being uppermost in the land; but who could help us against the punishment of God, should it come to us?" The Pharaoh said (to his people): "I would show you only what I see (as needing to be done), and I guide you only to the right way (to follow)."
40|30| But he who believed said: "O my people! I do indeed fear for you the like of the day (of disaster) of the communities (that, before you, also denied the Messengers sent to them);
40|31| "The like of what befell the people of Noah, the ‘Ad, and the Thamud, and others that came after them; and God never wills any wrong for (His) servants.
40|32| "O my people! I do indeed fear for you the Day of the Summons (the Day when people will vainly be calling out to one another for help, and cursing one another in distress);
40|33| "The Day when you will (strive in vain desperation) to turn and flee (from the Fire), having none to protect you from (the punishment of) God. Whomever God leads astray, there is no guide.
40|34| "And (reflect that) Joseph brought to you the manifest truths before, but you never ceased to doubt as to what he brought you. But when he finally died, you said that God would no longer send a Messenger after him. Thus God leads astray one who (transgressing all bounds) is wasteful (of his God-given faculties), persistently doubting (without good reason) –
40|35| "Those who dispute concerning God’s signs and Revelations without any authority that has reached them. It is grievous and loathsome in the sight of God and those who believe. Thus God impresses (a seal) on every haughty, tyrant’s heart."
40|36| The Pharaoh said: "O Haman! Build me a lofty tower so that I may attain the ways,
40|37| "The ways of (peering into) the skies, and that I may have a look at the God of Moses, even though I am sure that he is a liar." Thus were his evil deeds decked out to be appealing to the Pharaoh, and he was debarred from the (right) way. And the scheme of the Pharaoh ended in nothing but destruction.
40|38| And the one who believed said (continuing his warnings): "O my people! Follow me so that I may guide you to the way of right guidance.
40|39| "O my people! The life of this world is but a (passing) enjoyment, while the Hereafter – that is indeed the home of permanence.
40|40| "Whoever does an evil is not recompensed except with the like of it; whereas whoever does good, righteous deeds – whether man or woman – and is a believer, such will enter Paradise, being provided there without measure.
40|41| "O my people! How is it with me that I call you to salvation when you call me to the Fire!
40|42| "You call me so that I should disbelieve in God and associate with Him partners about whose partnership I have no sure knowledge; and I call you to the All-Glorious with irresistible might (Able to destroy whoever rebels against Him), the All-Forgiving (Who forgives whoever turns to Him in repentance).
40|43| "Without doubt you call me but to one who has no title (to be called to) in the world, or in the Hereafter; our return will be to God, and those who (transgressing all bounds) are wasteful (of their God-given faculties) – they will be companions of the Fire.
40|44| "Soon you will remember all that I now am telling you. As for me, I commit my affair to God (in full submission). Surely God sees the servants well."
40|45| So God preserved him from the evils they schemed (against him), while a most evil punishment overwhelmed the clan (the court and military aristocracy) of the Pharaoh:
40|46| The Fire: they are exposed to it morning and evening; and when the Last Hour comes in (and the Judgment is established, it is ordered): "Admit the clan of the Pharaoh into the severest punishment."
40|47| See, how they will dispute with each other in the Fire; so the weak ones (who blindly obeyed the leaders of unbelief) will say to those who acted arrogantly and oppressed (others): "Surely we were your followers; now can you therefore rid us of (even) a portion of the Fire?"
40|48| Those who were arrogant (and oppressed others) will say: "We are all together in this (Fire)! God has indeed judged between the servants (and all must face a reckoning and meet their deserts)."
40|49| Those who are in the Fire will cry to the keepers of Hell: "Call upon your Lord that He may lighten the punishment for us for one day (at least)."
40|50| (The keepers) will say: "Did not the Messengers sent to you come to you with clear proofs (of the truth)?" They will say, "Yes, indeed." (The keepers then) will say: "Then call (as you like)!" But the call of unbelievers is bound to be in vain.
40|51| Most certainly we help Our Messengers, and those who believe, in the life of this world and on the Day when the Witnesses will stand forth (to testify concerning people’s response to the Messengers) –
40|52| The Day when their excuses will not avail the wrongdoers, and for them there is curse (they will be eternally excluded from God’s mercy), and for them there is the evil abode.
40|53| Most certainly We did grant to Moses the guidance, and We made the Children of Israel inheritors of the Book (after Moses),
40|54| As guidance (for all to follow in their life) and a reminder (with teaching and admonition) for the people of discernment (among them).
40|55| So be patient (O Messenger, with whatever they do), for surely God’s promise (that He always helps His Messengers and the believers) is true; and ask forgiveness for your sins, and glorify your Lord with His praise in the afternoon and morning hours.
40|56| Those who dispute concerning the signs and Revelations of God without any authority that has reached them, (do so because) in their bosoms is a craving for superiority, which they will not attain. But take refuge in God (from their schemes). Surely He is the All-Hearing, the All-Seeing.
40|57| Surely the creation of the heavens and the earth is something greater than the creation of human, but most of humankind do not know (this truth).
40|58| Not equal are the blind and the seeing, nor (are equal) those who believe and do good, righteous deeds, and the doers of evil. Little do you reflect and be mindful!
40|59| The Last Hour is certainly bound to come; there is no doubt in it: Yet, most of humankind do not believe.
40|60| Your Lord has said: "Pray to Me, (and) I will answer you." Those who are too haughty to worship Me will enter Hell abased.
40|61| God it is Who has made the night for you, that you may rest in it, and the day, clear and sight-giving (to work). Indeed God has grace and bounty for humankind, but most of them do not give thanks.
40|62| Such is God, your Lord (Who creates you, and maintains and provides for you), the Creator of all things. There is no deity but He. How then are you turned away from the truth (and adopt false deities to worship)?
40|63| Thus it is: those who obstinately reject God’s signs and Revelations are turned away from the truth.
40|64| God is He Who has made the earth as a fixed abode, and the heaven as a canopy, and has formed you and perfected your forms, and He provides you with pure, wholesome things. Then Blessed and Supreme is God, the Lord of the worlds.
40|65| He is the All-Living, there is no deity but He, so pray to Him, being sincere in your faith in Him and practicing the Religion purely for His sake. All praise and gratitude are for God, the Lord of the worlds.
40|66| Say: "I have been forbidden to worship those whom you invoke apart from God when clear proofs (of the truth) have come to me from my Lord, and I have been ordered to submit myself wholly to the Lord of the worlds."
40|67| He it is Who has created you from earth, then from a drop of (seminal) fluid, then from a clot clinging (to the womb wall), then He brings you forth (into the world) as an infant, then (arranges that) you attain your (age of) full strength, thereafter that you (live long enough to) become old – though there are some of you who are caused to die before (reaching old age) – and that you reach a term appointed by Him, so that you may reason and understand (the truth).
40|68| He it is Who gives life and causes to die; and When He decrees a thing to be, He does but say to it "Be!" and it is.
40|69| Have you not considered those who dispute concerning God’s signs and Revelations, how they are turned about (to different kinds of belief)?
40|70| They have denied the Book (the Qur’an) and whatever (of guidance and wisdom) We have sent Our Messengers with. So in time they will come to know;
40|71| When the chains are around their necks, and fetters (around their legs): they will be dragged,
40|72| In the boiling water, then in the Fire they will be burned.
40|73| Then it is said to them: "Where are those to whom you ascribed Divinity (or Lordship or absolute Sovereignty)
40|74| "Apart from God? (Where are now those whose help you expected?)?" They will say: "They have failed us – or rather, we were not invoking before any (real) thing (which had part in Divinity or Lordship or absolute Sovereignty)." Thus does God lead astray the unbelievers (those who willfully disregard the truth and refuse to believe in it).
40|75| "That (His leading you astray and your punishment) is because you arrogantly exulted on the earth without (sense of the bounds of) right, and because you were arbitrary in your exulting.
40|76| Now enter through the gates of Hell to abide therein. How evil, indeed, is the dwelling of those (too) haughty (to acknowledge the truth).
40|77| So, be patient (O Messenger), for surely God’s promise is true. Whether We let you witness some of what We have promised them, or whether We cause you to die (before it befalls them), still it is to Us that they will return.
40|78| Indeed We sent Messengers before you; among them are those (the exemplary histories of) whom We have already related to you, and among them are those (the exemplary histories of) whom We have not related to you. It is not for a Messenger to bring forth a miracle except by God’s leave. Then, when God’s command is issued, it is judged with truth and justice, and those inventors of vain falsehoods (who associate partners with God and strive to disprove the truth) are brought to loss and ruin.
40|79| God is He Who has made the cattle (for your service), so that you use some of them for riding – and from them you obtain food.
40|80| And you have (many other) benefits in them – that you may attain by them some need in your breasts, and you are borne on them (over land) and on ships (over water).
40|81| He shows you His signs (so that they are manifest to your senses and understanding). Then which of God’s signs do you deny?
40|82| Have they not traveled about the earth that they might see what was the outcome for those before them (who obstinately disbelieved in Our signs)? They were more in numbers than these, and greater in power and the marks (that they left) on the land, but all that they had earned availed them nothing (in the face of God’s displeasure).
40|83| When their Messengers came to them with manifest truths, they chose to remain in pleasure and pride only in the (narrow, superficial) knowledge they had (about the worldly life and the means to enjoy it), and what they used to mock (God’s promised punishment) overwhelmed them.
40|84| Then when they saw Our mighty punishment, they exclaimed: "We have come to believe in God as One and rejected all that we used to associate (with Him)!"
40|85| But their faith when they actually saw Our mighty punishment could not avail them: (that is) God’s way (of dealing with humankind, a way) which has always been in effect for His servants. And so the unbelievers have lost altogether.
41|1| Ha. Mim.
41|2| (This is) the Book being sent down in parts from the All-Merciful (Who embraces all beings with His Mercy), the All-Compassionate (Who has special mercy for the believers).
41|3| A Book whose communications have been spelled out distinctly and made clear, and whose verses are in ordered sequence, a Qur’an (Recitation) in Arabic for a people who have knowledge (and so can appreciate excellence in the use of the language);
41|4| (Being sent) as a bearer of glad tidings (of the recompense for faith and righteousness), and a warner (against the consequences of misguidance). Yet most of them (the Makkan people) turn away, and they do not give ear to it (being inwardly averse, and deaf to its excellence).
41|5| They say: "Our hearts are wrapped in coverings against what you call us to, and in our ears is heaviness, and between us and you is a veil. So take action (such as is in your power), as we are taking action (such as we wish to take)."
41|6| Say: "I am but a mortal like you. But it is revealed to me that your God is the One and Only God. So take the straight path to Him (in correct belief and obedience), and ask His forgiveness (for your sins)." Woe to those who associate partners (with Him).
41|7| Those who do not spend out of their wealth (in alms for the poor and needy), and they are unbelievers in the Hereafter.
41|8| Whereas those who believe and do good, righteous deeds, surely for them is a reward constant and beyond measure.
41|9| Say: "Is it that you (associate partners with and therefore) disbelieve in the One Who created the earth in two days, and (on account of that unbelief) set up rivals to Him (as deities, lords and objects of worship)?" That is the Lord of the worlds.
41|10| He has set in it (the earth) firm mountains rising above it, and bestowed blessings therein, and determined its provisions in due measure (to be obtained) in four periods, in a way to meet the vital necessities of all things and beings, that seek their provision from Him.
41|11| And He directed (His Knowledge, Will, Power, and Favor) to the heaven when it was as a cloud (of gases), and ordered it and the earth, "Come both of you, willingly or unwillingly!" They said: "We have come in willing obedience."
41|12| So He fashioned them (the clouds of gaseous elements which then existed in the place of the heaven) seven heavens in two days and inspired in each heaven its tasks. And We adorned the lowest heaven (the heaven of the world) with lamps (stars), and guard (against every satan who would attempt to steal away information of the Unseen from angels). That is the measured determination of the All-Glorious with irresistible might, the All-Knowing.
41|13| If they turn away in aversion, say (to them): "I have warned you of a punishment striking like the lightning (that struck the tribes of) Ad and Thamud.
41|14| When the Messengers (sent to each) came to them (with all evidence of truth) from every approach, preaching: "Worship none but God alone!" they said: "Had it been the will of our Lord (to send us Messengers to warn us), He would certainly have sent down angels. So we disbelieve in what (you claim) you have been sent with."
41|15| Now, as for the Ad: They acted arrogantly and oppressively in the land against all right, and said: "Who can be superior to us in power?" Did they not see that God, Who created them, is superior to them in power? And they persisted in rejecting Our manifest signs and Revelations.
41|16| So then We sent upon them a furious windstorm through days of disaster, and so We made them taste the punishment of disgrace in the life of this world, while the punishment of the Hereafter is more humiliating. And they will not be helped (to evade it).
41|17| As for the (tribe of) Thamud: We showed them (the straight path of) guidance but they preferred blindness over guidance. So then the lightning-like punishment of humiliation seized them because of what they had been earning for themselves.
41|18| And We saved those who believed and who, in awe of God and reverence for Him, habitually avoided sin.
41|19| And (remind of) the day when the enemies of God will be raised up (from their graves) and gathered for the Fire: they will be driven (to the place of reckoning) in arrays,
41|20| Until when they reach it, their ears, and their eyes, and their skins will bear witness against them as to all that they did habitually.
41|21| They will ask their skins, "Why have you borne witness against us?" They will answer: "God Who makes everything speak has made us speak." It is He Who has created you in the first instance, and to Him you are being brought back.
41|22| You did not seek to veil yourselves (when sinning) without ever considering that your ears or your eyes or your skins would one day bear witness against you. Moreover, you supposed that God did not know most of what you did habitually.
41|23| It is that supposition of yours which you entertained about your Lord that has tumbled you down into perdition, and so you have come to be among the losers.
41|24| If they endure it (or do not endure it), still the Fire will be an everlasting dwelling for them. If they ask for favor (to be saved from it, or do not ask), still they are not of those who will be shown favor (and saved).
41|25| (In return for their preferring unbelief and sinfulness over belief and piety) We have assigned them comrades (of satanic disposition, not right-minded) who deck out their past (deeds) and their present (intentions) to be appealing to them. And the word (the sentence of punishment passed) on the communities of jinn and humankind before them (who were self-righteous in the same way) has also been their due. Surely they are the losers.
41|26| Those who disbelieve say: "Do not listen to this Qur’an, and speak random noise (during its recitation) so that you may prevail over it."
41|27| But We will certainly make those who disbelieve taste a severe punishment, and certainly recompense them for the worst of what they keep doing.
41|28| That is the recompense of God’s enemies – the Fire. Therein they will have the everlasting abode, as a deserving recompense for rejecting Our signs and Revelations obstinately.
41|29| Those who disbelieve will say (as they enter the Fire): "Our Lord! Show us those of both the jinn and humankind that led us astray, that we may trample them underfoot and they will be of the most humiliated!"
41|30| As for those who say, "Our Lord is God," and then follow the Straight Path (in their belief, thought, and actions) without deviation, the angels descend upon them from time to time (in the world as protecting comrades and in the Hereafter, with the message): "Do not fear or grieve; but rejoice in the glad tidings of Paradise which you have been promised.
41|31| "We are your well-wishing comrades and helpers in the Hereafter, as we have been in the life of the world. You will have therein all that your souls desire, and you will have therein all that you ask for.
41|32| "A welcoming gift from the One All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate."
41|33| Who is better in speech than one who calls to God and does good, righteous deeds, and says: "Surely I am of the Muslims (wholly submitted to Him)?"
41|34| Goodness and evil can never be equal. Repel evil with what is better (or best). Then see: the one between whom and you there was enmity has become a bosom friend.
41|35| And none are ever enabled to attain to it (such great virtue) save those who are patient (in adversities and against the temptations of their souls and Satan), and none are ever enabled to attain to it save those who have a great part in human perfections and virtues.
41|36| And if a prompting from Satan should stir in you (when carrying out your mission or during worship or in your daily life), seek refuge in God immediately. He is the One Who is the All-Hearing, the All-Knowing.
41|37| And the night and the day, and the sun and the moon (all the phenomena and objects you see in the universe) are among His signs (guiding to His absolute Oneness). Do not prostrate in adoration of the sun or the moon, but prostrate in adoration of God, Who has created them, if indeed it is Him that you worship.
41|38| If they are too arrogant (to worship Him alone), it is a fact that those who are in the Presence of your Lord (the angels and His sincere servants among humankind and jinn), glorify Him alone by night and day and are tireless (therein).
41|39| And among His signs is this: you see the earth lying low and barren; but when We send down water upon it, it stirs and swells (with life). He Who revives it is certainly the One Who will bring the dead to life. Surely He has full power over everything.
41|40| Surely those who deviate from the right way concerning Our signs (in nature and life) and Revelations are not hidden from Us. Who is in better state – the one who is thrown into the Fire or the one who comes secure on the Day of Resurrection? Do what you will, surely He sees well all that you do.
41|41| Those who disbelieve in this Reminder (the Qur’an) when it comes to them (are among those who will be thrown into the Fire). For it is surely a glorious, unconquerable Book.
41|42| Falsehood can never have access to it, whether from before it or from behind it (whether by arguments and attitudes based on modern philosophies or by attacks from the past based on earlier Scriptures; (it is) the Book being sent down in parts from the One All-Wise, All-Praiseworthy (to Whom all praise and gratitude belong).
41|43| What is said to you (O Messenger) is but that which was said (by the unbelievers) to the Messengers before you. Your Lord is indeed One Who disposes forgiveness, and Who disposes painful retribution.
41|44| If We had made it a Qur’an in a foreign tongue, they (who now reject it) would certainly have said: "If only its communications had been spelled out distinctly and made clear! Why a foreign tongue, and an Arab (to speak it to Arabs)?" Say: "(It is not a Book whose power or purpose is confined by language.) For those who believe, it is a guidance and healing (for their hearts and minds, and all their senses). But as for those who do not believe, in their ears is heaviness, and it is imperceptible to them. They are (like people who are being) called from far off (so the call does not reach their hearing and sight).
41|45| Assuredly We granted Moses the Book, and discordant views arose about it (just as your people, O Messenger, say different things concerning the Book We are revealing to you). Had it not been for a decree already issued by your Lord (postponing the final, decisive judgment until an appointed term), it would indeed have been judged between them. They are (nevertheless) in doubting uncertainty about it (about the Qur’an and their attitude to it).
41|46| Whoever does good, righteous deeds, it is for his own soul’s good, and whoever does evil, it is to its detriment. Your Lord never does the least wrong to His servants.
41|47| To Him alone is referred the knowledge of the Last Hour. And no fruits emerge from their sheaths, and no female conceives or gives birth, but with His Knowledge. And on the Day He will call out to them: "Where now are those (you alleged and proclaimed as) partners to Me?" They will surely say: "We proclaim to You that there is none among us who can testify (to that false claim)."
41|48| And those whom (they made as deities and) invoked before will surely fail them; so they will know for certain that there is no escape for them.
41|49| Human never tires of asking for (what he presumes is) his own good, but if evil befalls him, then he gives up all hope and loses heart.
41|50| And assuredly if We (by Our grace) let him taste a mercy from Us after a hardship that has visited him, he certainly says: "This is but my due (and I can dispose it as I please), and I do not consider that the Last Hour will ever come (so that I should be called to account for it). Even if (it should come, and) I should be brought back to my Lord, I will surely find with Him the best (because I judge myself to always be deserving of what is the best)." Without doubt We will make those who disbelieve understand all that they do (and call them to account), and without doubt We will make them taste a harsh punishment.
41|51| When We bestow favors upon human, he retreats and draws aside (from his Lord), and when evil befalls him, then he has recourse to long supplications.
41|52| Say: "Tell me if it (the Qur’an) is from God and after (knowing that) you have disbelieved in it, then who is more astray than one who is in wide schism (separating himself from the truth)?"
41|53| We will show them Our manifest signs (proofs) in the horizons of the universe and within their own selves, until it will become manifest to them that it (the Qur’an) is indeed the truth. Is it not sufficient (as proof) that your Lord is a witness over all things (just as He is witnessed to by all things)?
41|54| Beware! They are in (willful) doubt about the meeting with God (because they vainly expect to escape accounting for their deeds, and therefore decline to believe in the Qur’an). Beware! He is One Who encompasses all things (in His Knowledge and Power).
42|1| Ha. Mim.
42|2| ‘Ayn. Sin. Qaf.
42|3| Just so: He reveals to you as (He did) to those (whom He chose as Messengers) before you, (being as He is) God, the All-Glorious with irresistible might, the All-Wise.
42|4| His is whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth. And He is the All-Exalted, the Supreme.
42|5| The heavens are all but rent asunder from above them (because of the majesty of Revelation); and the angels glorify their Lord with His praise, and pray for (His establishing a way of guidance for) those on the earth and for forgiveness (of those who follow it). Beware, surely God is He Who is the All-Forgiving, the All-Compassionate.
42|6| As for those who take for themselves others besides God for guardians and confidants, (to whom they entrust their affairs, thereby associating partners with Him): God is ever watchful over them, (preserving a record of their deeds). You are not a guardian over them (responsible for their conduct).
42|7| And just so: (as We revealed these truths to the Messengers before you) We reveal to you a Qur’an (a Recitation) in Arabic so that you may warn the mother-city and all those around it, and warn of the Day of Assembly, about (the coming of) which there is no doubt. One party will be in Paradise, and one party in the Blaze.
42|8| If God had so willed, He would surely have made them a single community (of the same faith and way of life), but He admits whom He wills into His Mercy. As for the wrongdoers, they have neither a guardian (to protect them), nor a helper.
42|9| What? Have they taken for themselves other besides God for guardians and confidants (to whom they entrust their affairs, thereby associating partners with Him)? Rather, God is He Who is the true Guardian, and He will revive the dead, and He has full power over everything.
42|10| "Whatever you differ on, the final judgment about it is with God. Such is God, my Lord: in Him I put my trust, and to Him I turn in devotion:
42|11| The Originator of the heavens and the earth (each with particular features and on ordered principles); He has made for you, from your selves, mates, and from the cattle mates (of their own kind): by this means He multiplies you (and the cattle). There is nothing whatever like Him. He is the All-Hearing, the All-Seeing.
42|12| His are the keys of (the treasures of) the heavens and the earth. He enlarges provision for whom He wills, and straitens it (for whom He wills). Surely He has full knowledge of everything.
42|13| Of the Religion (that He made for humankind and revealed through His Messengers throughout history), He has laid down for you as way of life what He willed to Noah, and that which We reveal to you, and what We willed to Abraham, and Moses, and Jesus, (commanding): "Establish the Religion and do not divide into opposing groups concerning it." What you call people to is hard and distressful for those who associate partners with God. God chooses whom He wills and brings them together (in faith and in obedience) to Himself, and He guides to Himself whoever turns to Him in devotion.
42|14| And they (who follow the previous Ways) were not divided (into opposing groups) until after the knowledge came to them (of the way they must follow and what that entailed, and only) because of envious rivalry and insolence among themselves. Had it not been for a decree already issued by your Lord, (granting people respite and postponing the final, decisive judgment) until an appointed term, it would indeed have been judged between them. Surely those who (succeeded those opposing groups and) inherited the Book, are in doubting uncertainty about it.
42|15| So (O Messenger) call people to that (the way of life God has laid down for you). Pursue what is exactly right (in every matter) as you are commanded (by God). Do not follow their desires and caprices (who follow other ways, including the followers of the previous Scriptures), and say: "I believe in whatever Book God has sent down; and I am commanded to bring about equity among you (without discrimination of race or rank by birth or by wealth or by power). God is our Lord and your Lord. To us are accounted our deeds, and to you, your deeds: (let there be) no contention between us and you: God will bring us all together (and settle any difference between us and you). To Him is the homecoming."
42|16| And as for those who contend about God (defying His Lordship or struggling against His Religion) after His call has been accepted (and His Religion recognized as true), their contention is void in their Lord’s sight, and (His) wrath (condemnation) is upon them, and for them is a severe punishment.
42|17| God is He Who has sent down the Book with truth and the Balance, (setting out the truth and what is right in all matters). And for all you know, the Last Hour may well be near.
42|18| Those who do not believe in it (derisively) ask it to be hastened; whereas those who believe hold it in awe, and know that it is true (certain to come). Be aware! those who dispute concerning the Last Hour have indeed gone far astray.
42|19| God is All-Gracious to His servants. He grants provision to whom He wills (in the manner and degree that He wills); and He is the All-Strong, the All-Glorious with irresistible might.
42|20| Whoever desires (and strives to gain) the harvest of the Hereafter, We increase him in his harvest; and whoever desires the harvest of the world, We grant him out of that, and he has no portion in the Hereafter.
42|21| Or do they have partners with God who have prescribed for them in the Religion what God has not allowed (and so they judge and act however they wish)? Had it not been for a decree (already issued by God, postponing the final, decisive judgment) between people, it would indeed have been judged between them. Surely for the wrongdoers there is a painful punishment.
42|22| You will see the wrongdoers (who presume to lay down a way of life in the name of religion other than God’s) full of fear on account of what they have earned, and it will inevitably befall them. As for those who believe and do good, righteous deeds, they will be in the luxuriant meadows of the Gardens. They will have whatever they wish prepared in God’s Presence. That indeed is the great favor.
42|23| That it is of which God gives the glad tidings to His servants who believe and do good, righteous deeds. Say: "I ask of you no wage for it (for conveying God’s Religion to you which will bring you this favor), but (I ask of you for) love for my near relatives (on account of my mission)." Whoever scores a good deed, We increase him in good in respect of it. Surely God is All-Forgiving, All-Responsive (to gratitude).
42|24| What? Do they say that he (the Messenger) has fabricated a falsehood in attribution to God? If He so wills, He can seal up your heart (so you would not be able to recite to them anything of Revelation. But what you convey to them is the Revelations from Us.) And God blots out falsehood and affirms the truth to be true by His decrees. Surely, God has full knowledge of what lies hidden in the bosoms.
42|25| He is the One Who accepts repentance from His servants and excuses evil deeds, and He knows all that you do.
42|26| He responds with acceptance to (the worship and supplication of) those who believe and do good, righteous deeds, and grants them more out of His bounty (than they asked for). However, as to the unbelievers, for them is a severe punishment.
42|27| If God were always to provide for (all of) His servants in great abundance, they would certainly have transgressed all bounds on the earth, but He sends it down in due measure as He wills. Surely He is fully aware of His servants, and sees them well.
42|28| He it is Who sends down the rain useful in all ways to rescue (them) after they have lost all hope, and spreads out His mercy far and wide (to every being). He it is Who is the Guardian, and the All-Praiseworthy.
42|29| Among His manifest signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth, and that He has dispersed in both of them living creatures. And He has full power to gather them together when He wills.
42|30| Whatever affliction befalls you, it is because of what your hands have earned, and yet He overlooks many (of the wrongs you do).
42|31| You cannot frustrate in the earth (God’s will). You have, apart from God, neither a guardian (to whom you can entrust your affairs) nor a helper.
42|32| And among His manifest signs are the ships running through the sea like (floating) hills.
42|33| If He so wills, He calms the wind and so they lie motionless on its surface. Surely in that are signs for all who are greatly patient and perseverant (in adversity for His sake), and greatly thankful (for His favors).
42|34| Or He causes them (the ships) to sink because of what they (the travelers) have earned; and yet He overlooks many (of their wrongs).
42|35| Those who dispute concerning Our signs and Revelations should know that they have no (escape, nor any) place of refuge.
42|36| Whatever thing you are granted is but for the passing enjoyment of the present, worldly life, but what God keeps for you in the Hereafter is much better and more enduring for those who believe and put their trust in their Lord;
42|37| Those who avoid the major sins and indecent, shameful deeds (which are indeed to be counted among major sins), and when they become angry, even then they forgive (rather than retaliate in kind).
42|38| And those who answer the call of their Lord and obey Him (in His orders and prohibitions), and establish the Prayer in conformity with its conditions; and whose affairs are by consultation among themselves; and who spend out of what We provide for them (to provide sustenance for the needy, and in God’s cause);
42|39| And those who, when an unjust aggression is inflicted on (any or all of) them, defend themselves and one another (to end the aggression).
42|40| The recompense of an evil deed can only be an evil equal to it; but whoever pardons and makes reconciliation, his reward is due from God. Surely He does not love the wrongdoers.
42|41| But whoever defends himself and restores his right (in the lawful way) after he has been wronged – against such there is no route (of blame and retaliation).
42|42| The route (of blame and retaliation) is only against those who wrong people and behave rebelliously on earth, offending against all right. For such there is a painful punishment.
42|43| But indeed whoever shows patience and forgives (the wrong done to him), surely that is a very meritorious thing, a matter of great resolution.
42|44| Whoever (due to his choice) God leads astray, he will no longer have any guardian (to help and support him). You will see the wrongdoers, when they see the punishment, saying: "Is there any way back (to the world for us to become righteous people)?"
42|45| You will see them brought before it (Hell), in fear and humbled by disgrace, and looking around with furtive look. And those who believe will say: "Those are the real losers who have ruined their own selves and their families on the Resurrection Day." Be aware: the wrongdoers are in an enduring punishment.
42|46| And they will surely have no guardians to help them apart from God (only He is the Guardian with power to help His servants, as He wills). Whoever God leads astray, he can no longer have a way (to guidance and eternal happiness).
42|47| Answer the call of your Lord before there comes to you a Day which God will not remove (from them) and none can prevent Him from bringing it. You will have no refuge on that Day nor power of denial (of any of your sins or of your identity).
42|48| But (do not grieve) if they turn away in aversion (from your call, O Messenger): We have not sent you (as a Messenger) so as to be their keeper (to prevent their misdeeds or carry accountability for them). What rests with you is but to convey (God’s Message) fully. Indeed, when We favor human with a taste of mercy, he rejoices in it (without ever thinking to express gratitude to Him Who favored him). But if an evil befalls them because of what their hands have forwarded, surely then human is ungrateful.
42|49| To God belongs the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth. He creates whatever He wills. He grants to whom He wills daughters and grants to whom He wills sons.
42|50| Or He mingles them, both sons and daughters (granted to whom He wills); and He leaves barren whom He wills. Surely He is All-Knowing, All-Powerful.
42|51| It is not for any mortal that God should speak to him unless it be by Revelation or from behind a veil, or by sending a messenger (angel) to reveal, by His leave, whatever He wills (to reveal). Surely He is All-Exalted, All-Wise.
42|52| And thus (in the ways mentioned) We have revealed to you a spirit of Our command (the life-giving Message, the Qur’an). You would not (otherwise) have known what the Book was (with all the knowledge it contains and the way of life it establishes), and what faith was (as described by the Book and with all its principles, requirements, and implications). But We have made it a light by which We guide whom We will of Our servants. And certainly you, (by God’s guidance) guide (people) to a straight path –
42|53| The path of God, to Him belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth. Be aware: all affairs are ultimately referred to God.
43|1| Ha. Mim.
43|2| By the Book clear in itself and clearly showing the truth,
43|3| We have made it a Recitation (a Qur’an) in Arabic so that you may reason (and understand it and the wisdom in its revelation).
43|4| Surely it is in the Mother Book with Us, exalted, firm and decisive.
43|5| Shall We take away this Reminder from you (and leave you to your own devices), because you are a people wasteful (of your God-given faculties and committing excesses)?
43|6| How many a Prophet have We sent to convey Our Message among the former peoples,
43|7| And there never came to them a Prophet but they mocked him.
43|8| So We destroyed peoples mightier than these in prowess, and the illustrative histories of those (destroyed peoples) have already have been related.
43|9| If you ask them who has created the heavens and the earth, they most certainly say (in answer), "The One All-Glorious with irresistible might, the All-Knowing, has created them;"
43|10| He Who has made the earth a cradle for you, and has set on it roads for you so that you may find your way.
43|11| And Who sends down water from the sky in a measure, and We raise a dead land to life with it. Even so will you be (raised from the dead and) brought forth (from your graves).
43|12| And Who has created all the pairs (of all things), and has enabled for you ships and cattle on which you ride,
43|13| So that you sit secure on their backs, then remember and reflect on the favor of your Lord, and when you settle securely on them, say: "All-Glorified is He Who has subjugated this to our use. We were never capable (of accomplishing this by ourselves).
43|14| "And surely, to our Lord we are indeed bound to return."
43|15| Yet they attribute to Him (fatherhood of) some among His servants. Human is indeed ungrateful, obviously.
43|16| What! has He taken to Himself daughters out of all that He creates, and "honored" you with sons?
43|17| When any of them is given the news of the birth of what he accepts as appropriate for the All-Merciful, his face darkens, choking with anger.
43|18| "What! (Am I to have a daughter –) one who is brought up in adornments, and unable to be clear in disputation?"
43|19| And yet they have judged the angels, who are themselves the servants of the All-Merciful, to be females (whom they judge to be of little value, and yet regard as His daughters). Did they witness their creation? This testimony of theirs will be recorded, and they will be called to account (for this falsehood in the Hereafter).
43|20| They also say: "If the All-Merciful had so willed, we would not have worshipped them (our deities, including angels)." They have no knowledge whatever of that (the relationship of Divine Will and human will and actions). Indeed, they only judge and speak according to their own fancies and interests.
43|21| Or did We give them a Book before this (Qur’an) and so they are holding fast to it (and worshipping their false deities by its authority)?
43|22| Not at all! (Indeed, their only argument is that) they say: "We have found our forefathers following a certain religion, and we are led in their footsteps."
43|23| In just that way, We never sent a warner to a township before you but those of its people who had been lost in the pursuit of pleasures without scruples reacted, saying: "We have found our forefathers following a religion, and we certainly follow in their footsteps."
43|24| He (who was sent to warn them) said: "What! even though I have come to you with better guidance than what you have found your forefathers following?" They said: "Surely we are unbelievers in that with which you have been sent."
43|25| So then We took Our retribution on them. So look: how was the outcome for those who denied (God’s Messengers)?
43|26| And (remember) when Abraham (who rejected following the way of his forefathers blindly) said to his father and his people: "I am indeed free of all that you worship.
43|27| "I worship only Him Who has originated me with a particular nature, and He will guide me (to the truth and to eternal happiness)."
43|28| And He left it as a Word to endure among those who would come after him, so that they may return (from worshipping false deities to the worship of One God).
43|29| Indeed I have allowed these (people of Makkah), as I had allowed their forefathers, to enjoy their lives until when the truth and a Messenger came to them, making the truth clear, (and embodying it in every element of his life and character).
43|30| But now the truth has come to them, they say: "This is sorcery and we are unbelievers in it."
43|31| They also say: "If only this Qur’an had been sent down on a man of leading position of the two (chief) cities!"
43|32| Is it they who distribute the mercy of your Lord (so that they may appoint whom they wish as Messenger to receive the Book)? (Moreover, how do they presume to value some above others only because of their wealth or status, when) it is also We Who distribute their means of livelihood among them in the life of this world, and raise some of them above others in degree, so that they may avail themselves of one another’s help? But your Lord’s mercy (in particular Prophethood) is better than what they amass (in this life).
43|33| And were it not that all people would become one community (around unbelief), We might well have provided for everyone who disbelieves in the All-Merciful roofs of silver for their houses, and (silver) stairways on which to go up,
43|34| And (silver) doors for their houses, and (silver) couches on which to recline,
43|35| And also adornments of gold (and other jewelry). Yet all this is nothing but a (fleeting) enjoyment of the present, worldly life. And the Hereafter with your Lord is only for the God-revering, pious.
43|36| Whoever willfully ignores the remembrance of the All-Merciful (and lives as if He did not exist always watching him), We assign to him a devil, who becomes his closest comrade.
43|37| Such devils certainly bar them from the way (of truth). Yet they think (in themselves) that they are rightly guided.
43|38| But in the end, when such a one comes to Us (on Judgment Day), he says (to his comrade): "Ah, would that between me and you were the distance of the two easts. How evil a comrade!"
43|39| "It is of no avail to you at all today (this remorse after death). For you did wrong (in the world), and you will suffer the punishment together."
43|40| (Although this is the truth and clear to you, O Messenger,) can you make the deaf hear or guide the blind and him who is lost in obvious error?
43|41| And whether We take you away from among them, and then We take retribution on them;
43|42| Or We let you see (in your lifetime) the fulfillment of what We have promised them: (either way) We have full power over them.
43|43| So hold fast to what is revealed to you. Surely you are on a straight path (in all matters).
43|44| Indeed, it (the Qur’an) is a Reminder for you and for your people, in which lie your honor and happiness (in both worlds). And you (all people) will be questioned (about how it was understood, and how lived).
43|45| And ask (their true followers about) those of Our Messengers whom We sent before you: Did We ever enable deities to be worshipped apart from the All-Merciful?
43|46| Assuredly We sent Moses to the Pharaoh and his chiefs with Our clear signs (miracles demonstrating Our being the sole Deity and Lord to be worshipped), and he said: "I am a Messenger of the Lord of the worlds."
43|47| But when he came to them with Our clear signs (miracles), they then ridiculed them.
43|48| We displayed to them sign after sign, each greater than the other, and We seized them with (diverse forms of) punishment so that they might turn back (from the way they followed).
43|49| (Whenever We seized them with a punishment) they would say (to Moses): "O Sorcerer! Pray for us to your Lord by the covenant He has made with you (that He will remove affliction from us if we believe); for we will surely accept the right guidance."
43|50| But when We removed the punishment from them, they then broke their promise.
43|51| The Pharaoh made this proclamation among his people: "O my people! Does not the dominion of Egypt belong to me, as well as these rivers flowing beneath me? Will you not see the truth?
43|52| "And, am I not better than this man, who is despicable and can scarcely express himself clearly?
43|53| "(If he is true in his claim) why are bracelets of gold not dropped upon him (from the sky), or why do there not come with him angels (to support him in his cause)?"
43|54| Thus did he make fools of his people and demeaned them, and they obeyed him. Assuredly they were a people given to transgression.
43|55| So finally when they incurred Our condemnation, We took retribution on them, and We caused them to drown all together.
43|56| So We made them a thing of the past, and a precedent (in entering the Fire), and an example to later generations.
43|57| And when (Jesus) the son of Mary has been presented as an example (of God’s Power and Oneness and to refute his being deified by many Christians), your people turn from it in disdain;
43|58| And they say, "Are our deities better or is he?" They put it to you only for disputation. Indeed, they are a people addicted to contentiousness.
43|59| Surely he (Jesus) was not other than a servant (worshipping God), whom We favored (with Messengership), and We made him a miraculous example for the Children of Israel (to follow and mend their ways).
43|60| If We had so willed, We could have made some from among you angels, succeeding each other on the earth.
43|61| Surely he (Jesus) (brought into the world without a father, and granted such miracles as reviving the dead) is a means to knowledge of the Last Hour, so do not feel any doubt concerning it and follow Me (to attain eternal happiness in the other life). This is a straight path.
43|62| And never let Satan debar you (from the Straight Path). Surely he is a manifest enemy.
43|63| When Jesus came with manifest truths (and miracles), he said: "I have come to you with the Wisdom (the truths and essentials of faith and good life), and so that I may make clear to you some of what you differ on (matters that require clarification for your good in both worlds). So keep from disobedience to God in reverence for Him and piety, and obey me.
43|64| "Surely God is He Who is my Lord as well as your Lord, so worship Him (alone). This is a straight path."
43|65| However, parties (that arose and held differing views concerning him and his teachings) fell into disagreement among themselves. Then woe to those who do the greatest wrong (by corrupting his teachings) because of the punishment of a painful Day.
43|66| Do they (who persist in unbelief and evil deeds) wait but for the Last Hour – (waiting) that it come upon them all of a sudden, being unaware and indifferent toward it?
43|67| Those who are intimate friends (in the world) will be enemies one to another on that Day, except the God-revering, pious. (They will hear:)
43|68| "O My servants! You will have no fear today, nor will you grieve!
43|69| "(You) who have believed in My signs and Revelations, and have submitted to Me wholly (as Muslims).
43|70| "Enter Paradise, you and your (believing) spouses, made contented."
43|71| Trays of gold and goblets will be passed round them; and there will be therein all that souls desire, and eyes delight in, "and you will abide therein.
43|72| "That is the Paradise which is made your inheritance in return for what you used to do (in the world).
43|73| "In it there is for you fruit (of all kinds) in abundance, to eat therefrom."
43|74| But the disbelieving criminals will abide in the punishment of Hell.
43|75| It will not be abated for them, and therein they are in despair (of any mercy and hope of escape).
43|76| We have not wronged them, but they are the wrongdoers (who ever wronged themselves).
43|77| They will call out (to the chief keeper of Hell): "O Malik! Let your Lord make an end of us!" He says: "You are bound to remain (therein)!"
43|78| We have brought you the truth, assuredly, but most of you are averse to the truth.
43|79| Or are they settling on some plan (against you, O Messenger)? But We have already settled a "plan" (against them).
43|80| Or do they think that We do not hear their secrets (that they whisper only to themselves,) and their private counsels? Indeed We do, and Our messengers (angels) are by them, recording.
43|81| Say: "If the All-Merciful had a child, I would be the first to worship."
43|82| All-Glorified is the Lord of the heavens and the earth, the Lord of the Supreme Throne, (exalted) above all that they attribute (to Him in ignorance and falsehood).
43|83| So leave them plunging about in play and amusement until the Day which they have been promised.
43|84| And He it is Who is God in the heaven (exclusively deserving of worship), and God on the earth (exclusively deserving of worship). He is the All-Wise, the All-Knowing.
43|85| Blessed and Supreme is He to Whom belongs the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth, and all that is between them; and with Him is the knowledge of the Last Hour. And to Him you are on the way to return.
43|86| Those whom they (deify and then) invoke apart from God have no power and permission to intercede (with God in either world); only those who bear witness to the truth (of God’s absolute Oneness in Divinity, Lordship, and Sovereignty), and who have knowledge (of the truth, will have it).
43|87| If you ask them who has created them, they will certainly say, "God." How then are they turned away from the truth and make false claims?
43|88| (God certainly hears His Messenger when) he says: "O my Lord! Surely those are a people who do not believe."
43|89| Yet forbear and pardon them, and (when you go your way,) say, "Peace (be upon you)!" In time, they will come to know.
44|1| Ha. Mim.
44|2| By the Book clear in itself and clearly showing the truth.
44|3| We sent it down on a night full of blessings; surely We have ever been warning (humankind since their creation).
44|4| In that night every affair is identified and made distinct for wise purposes,
44|5| As a command issued from Our Presence; surely We have ever been sending Messengers (from among the angels and human beings to convey Our decrees and guide),
44|6| As a mercy from your Lord – surely He is the All-Hearing, the All-Knowing –
44|7| The Lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them, if you would but seek certainty (about the Messenger and the Book he brings).
44|8| There is no deity but He, giving life and causing to die; your Lord and the Lord of your forefathers.
44|9| Yet (they do not desire certainty; instead) they are in an irrecoverable doubt, lost in the playthings of the worldly life.
44|10| Then watch (O Messenger) for the day when the sky will bring forth a visible smoke,
44|11| Which will engulf the people, (causing them to exclaim): "This is a painful punishment.
44|12| "Our Lord! Remove this punishment from us, for now we are true believers."
44|13| How is a reminder possible for them (such that their profession of faith could be true), seeing that there has come to them a Messenger making the truth clear (and embodying it in every element of his life and character),
44|14| But they turn away from him and say (of him): "One taught by others, a madman."
44|15| We will hold back the punishment for a little (while), but you will turn back (to your former ways of unbelief, whose outcome is a punishment everlasting) –
44|16| On the day when We will seize with the mightiest grasp. We will indeed take retribution.
44|17| Before them, assuredly We tried the people of the Pharaoh, when there came to them a noble Messenger,
44|18| Saying: "Deliver to me the servants of God! I am a trustworthy Messenger sent to you (by God).
44|19| "And do not exalt yourself in proud defiance against God (by disobeying His order and so rejecting my Messengership). Surely I have come to you with an evident authority.
44|20| "I have sought refuge in my Lord, Who is surely also your Lord, from your stoning me to death.
44|21| "If you will not believe in me, then keep away from me (let me go)!"
44|22| Then he called upon his Lord: "These are indeed a guilty people committed to accumulating sin."
44|23| Then (his Lord commanded him): "Set forth with My servants by night. You are sure to be pursued.
44|24| "And now leave the sea in quiet (as it was when it divided for you), for they are a host destined to be drowned."
44|25| How many were the gardens and springs that they left behind;
44|26| And cornfields, and excellent dwellings, and elevated, honored situations;
44|27| And other comforts of life, in which they used to take delight!
44|28| Just so! And We made another people heirs (to the bounties they enjoyed).
44|29| And neither the heaven nor the earth shed tears over them, nor were they given a respite (when the punishment became due on them).
44|30| And indeed We delivered the Children of Israel from the humiliating persecutions
44|31| Of the Pharaoh. He was indeed a haughty tyrant committing excesses.
44|32| And with knowledge (deliberately and for a purpose known to Us) We chose them (the Children of Israel) over all other peoples (in their time).
44|33| And (as a favor) We granted them many signs (miracles), in which there was a manifest trial.
44|34| Yet these (Makkan polytheist) people say with emphasis:
44|35| "There is nothing beyond our first death, and we will not be raised again.
44|36| "If you are truthful (in claiming that the dead will be raised to a new life), then bring back our forefathers."
44|37| What? Are they better (in wealth and power), or were the people of Tubba‘ and the others (that We destroyed) before them? We destroyed them, for they were disbelieving criminals committed to accumulating sins.
44|38| We have not created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in play and fun.
44|39| We have created them only with truth (for meaningful purposes, and on solid foundations of truth), but most people do not know.
44|40| Surely the Day of Judgment and Distinction (between the truth and falsehood and the righteous and the sinful) is the time appointed for them all;
44|41| The Day when no guardian will be of any avail to one supported and protected, and none will be helped;
44|42| Save those on whom God will have mercy. Surely He is the All-Glorious with irresistible might (Whose punishment no one can escape), the All-Compassionate (especially toward His believing servants).
44|43| (Here is) the tree of Zaqqum,
44|44| The food of him addicted to sinning,
44|45| Like molten brass; it will boil in their bellies,
44|46| Like the boiling of hot water.
44|47| "(O angels of Hell!) Take him (the sinful one) and drag him into the midst of the Blazing Flame!
44|48| "Then pour over his head boiling water as punishment."
44|49| "Taste! (Only in your own judgment) were you mighty, honorable, and noble.
44|50| "And this (what you are suffering now) is that which you used to doubt!"
44|51| Whereas the God-revering, pious ones will be in a position absolutely secure (from any evil),
44|52| Amid gardens and springs (of Paradise);
44|53| Dressed in fine silk and silk brocade, (seated) face to face.
44|54| Just so it will be. And We will assign for them maidens pure, most beautiful of eye.
44|55| There they call for every kind of fruit in security (from any harm).
44|56| They will not taste death therein, except the first death (of leaving the world); and He has preserved them from the punishment of the Blazing Flame;
44|57| As a grace from your Lord. That is the supreme triumph.
44|58| So (to enable you for that triumph) We have made this Qur’an easy to understand by revealing it in your tongue, so that they may remember and be mindful (and order their lives according to it).
44|59| Then wait (O Messenger, and watch (how they react and how they fare); they too are waiting (to see how your mission will fare).
45|1| Ha. Mim.
45|2| (This is) the Book being sent down in parts from God, the All-Glorious with irresistible might, the All-Wise.
45|3| In the heavens and on the earth there are indeed (clear) signs for the believers (pointing to God’s Existence, Oneness, and Lordship);
45|4| And in your creation and His scattering (innumerable kinds of) living creatures (through the earth) there are (clear) signs for a people who seek certainty of faith (in His existence, Oneness, and Lordship).
45|5| And in the alternation of night and day (with their periods shortening and lengthening), and in the provision (rain) God sends down from the sky and reviving thereby the earth after its death, and in His turning about of the winds — (in all this) there are (clear) signs for a people who are able to reason and understand.
45|6| Those are the Revelations of God that We recite to you (through Gabriel) with truth. In what other statement, if not in God and His Revelations, will they, then, believe?
45|7| Woe to everyone addicted to inventing falsehoods, addicted to sinning:
45|8| He hears God’s Revelations recited to him, and yet he persists in unbelief haughtily as if he had not heard them. So give him the glad tidings of a painful punishment.
45|9| When he has come to some knowledge of Our signs (whether in the universe or in the Qur’an), he takes them in mockery. For such there is a humiliating punishment.
45|10| In front of them there is Hell; and all that they have earned (of this world) will be of no avail whatever to them, and nor will those whom (apart from God and in defiance of Him) they have taken as guardians (to entrust their affairs to). For them there is a mighty punishment.
45|11| This (Qur’an) is the guidance, and for those who disbelieve in the signs and Revelations of their Lord there is a painful punishment of loathsome kind (brought on by their loathsome deeds).
45|12| God it is Who has made the sea to be of service to you by making it subservient (to His command) so that the ships may run through it by His command, and that you may seek of His bounty, and that (in return) you may give thanks.
45|13| He has also made of service to you whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth, all is from Him (a gift of His Grace). Surely in this there are (clear) signs for a people who reflect.
45|14| Tell those who believe that they should pardon those who do not hope for the coming of the Days of God (when He will make them understand what their unbelief means), seeing that He will recompense people for what they have earned.
45|15| Whoever does a good, righteous deed, it is for (the good of) his own soul; and whoever does an evil, it is against it. Thereafter (in all events) it is to your Lord that you will be brought back.
45|16| We did for sure grant to the Children of Israel the Book, and the authority to judge (by the Book), and Prophethood; and We provided them with pure, wholesome things, and exalted them above all other peoples (of their time).
45|17| And We granted them clear proofs concerning the affairs and commands of the Religion.; and it was only after all this knowledge came to them that they differed through envious rivalry and insolence among themselves. Surely your Lord will judge among them on the Day of Resurrection concerning that on which they used to differ.
45|18| Thereafter (in this conclusive Revelation) We have set you on a way of life (Shari‘ah) based on the Religion, so follow it and do not follow the lusts and fancies of those who do not know (the Divine Guidance).
45|19| They surely cannot be of any avail to you as against God. And surely the wrongdoers (who, out of their caprices, follow ways other than that on which God has set you) are guardians of one another. Whereas God is the Guardian of the God-revering, pious.
45|20| This (Qur’an which teaches the way of life God has prescribed) is perception and insight (into the truth) for humankind, and guidance and mercy for people who seek certainty of faith.
45|21| What? Do those who commit evil deeds think that We hold them equal with those who believe and do good, righteous deeds – equal in respect of their life and their death? How evil is their judgment!
45|22| God has created the heavens and the earth in truth (for meaningful purpose, on solid foundations of truth and embodying it), and so that every soul may be recompensed for what it has earned (in this world), and they will not be wronged.
45|23| Do you ever consider him who has taken his lusts for his deity, and whom God has (consequently) led astray though he has knowledge (of guidance and straying), and sealed his hearing and his heart, and put a cover on his sight? Who, then, can guide him after God (has led him astray)? Will you not then reflect and be mindful?
45|24| And they say: "There is nothing but only our life in this world. Some of us die while others continue to live; and nothing causes us to perish but Time (the processes of decline and decay)." But they have no (sure and true) knowledge about this (the real nature and meaning of life and death, and the life after it). They merely follow their conjectures.
45|25| When Our Revelations, clear as evidence and in meaning are recited (and conveyed) to them, they have no argument except to say: "Bring back our forefathers, if you are truthful in your claim."
45|26| Say: "God gives you life, then causes you to die, then He will gather you together for the Day of Resurrection, about (the coming of) which there is no doubt. But most people do not know (being content with narrow conjectures and ignorant suppositions).
45|27| To God belongs the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth. On the Day when the Last Hour stands forth (and the Judgment is established), on that Day those who invented and followed falsehood will be ruined in loss;
45|28| And you will see every community gathered together and kneeling down (in fear). Every community will be called to its record of deeds (to account for whatever it did in the world). "This Day you will be recompensed for what you used to do.
45|29| "This is Our Book (the record of your deeds that We prepared), speaking the truth against you. Assuredly We have had transcribed what you used to do (in the world)."
45|30| Then: as for those who believed and did good, righteous deeds, their Lord will admit them into (Paradise, which is the embodiment of) His mercy. That is the obvious triumph.
45|31| As for those who disbelieved (there will be this reproach): "Were My Revelations not recited to you (indeed, recited repeatedly) but you in arrogance scorned them, and proved yourselves a guilty people committed to accumulating sin?
45|32| "When it was proclaimed that God’s promise is true and that there is no doubt about the coming of the Last Hour, you said: ‘We can make no sense of the Last Hour; we think it is only a supposition. We are by no means convinced (of it)’."
45|33| The evil deeds they committed have (now) become obvious to them, and what they used to mock (God’s promised punishment) has overwhelmed them.
45|34| And it will be said: "We are oblivious of you today (so do not hope for forgiveness and favor), as you were oblivious of the encounter of this day of yours, and your (lasting) refuge will be the Fire, and you have no helpers.
45|35| "That is because you used to take all the signs and Revelations of God in mockery, and the life of the world deluded you." And so this Day they will not be taken out of it (the Fire), and (no plea will be accepted from them to return to the world and so) they can no longer make amends.
45|36| And all praise and gratitude are for God, the Lord of the heavens and the Lord of the earth, the Lord of the worlds.
45|37| And to Him belongs grandeur and sovereignty in the heavens and the earth, and He is the All-Glorious with irresistible might, the All-Wise.
46|1| Ha. Mim.
46|2| (This is) the Book being sent down in parts from God, the All-Glorious with irresistible might, the All-Wise.
46|3| We have not created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them save with truth (for meaningful purposes, and on solid foundations of truth), and for an appointed term. But those who disbelieve turn away from that (Day of Judgment) about which they are warned.
46|4| Say: "Do you not consider what those are whom (you deify and) invoke apart from God? Show me what they have created of the earth. Or do they have a share in (the creation and maintenance of) the heavens? Bring me a Book (revealed) before this one (the Qur’an) or some remnant of knowledge (accurately preserved and transmitted), if you are truthful (in your claims)."
46|5| Who is more astray than one who invokes, apart from God, such as will not make any answer to him until the Day of Resurrection, and are (self-evidently) unconscious and heedless of their invocation?
46|6| When all people are raised from the dead and gathered together for judgment, they (whom they invoked) will be enemies to them, and will disown their worshipping them.
46|7| When Our Revelations, clear as evidence and in meaning are recited (and conveyed) to them, those who disbelieve say of the truth when it reaches them: "This is clearly nothing but sorcery."
46|8| Or do they say, "He (the Messenger) has fabricated it (the Qur’an)?" Say: "If I have fabricated it, you have no power at all to help me against God. He knows best all that you are busy inventing concerning it (the Qur’an). He suffices for a Witness between me and you. He is the All-Forgiving, the All-Compassionate.
46|9| "I am no novelty (either in my person or in the message I have brought) among the Messengers, and (being human) I do not know (unless God informs me) what (will happen in the future in the world and therefore what will) be done to me and to you. I only follow what is revealed to me, and I am only a plain warner."
46|10| Say: "Do you ever consider that if this Qur’an is from God, and you disbelieve in it while (many) a witness from among the Children of Israel (those who had knowledge of Revelation) had already testified to the like of it and (also) believed, whereas you are too arrogant to believe: (is this not plain deviation and wrong)? Surely God does not guide the wrongdoing people."
46|11| Those who disbelieve say of those who believe (as another pretext for their rejection of faith in the Qur’an): "If it (the Qur’an) had been something good and useful, those people would not have preceded us in accepting it." And as they (having refused it) have not found guidance through it, they say: "This is a fabrication from ancient times."
46|12| (They say so despite the fact that) before this there was the Book of Moses as a guide and mercy (for the Children of Israel); and this (Qur’an) is a Book confirming (the truth in the earlier Scriptures) and revealed in Arabic to warn those who commit wrong, and as a good tiding for those devoted to doing good, aware that God is seeing them.
46|13| Surely those who profess, "Our Lord is God," and then follow the Straight Path (in their belief, thought, and actions), they will have no fear, nor will they grieve.
46|14| They are the companions of Paradise, abiding therein as a reward for what they used to do.
46|15| Now (among the good deeds) We have enjoined on human is the best treatment towards his parents. His mother bore him in pain, and in pain did she give him birth. The bearing of him and suckling of him (until weaned) is thirty months, until when he has reached his full manhood and reached forty years of age, he says: "My Lord! Arouse me that I may be thankful for all Your favors (life, health, sustenance, faith, and submission, and more) that You have bestowed on me and on my parents, and that I may do good, righteous deeds with which You will be pleased, and grant me righteous offspring (so that they treat me righteously, as I treat my parents). I have turned to You, and I am one of those who have submitted to You."
46|16| Those are they from whom We will accept (their good deeds in a manner to reward them in accordance with) the best of what they ever did, and whose evil deeds We will overlook, (and include them) among the companions of Paradise. This is a true promise which they have been given (here in the world).
46|17| But (there is many a one) who says to his parents (who call him to righteousness and faith): "Uff to you both! (I am fed up with you!) Do you threaten me that I will be brought forth from the dead (to a new life and judgment), while so many generations have passed away before me (and so far not a single person has been raised)?" And they both pray to God for help (in the guidance of their child, and say to him): "Woe to you! Believe! God’s promise is certainly true!" But he says: "All this is nothing but fables of the ancients!"
46|18| Such are they upon whom the word (of God’s punishment) is rightly due (as included) among the (similar) communities of jinn and humankind before them. Surely they are the ones ruined in loss.
46|19| For all (individuals and groups) there will be degrees of their own, according to what they have done, and so God will pay them fully for their deeds, and they will not be wronged.
46|20| On that Day, those who disbelieve will be brought to the Fire (and they will be told): "You consumed in your worldly life your (share of) pure, wholesome things, and enjoyed them fully (without considering the due of the Hereafter, and so have taken in the world the reward of all your good deeds). So this Day you are recompensed with the punishment of abasement because of your scornful arrogance on the earth against all right, and because of your transgressing (the bounds set by God)."
46|21| Make mention of (Hud) the brother of Ad: he warned his people in al-Ahqaf – as indeed warners came and went before and after him (to warn their peoples) – saying: "Worship none but God alone. I surely fear for you the punishment of an awesome day."
46|22| They said: "Have you come to us to turn us away from our deities? If you are truthful in your claims, then bring us what you are threatening us with."
46|23| He said: "The knowledge (of when it will come) is only with God. I convey to you that with which I have been sent as a Messenger, but I see you are a people acting ignorantly."
46|24| Then (as the events unfolded) they saw that (which they were threatened with) as a dense cloud in the sky advancing towards their valleys, and they said: "This is a cloud bringing us rain." No; it is what you have (derisively) asked to be hastened: a wind bearing a painful punishment,
46|25| Bound to devastate everything by the command of its Lord. And so they became such that nothing was to be seen except their dwellings. Thus do We recompense the guilty people committed to accumulating sin.
46|26| We had, assuredly, given them such power and prosperity (on the earth) that We have not given to you (O Quraysh), and We had endowed them with hearing and eyes and hearts (all the means of perception, outward and inward). But neither their ears, nor their eyes, nor their hearts, availed them anything, as they obstinately rejected God’s signs and Revelations, and what they used to mock overwhelmed them.
46|27| We have, assuredly, destroyed many townships that are around you, and (before that) We had set out the signs and Revelations in diverse ways, so that they might turn back (from their wrong ways).
46|28| So, why did those whom they took for deities apart from God as a means of nearness (to God) not help them (against God’s punishment)? Rather, they failed them. That was (the end result of) their falsehood and all that they used to fabricate (of slanders against God).
46|29| We directed a company of jinn towards you in order that they might listen to the Qur’an (while you were reciting of it). When they were present for it, they said (to one another): "Be silent and listen!" When the recitation finished, they returned to their community as warners.
46|30| They said: "O our people! We have listened to a Book which has been sent after Moses, confirming (the Divine origin of and the truths that are still contained by) the Revelations prior to it: It guides towards the truth and towards a straight road (in all matters).
46|31| "O our people! Respond (affirmatively) to him who calls to God, and believe in him. God will forgive you your sins (which you have committed so far), and save you from a painful punishment.
46|32| "Whoever does not respond (affirmatively) to him who calls to God, he cannot frustrate (God’s will) on the earth, and no guardian will he have apart from God (once God has disowned him): those (who seek to do so) are in obvious error."
46|33| Have they (the unbelievers) not considered that surely God, Who has created the heavens and the earth, and never wearied with their creation, is able to bring the dead to life? Certainly He is; He has full power over everything.
46|34| On the Day when those who disbelieve are brought to the Fire (they will be asked): "Is this not true?" They will say: "Yes, most certainly, by our Lord!" He (God) will say: "Taste the punishment in which you used to disbelieve!"
46|35| So, be patient (O Messenger), (with their rejection of faith and with whatever they do), just as those of greatest steadfastness and resolution among the Messengers were patient, and do not seek to hasten (the judgment on) them. The Day when they see what they are threatened with, (they will feel) as if they had not stayed (in the world) save a short while of the day only. The message has been conveyed. Will, then, any be destroyed save the people who transgress the bounds (in belief and action)?
47|1| Those who disbelieve and bar (people) from God’s way – God will render all their deeds vain.
47|2| While those who believe and do good, righteous deeds, who believe in what has been sent on Muhammad – and it is the truth from their Lord – He will blot out from them their evil deeds (which will otherwise prevent their achievement of their goals in both worlds), and set their hearts fully aright and improve their conditions (both in this world and the next).
47|3| That is because those who disbelieve follow falsehood (in their beliefs, thoughts, and actions), while those who believe follow the truth from their Lord. Thus God expounds to people what they are like.
47|4| So, when you meet those who disbelieve in war, smite at their necks (without giving them opportunity to defeat you). At length, when you have sufficiently suppressed them, (without continuing fighting) bind a firm bond of captivity on them. Then set them free either as a favor without demanding anything in return, or for ransom (which may consist of a reciprocal exchange of prisoners of war), so that warfare may abandon weapons and come to an end. That (is God’s command). Had God so willed, He would certainly exact retribution from them (Himself), but (He orders you to fight) in order to try you by means of one another. As for those who are killed in God’s cause, He will never render their deeds vain.
47|5| (Rather,) He will guide them (to the realization of their goal in both worlds) and set their conditions right for them,
47|6| And He will admit them into Paradise that He has made known to them.
47|7| O you who believe! If you help God(’s cause by striving in His cause), He will help you and make your feet firm (so that you are steadfast in His cause and ultimately victorious).
47|8| But those who disbelieve: collapse and perdition are their lot, and He will render all their deeds vain.
47|9| This is because they are averse to that which God has sent down, and so He causes their deeds to go to waste.
47|10| Have they not traveled about the earth and seen how the outcome was for those who came before them (and persisted in associating partners with Him, and in all kinds of transgression)? God brought utter devastation upon them, and the unbelievers (now) the like of their fate awaits.
47|11| This is because God surely is the Guardian of those who believe, but those who disbelieve have no guardian (acceptable in God’s sight and who can help them against Him).
47|12| God will admit those who believe and do good, righteous deeds into Gardens through which rivers flow. As for those who disbelieve, they take their enjoyment and consume (God’s bounties) just as cattle consume, (without considering Who has given them to them, and what they are expected to do in return, and with no sense of the life to come); and the Fire will be their dwelling (fitting for them).
47|13| How many a township there has been, greater in power (and more abundant in wealth) than your township, which has driven you out, (O Messenger). We destroyed them and they had no helper (against Us).
47|14| Is, then, the one who is (standing) upon a clear evidence from his Lord like him whose evil deeds are decked out to be appealing to him, and (those who) follow their lusts and fancies?
47|15| A likeness of Paradise which the God-revering, pious are promised is this: in it are rivers of water incorruptible (in taste, smell, and color); and rivers of milk whose taste never changes; and rivers of wine delicious for the drinkers; and rivers of pure, clear honey. And in it there are also fruits of every kind for them, as well as forgiveness from their Lord (to bring unforeseen blessings). (Are those who will enjoy all this) like those who will abide in the Fire and be given boiling water to drink, so that it rends their bowels?
47|16| Among them (the people of Madinah) are some who give ear to you, but when they go out from your presence, they ask (with arrogance and derision) those who have been given (some) knowledge (of the truths of the Religion): "What has he said just now?" Those are they whose hearts God has sealed, and who follow their lusts and fancies.
47|17| As for those who have accepted God’s guidance, He strengthens them in guidance (through deeper knowledge and submission), and gives them piety and protection from sinning.
47|18| Do they (who persist in unbelief and evil deeds) wait but for the Last Hour – (waiting) that it come upon them all of a sudden? Now indeed its portents have already come. But how can it benefit them to take admonition when the Last Hour has (already) come upon them?
47|19| Then, know (bear in mind) that there is no deity but God, and ask forgiveness for your lapses, and for the believing men and believing women. God knows from which (inner) state and (social) condition to which state and condition you do and will move, and in which state and condition you will be steady.
47|20| Those who believe (look forward to a new surah conveying knowledge of Divine truths and God’s new commandments being sent down, and) say: "If only a new surah were sent down!" But when a decisive surah has been sent down in which fighting is mentioned (clearly as a commanded duty), you see those in whose hearts there is sickness looking at you with a look of one swooning to death. That is, in fact, what is expected of them!
47|21| (Whereas, what true believers are expected to do in response to any Divine order is) obedience and a proper word. So, if they were true to God when the command has been resolved upon (and it calls them to do what their pledge to God requires them), it would certainly be good for them.
47|22| But is it to be expected of you (O hypocritical ones), that you will break your promise and turn away (from God’s commandments), and cause disorder and corruption in the land, and sever the ties of kinship?
47|23| Such are they whom God has cursed (excluded from His mercy), and so He has made them deaf and blinded their eyes (to the truth).
47|24| Do they not meditate earnestly on the Qur’an, or are there locks on the hearts (that are particular to them so that they are as if deaf and blind, and incapable of understanding the truth)?
47|25| Surely those who have turned back as apostates after (God’s) guidance has become clear to them, Satan has seduced them; he has implanted in them long-term worldly ambitions.
47|26| This is because they have said to those who are averse to what God has sent down: "We will obey you in some issues." God knows their secrets.
47|27| So, how (will it be) when the angels take their souls at death, striking their faces and their backs?
47|28| This is because they have followed what incurs God’s wrath (condemnation), and are averse to what pleases Him, and so He has caused all their (previous good) deeds to go to waste.
47|29| Or do those in whose hearts is sickness think that God will not bring to light their spite (against the Divine Religion and its followers)?
47|30| Had We so willed, We would have shown them to you, and you would have known them by their marks (visible on their faces). But you certainly know them by the false tone and rhythm of their speech. God knows (O humankind) your deeds (and why and how you do them).
47|31| And We will most certainly try you so that We may mark out those among you who strive hard (in God’s cause with their persons and their wealth), and those who are steadfast (on His Path and patient through adversities), and try your accounts (of deeds).
47|32| Those who disbelieve and bar (people) from God’s way, and defy the Messenger after (God’s) guidance has become clear to them – they will never be able to harm (the cause of) God, and He will cause their deeds to go to waste.
47|33| O you who believe! Obey God (in all His commandments) and obey the Messenger (in his execution of God’s commandments and in his own directives), and do not let your deeds go to waste.
47|34| Those who disbelieve and bar (people) from God’s way, and then die unbelievers, God will never forgive them.
47|35| So (when in warfare with the enemy) do not be faint of heart and cry out for peace (which will bring you humiliation) when you have the upper hand. (Always bear in mind that) God is with you, and He will never diminish the reward of your good deeds.
47|36| The present, worldly life is nothing but a play and a pastime. If you truly believe and keep from disobedience to Him in reverence for Him and piety, He will grant you your rewards, and will not ask of you your wealth.
47|37| If He should ask it of you and press you (to give it), you would covet and withhold, and He would bring out your (suppressed) resentments.
47|38| You are surely those called upon to spend (of your wealth) in God’s cause; yet among you are some who are niggardly. But whoever is niggardly is niggardly only to the depriving of his own soul. God is the All-Wealthy and Self-Sufficient (absolutely independent of any need), and you are the poor (in need of Him). If you turn away (from true faith and piety), He will substitute in your stead another people; then they will not be like you.
48|1| We have surely granted you a manifest victory (which is a door to further victories),
48|2| That God may forgive you (O Messenger) your lapses of the past and those to follow, and complete His favor on you, and guide you (to steadfastness) on a straight path (leading to God’s being pleased with You and eternal happiness);
48|3| And that God may help you to a glorious, mighty achievement –
48|4| He it is Who sent down His (gift of) inner peace and reassurance into the hearts of the believers, so that they might add faith to their faith. To God belong the hosts of the heavens and the earth; and God is All-Knowing, All-Wise –
48|5| And that He may admit the believing men and believing women into Gardens through which rivers flow, therein to abide, and may blot out from them their evil deeds. That is a supreme triumph in God’s sight;
48|6| And that He may punish the hypocritical men and the hypocritical women, and the men and the women who associate partners with God, who always entertain evil thoughts about God. Theirs will be the evil turn of fate. God has destined them to a severe punishment, eternally excluded them from His Mercy, and prepared Hell for them. How evil a destination to arrive at!
48|7| To God belong the hosts of the heavens and the earth. God is All-Glorious with irresistible might, All-Wise.
48|8| Surely We have sent you as Messenger as a witness (to the truth of Islam and the falsehood of other ways, and as a witness in both worlds to people’s deeds), and as a bearer of glad tidings (of prosperity in return for faith and righteousness) and a warner (against the consequences of misguidance);
48|9| And in order that you (O humankind and jinn) believe in God and His Messenger (and support His cause), and hold God in the highest regard, and glorify Him in the early morning and in the evening (i.e., day and night).
48|10| Those who swear allegiance to you (O Messenger), swear allegiance to God only. God’s "Hand" is over their hands. Whoever then breaks his oath, breaks his oath only to his own harm; and whoever fulfills what he has covenanted with God, He will grant him a tremendous reward.
48|11| Those of the Bedouins (dwellers of the desert) who (did not respond to your call to participate in the Minor Pilgrimage Campaign and) stayed behind will say to you (by way of excuse): "Our possessions and families kept us busy, so ask God for our forgiveness." They speak with their tongues that which is not in their hearts. Say (to them): "Who is there that can intervene on your behalf with God if He wills harm for you or if He wills a benefit for you? (Whatever excuse you offer, bear in mind that) God is fully aware of all that you do."
48|12| Indeed you thought that the Messenger and the believers would never return to their families (from the Campaign), and this thought was decked out to be appealing in your hearts, and you entertained an evil thought (that God would not help the believers and they would be defeated). You (in thinking so have proved yourselves to be and you) are a people useless and doomed to perish.
48|13| Whoever does not believe (and trust) in God and His Messenger: then We have surely prepared a Blaze for the unbelievers.
48|14| To God belongs the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth: He forgives whom He wills and punishes whom He wills. God is All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate.
48|15| When you (O believers) set forth for (the campaign during which they think that you are sure) to take gains of war, those who stayed behind (aforetime) will say: "Let us go with you." They desire to alter God’s decree. Say (to them): "You will by no means come with us. That (decision) regarding you is what God declared before." Then they will say: "Rather, you are jealous of us." But the fact is that they are lacking in discernment and understanding, except a very little.
48|16| Say to those of the dwellers of the desert who stayed behind: "Soon you will be called (to fight) against a people of great military power, then either you will fight against them or they will submit to God and become Muslims. If you obey, God will grant you a handsome reward, but if you turn away as you turned away before, He will punish you with a painful punishment."
48|17| There is no blame on the blind nor any blame on the lame nor any blame on the sick (for staying away from a war in God’s cause). Whoever obeys God and His Messenger (in the religious duties he is charged with and can carry out), God will admit him into Gardens through which rivers flow. But whoever turns away, He will punish him with a painful punishment.
48|18| God was assuredly well-pleased with the believers when they swore allegiance to you under the tree. He knew what was in their hearts (of sincere intention and loyalty to God’s cause), and therefore He sent down (the gift of) inner peace and reassurance on them, and rewarded them with a near victory,
48|19| And much in gains of war that they will take. And God is All-Glorious with irresistible might, All-Wise.
48|20| God has promised you abundant gains of war that you will take later, and these He granted you as present reward (for your obedience and purity of intention). And He has restrained the hands of (other hostile) people from you so that it may be a sign for the believers (concerning the truth of their way and God’s promises to them), and that He may guide you to (steadfastness on) a straight path.
48|21| And there are yet other (gains) which you have not been able to acquire but God has encompassed (in His Knowledge and Power, and will grant you). Surely God has full power over everything.
48|22| If the unbelievers (of Makkah) had fought against you (instead of signing the treaty with you at Hudaybiyah), they would certainly have turned their backs in flight, then they would have found no protecting guardian or helper (to rescue them).
48|23| It is God’s way that has continued (ever so) from the past: you will never find any change in God’s way.
48|24| And He it is Who restrained their hands from you and your hands from them in the valley of Makkah, after He had granted you victory over them. Surely God sees well all that you do.
48|25| (God defeated them because) they are the ones who have disbelieved and who barred you from (visiting) the Sacred Mosque and (prevented) the offerings from reaching their destination. And had there not been (in Makkah) believing men and believing women whom you did not know and therefore might have trodden down, and thus something undesired might have afflicted you on their account (for what you did) unknowingly, (God would not have restrained your hands from fighting. But He restrained your hands) so that He might admit to His mercy whom He wills (by sparing the believers in Makkah and enabling many among the Makkans to embrace Islam in time). If they (the believers and unbelievers in Makkah) had been clearly separated, We would certainly have punished those among them who disbelieved with a painful punishment.
48|26| When those who disbelieved harbored in their hearts fierce zealotry (coming from egotism, tribalism, and feuding), the zealotry particular to the Age of Ignorance, God sent down His (gift of) inner peace and reassurance on His Messenger and on the believers, and bound them to the Word of faith, piety, and reverence for God. They were most worthy of it and entitled to it. And God has full knowledge of everything.
48|27| God has assuredly confirmed the vision for His Messenger as true (and will certainly fulfill it) in reality: you will certainly enter the Sacred Mosque, if God wills, in full security, with your heads shaven or your hair cut short, and you will have nothing to fear. But He always knows what you do not know, and (therefore, without allowing you to enter the Mosque this year,) granted you a near victory before this.
48|28| He it is Who has sent His Messenger with the Divine guidance and the Religion of truth that He may make it prevail over all religions. God suffices for a witness (for the truth of His promise and the mission of His Messenger).
48|29| Muhammad is the Messenger of God; and those who are in his company are firm and unyielding against the unbelievers, and compassionate among themselves. You see them (constant in the Prayer) bowing down and prostrating, seeking favor with God and His approval and good pleasure. Their marks are on their faces, traced by prostration. This is their description in the Torah; and their description in the Gospel: like a seed that has sprouted its shoot, then it has strengthened it, and then risen firmly on its stem, delighting the sowers (with joy and wonder); (thereby) it fills the unbelievers with rage at them (the believers). God has promised all those among them who believe and do good, righteous deeds forgiveness (to bring unforeseen blessings) and a tremendous reward.
49|1| O you who believe! Do not be forward in the Presence of God and His Messenger. Keep from disobedience to God in piety and reverence for Him, so that you may deserve His protection. Surely God is All-Hearing, All-Knowing.
49|2| O you who believe! Do not raise your voices above the voice of the Prophet, nor speak loudly when addressing him, as you would speak loudly to one another, lest your good deeds go in vain without your perceiving it.
49|3| Those who lower their voices in the presence of God’s Messenger, those are they whose hearts God has tested and proven for piety and reverence for Him. For them there is forgiveness (to bring unforeseen rewards) and a tremendous reward.
49|4| Those who call out to you from behind the private apartments (which you share with your wives), most of them do not reason and understand (and are therefore lacking in good manners).
49|5| If (instead of shouting to you to come out to them) they had been patient until you came out to them, it would certainly have been better for them (in respect of the manners due to you from them). However, God is All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate (especially toward His believing servants, and may forgive ill-manners arising from ignorance).
49|6| O you who believe! If some transgressor brings you news (that requires taking action), verify it carefully (before you believe and act upon it), lest you harm a people in ignorance and then become regretful for what you have done.
49|7| Always bear in mind that God’s Messenger is among you (so that you have a duty to refer decisions to him). If he were to follow you in many affairs of public concern, you would surely be in trouble (and suffer loss). But God has endeared the faith to you (O believers) and made it appealing to your hearts, and He has made unbelief, transgression, and rebellion hateful to you. Those are they who are rightly guided (in belief, thought, and action),
49|8| As a grace from God and a favor. God is All-Knowing, All-Wise.
49|9| If two parties of believers fall to fighting, make peace between them (and act promptly). But if one of them aggressively encroaches the rights of the other, then fight you all against the aggressive side until they comply with God’s decree (concerning the matter). If they comply, then make peace between them with justice and be scrupulously equitable. Surely God loves the scrupulously equitable.
49|10| The believers are but brothers, so make peace between your brothers and keep from disobedience to God in reverence for Him and piety (particularly in your duties toward one another as brothers), so that you may be shown mercy (granted a good, virtuous life in the world as individuals and as a community, and eternal happiness in the Hereafter).
49|11| O you who believe! Let not some people among you deride another people, it may be that the latter are better than the former; nor let some women deride other women, it may be that the latter are better than the former. Nor defame one another (and provoke the same for yourselves in retaliation), nor insult one another with nicknames (that your brothers and sisters dislike). Evil is using names with vile meaning after (those so addressed have accepted) the faith (– doing so is like replacing a mark of faith with a mark of transgression). Whoever (does that and then) does not turn to God in repentance, (giving up doing so), those are indeed wrongdoers.
49|12| O you who believe! Avoid much suspicion, for some suspicion is a grave sin (liable to God’s punishment); and do not spy (on one another), nor backbite (against one another). Would any of you love to eat the flesh of his dead brother? You would abhor it! Keep from disobedience to God in reverence for Him and piety. Surely God is One Who truly returns repentance with liberal forgiveness and additional reward, All-Compassionate (particularly towards His believing servants).
49|13| O humankind! Surely We have created you from a single (pair of) male and female, and made you into tribes and families so that you may know one another (and so build mutuality and co-operative relationships, not so that you may take pride in your differences of race or social rank, and breed enmities). Surely the noblest, most honorable of you in God’s sight is the one best in piety, righteousness, and reverence for God. Surely God is All-Knowing, All-Aware.
49|14| (Some of) the dwellers of the desert say: "We believe." Say (to them): "You have not believed. Rather, (you should) say, ‘We have submitted (to the rule of Islam),’ for faith has not yet entered into your hearts." But, if you obey God and His Messenger, He will not hold back anything of the reward of your (good) deeds. Surely God is All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate.
49|15| Only those are the believers who have truly believed in God (as the Unique Deity, Lord, and Sovereign), and (believed in) His Messenger (including all that he has brought from God), then have never since doubted (the truth of what they have testified to), and who strive hard with their wealth and persons in God’s cause. Those are they who are truthful and honest (in their profession of faith).
49|16| (If those desert dwellers still insist on thinking themselves true believers,) say: "What? Would you teach God (how truly you are devoted to) your Religion, while God knows all that is in the heavens and all that is on the earth?" God has full knowledge of everything.
49|17| They impress it on you as their favor to you that they have submitted (to the rule of Islam and thereby put you under an obligation to them). Say: "Do not count your being Muslims as a favor to me (nor seek to put me under an obligation. The Religion does not belong to me, but to God only.) It is indeed God Who has conferred a favor upon you inasmuch as He has shown you the way to faith – if you are truthful (in your profession of being Muslims, those who have submitted to God)."
49|18| Surely God knows the unseen of the heavens and the earth (all that is beyond human perception and knowledge in them). And God sees well all that you do.
50|1| Qaf. By the Qur’an most sublime. (We have indeed, in spite of what they say, sent it to you to warn people that they will be raised from the dead to account for their lives.)
50|2| But they deem it strange that a warner from among them has come to them, and the unbelievers say: "This is something strange!
50|3| "When we have died and become dust (you say, we will be raised from the dead)? That is a far-fetched return!"
50|4| We know for certain whatever the earth corrodes of them (to the most minute particle); with Us there is a book recording and preserving (incorruptibly).
50|5| Rather, they have denied the truth when it has come to them (and done so willfully and persistently), so they are in a dire state (utterly confused about how to explain their rejection, and about how to prevent the acceptance of others).
50|6| But do they, then, never observe the sky above them (to ponder Our Knowledge and Power; and reflect) how We have constructed it and adorned it, and that there are no rifts in it?
50|7| And the earth – We have spread it out, and set therein firm mountains, and caused to grow thereon every lovely pair of vegetation.
50|8| (All this is a means of) insight and reminder for every servant (of God) willing to turn to Him in contrition.
50|9| And We send down from the sky blessed water with which We cause to grow gardens and grain to harvest,
50|10| And tall and stately date-palms with ranged clusters,
50|11| As provision for the servants. And We revive with it a dead land: even so will the dead be raised and come forth (from their graves).
50|12| Before them the people of Noah denied, and the companions of ar-Rass, and the Thamud;
50|13| And the ‘Ad, and the Pharaoh, and the people among whom Lot was sent as Messenger;
50|14| And the companions of al-Aykah, and the people of Tubba‘. Every one of them denied the Messengers and My threat was duly fulfilled.
50|15| What! did We show failure and weariness in the first creation (that We will not be able to repeat creation after its destruction)? Rather, (knowing that it could never be so) they are in a tangle (of thought and argument) about a new creation (after destruction of the old).
50|16| Assuredly, it is We Who have created human, and We know what suggestions his soul makes to him. We are nearer to him than his jugular vein.
50|17| Remember that the two recording angels (appointed to record his speech and deeds), seated on the right and on the left, receive and record.
50|18| Not a word does he utter but there is a watcher by him, ever-present.
50|19| And the stupor of death comes in truth (being the established decree of God for life). That is, (O human,) what you were trying to escape.
50|20| And (in time) the Trumpet will be blown. That is the Day when God’s threat will be fulfilled.
50|21| And every person will come (before the Supreme Court) with one (angel) driving, and one (angel) bearing witness.
50|22| "Indeed you were in heedlessness of this, and now We have removed from you your veil, so your sight today is sharp."
50|23| And the one (the witnessing angel) who accompanies him says: "This is (his record) that I keep ready with me."
50|24| (The sentence is pronounced): "You two, throw into Hell everyone persistent in unbelief, obstinate (in rejecting the truth),
50|25| "Who impedes the doing of good (preventing himself and others), and who exceeds all bounds (of right and decency), and who is lost in doubts and implants doubts (in others);
50|26| "Who sets up another deity beside God: so cast him into the severe punishment."
50|27| His companion (the devil who accompanied him in the world and seduced him into evil) will say: "Our Lord! I did not cause him to rebel and transgress, but he himself was far astray."
50|28| God will say: "Do not dispute (with each other) in My Presence. I had warned you (of this Day) before.
50|29| "And the decree from Me will not be changed, and I am in no wise one who wrongs (My) servants."
50|30| On that Day We will say to Hell, "Are you filled (to the full)?", and it will say, "Are there (yet) more (to come)?"
50|31| And Paradise will be brought near for the God-revering, pious; not (any longer) is it far.
50|32| "This is what was promised for you – for everyone who was penitent, careful in keeping his duties (to God).
50|33| "Everyone who stood in awe of the All-Merciful though unseen (beyond their perception), and has come with a heart contrite and devout.
50|34| "Now enter it in peace (secure from any trouble or distress). That is the Day of immortality."
50|35| Therein will be for them everything that they desire, and in Our Presence there is yet more.
50|36| How many a generation We have destroyed before them who were mightier than these in prowess, and overran other lands. But was there any place of escape (for them when God’s punishment became due: is there ever?)
50|37| Surely in that is a warning reminder for anyone who has a heart (that is truly alive), and who gives ear (to the one conveying this reminder), with eyes able to see well.
50|38| We assuredly created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days, and nothing of fatigue touched us.
50|39| So (with confident reliance on Our promise and Power) bear with patience whatever they say and glorify your Lord with His praise before the rising of the sun and before its setting;
50|40| And during (some part of) the night, too, glorify Him, and after the prostrations.
50|41| And wait with ears able to hear for the Day when the Caller will call out from a place near;
50|42| The Day when they will hear the Blast in truth (as a predetermined decree of God that must happen). That is the Day of the coming forth (when the dead will be raised from their graves).
50|43| Surely it is We Who give life and cause to die, and to Us is the homecoming.
50|44| That Day the earth will be rent asunder away from them, and they, hurrying out of it (will come to the gathering). That will be a gathering easy for Us.
50|45| We know best whatever they say, and you (O Messenger) are not one to compel them (to faith). So remind and warn by the Qur’an him who fears My threat.
51|1| By those that (like winds) scatter far and wide;
51|2| And those that (like clouds) bear heavy burdens:
51|3| And those (like ships) that run with gentle ease;
51|4| And those (angels) who distribute by command (of God, His provision of rain and innumerable other blessings):
51|5| What you are promised is most certainly true:
51|6| The Last Judgment is bound to take place.
51|7| By the heaven full of braided pathways (for the movement of angels and celestial objects, for the sending down of God’s commands, and for the ascent of the diverse supplications of conscious beings by speech or act or need):
51|8| Surely you are in contradicting views (about the Qur’an and how to describe it).
51|9| Whoever has been deluded from it (the Qur’an) is (first) self-deluded (turning away from the right way in thought, belief, and action).
51|10| Be away from God’s mercy the liars building on conjecture,
51|11| Who are quite heedless (of truth) in an abyss of ignorance.
51|12| They ask: "When is the Day of Judgment?"
51|13| The Day when they will be tormented over the Fire.
51|14| "Taste your torment (that you have brought upon yourselves). This is what you (in mockery) would ask to be hastened!"
51|15| As for the God-revering, pious: they will be in Gardens and springs,
51|16| Taking whatever their Lord grants them. For they were, before that, devoted to doing God’s commands, aware that God was seeing them.
51|17| They used to sleep but little by night (almost never missing the Tahajjud Prayer).
51|18| And in the hour of early dawn, they would implore God’s forgiveness.
51|19| And in their wealth the poor (who had to beg) and the destitute (who did not beg out of shame) had due share (a right they gladly honored).
51|20| On the earth there are (clear) signs (of God’s Oneness as Lord and Sovereign) for those who seek certainty;
51|21| And also in your own selves. Will you then not see (the truth)?
51|22| And in the heaven there is your provision, and what you are promised.
51|23| Then, by the Lord of the heaven and the earth, this (promise) is as much (a fact conveyed to you) as that you speak.
51|24| Has there come to you report of Abraham’s honored guests?
51|25| They presented themselves before him and bade him peace. He said (in returning their greeting) "Peace!" (and thought:) A people unknown.
51|26| He withdrew to his household and brought a (roast of) fatted calf.
51|27| He placed it before them, and said: "Will you not eat?"
51|28| (When he saw that they did not eat) he became apprehensive of them. They said: "Do not be apprehensive!" They gave him the glad tidings of (the birth of) a son to be endowed with profound knowledge.
51|29| Then his wife came forward, groaning, and struck her forehead, saying: "How shall I bear a child, (being) a barren old woman?"
51|30| They said: "Thus has your Lord decreed. Surely He is the All-Wise, the All-Knowing."
51|31| He (Abraham) said: "Then (after that), what is your concern, O you (heavenly) envoys?"
51|32| They said: "Indeed, we have been sent to a people who are all criminals,
51|33| "So that We may send upon them stones of baked clay,
51|34| "Marked out in your Lord’s Presence for (the destruction of) the people wasteful (of their God-given faculties and) committing excesses."
51|35| We brought out (from the land) those in it who were believers;
51|36| But We did not find there any but a single house of Muslims (those wholly submitted to God).
51|37| We left there a clear sign (of the truth of God’s Messages) for those who fear the painful punishment."
51|38| And in (the exemplary history of) Moses too (there is a clear sign): We sent him as Messenger to the Pharaoh with an evident authority.
51|39| But the Pharaoh turned away (from Our Message), together with his hosts, and said: "(Moses is either) a sorcerer or a madman."
51|40| So We seized him and his hosts, and hurled them into the sea. And he was self-accused, remorseful (too late, when he was drowning).
51|41| And in (the exemplary history of the tribe of) ‘Ad also (there is a clear sign), when We sent upon them the devastating wind.
51|42| It spared nothing that it reached, but made it like ashes.
51|43| And in (the exemplary history of the tribe of) Thamud also (there is a clear sign), when they (were given respite and) it was said to them: "Enjoy life for a little while!"
51|44| But they rebelled against their Lord’s decree, so the thunderbolt (along with the blast) seized them, even while they were looking on.
51|45| They were not able to rise up (still less escape the punishment), nor were able to receive help.
51|46| (And We had destroyed) the people of Noah before. They were a people transgressing (God’s bounds).
51|47| And the heaven, We have constructed it mightily, and it is surely We Who have vast power, and keep expanding it.
51|48| And the earth, We have spread it out, and how excellent We are in spreading it out (like a cradle).
51|49| And all things We have created in pairs, so that you may reflect and be mindful.
51|50| "So, flee to (refuge in) God. I am surely from Him to you a plain warner.
51|51| "And do not set up another deity besides God. I am surely a plain warner from Him to you."
51|52| Similarly, no Messenger came to the peoples who lived before them but they said of him (in like manner): "A sorcerer or a madman."
51|53| Have they bequeathed this to one another (by way of response)? They were indeed a rebellious people.
51|54| So, turn away from disputing with them, and you are not to be blamed (for doing so).
51|55| But remind and warn, for reminding and warning are of benefit to the believers.
51|56| I have not created the jinn and humankind but to (know and) worship Me (exclusively).
51|57| I demand of them no provision, nor do I demand that they should feed Me.
51|58| Surely God – it is He Who is the All-Providing, Lord of all might, and the All-Forceful.
51|59| So surely those who commit the greatest wrong (namely, not believing in and worshipping God or associating partners with Him in worship), will have their share (of the punishment) like the share of their fellows (of old who were destroyed). Then, let them not ask Me to hasten it.
51|60| Then, woe to those who disbelieve because of their Day with which they are threatened.
52|1| By the Mount (Sinai),
52|2| And by a Book inscribed,
52|3| In parchments outstretched,
52|4| And by Bayt al-Ma‘mur (the House continuously frequented),
52|5| And by the canopy (of heaven) raised high,
52|6| And by the sea kept filled (and ready to overflow),
52|7| The punishment of your Lord will certainly take place.
52|8| There is none that can avert it.
52|9| On that Day the heaven will be convulsed violently;
52|10| And the mountains will move away with an awesome movement.
52|11| Woe, then, on that Day to those who deny (God’s Message and the Messengers) –
52|12| Those who are habitually playing, absorbed (in vanities):
52|13| On that Day they will be forcefully thrust into the fire of Hell.
52|14| "This is the Fire which you used to deny.
52|15| "Is this sorcery (for you used to deride the Revelation as sorcery), or is it that you do not see (so that, for you, it is something illusory)?
52|16| "Suffer the heat of it now! Bear it patiently, or do not bear it patiently, it is all the same to you. You are only being recompensed for all that you used to do (in the world)."
52|17| The God-revering, pious ones will surely be in Gardens and bliss,
52|18| Enjoying all that their Lord will grant them (by His grace and in recompense for their good deeds); and their Lord has protected them from the punishment of the Blazing Flame.
52|19| "Eat and drink to your hearts’ content for all that you used to do (in the world)."
52|20| They will recline on thrones arranged; and We have assigned for them maidens pure, beautiful of eye.
52|21| Those who have believed and their offspring have followed them in faith, We will unite them with their offspring (even though the faith of the latter may not be of the same degree as that of the former), and We will not decrease the reward of their deeds in anything (because of their being united with their offspring). Every person will enjoy according to what he has earned.
52|22| And We will provide them with fruit and meat, one meal after the other, such as they desire.
52|23| There they will pass among one another a cup wherein is (a drink inciting) no false, foolish talk nor sin.
52|24| And there will go round them boy-servants attending upon them, (so pure) as hidden pearls.
52|25| Some of them will move closer to others, asking (about their affairs in the world and how they were admitted to Paradise).
52|26| They say: "We used to be, when amongst our families, indeed most apprehensive before (most careful and alert for the guidance and eternal life of our family members).
52|27| "Then God bestowed His favor upon us, and protected us from the punishment of the scorching fire penetrating through the skin.
52|28| "We used to worship and invoke Him alone before. Surely He is the All-Benign, the All-Compassionate (especially to His believing servants)."
52|29| So (O Messenger, continue to) preach and remind; by God’s grace, you are not a soothsayer, nor a madman.
52|30| Or do they say (of him): "A poet (jinn-possessed). We await for him some calamity ahead"?
52|31| Say: "Wait on, for I am waiting with you (though I hope for a different outcome)."
52|32| Do their minds urge them to such (absurd falsehoods), or are they a people (in the habit of being) rebellious and outrageous?
52|33| Or do they say: "He forges it (and then attributes the Qur’an to God)?" No indeed. Rather, (they make such claims because) they have no will to believe.
52|34| (If they really believe such a Book can be forged) then, let them produce a Discourse like it, if they are truthful (in their claims).
52|35| Or were they created without anything being before them (or out of something different than the basic material of all creation, so that they know things others do not), or are they the creators (of themselves, so that they can maintain themselves and are free in their acts)?
52|36| Or did they create the heavens and the earth (so that their sovereignty belongs to them)? No indeed. Rather, they have no certain knowledge (about creation, humankind, and the basic facts concerning them).
52|37| Or are the treasures of your Lord at their disposal (so that they provide for creation however they will, and choose whomever they will as Messenger and send down to him whatever Book they will)? Or have they been given authority over them (so that they can prevail upon God to send them a Message and Messenger that suits their interests)?
52|38| Or do they have a ladder by which (having climbed to heaven) they overhear (the secrets of heaven, confirming their stand against the Messenger and the Qur’an)? Then let their eavesdropper produce some clear authority (to prove what he claims to have heard).
52|39| Or (do you in your absurdity attribute to Him children, so that) for Him there are daughters (whom you yourselves foolishly disdain), while for you there are sons?
52|40| Or is it that you (O Messenger) ask them for wage (for conveying God’s Religion to them) so that they are crushed under debt?
52|41| Or do they have the knowledge of the Unseen (and the Supreme Preserved Tablet) so that they write down the decrees (determining all events, and stipulating a way of life for others to follow)?
52|42| Or do they intend a plot (to entrap you so as to defeat your mission)? Yet it is those who disbelieve who are entrapped (in so plotting, because they deny themselves God’s blessings in both worlds).
52|43| Or do you have a deity other than God (to whom, in vain, you look to sustain, and help, and protect you)? All-Glorified is He (in that He is absolutely exalted) above what they associate as partners with Him.
52|44| (So obstinate are they in rejecting the truth that) if they saw a piece of the sky falling down (on them), they would say, "This is (only) a heap of clouds!" (For they cannot conceive that it may be a punishment for their obstinate denial).
52|45| So, leave them until they meet their Day when they will be struck dead.
52|46| The Day when their scheming will avail them nothing, nor will they be helped.
52|47| And surely for those who commit the greatest wrong (through unbelief or associating partners with God and resisting the conveying of His Religion), there is another punishment besides that, but most of them do not know.
52|48| So wait patiently for your Lord’s judgment, for you are under Our Eyes (under Our care and protection); and glorify your Lord with His praise when you rise up (to pray);
52|49| And in the night-time also glorify Him, and at the retreat of the stars.
53|1| By the star when it goes down,
53|2| Your Companion (the Messenger) has neither gone astray nor adopted a wrong way (in belief and action).
53|3| He does not speak on his own, out of his own desire;
53|4| That (which he conveys to you) is but a Revelation that is revealed to him.
53|5| One of forceful might (Gabriel) has taught it;
53|6| One firm, with ability to penetrate and perfect in spirit, rose with all his splendor
53|7| When he was in the highest part of the horizon.
53|8| Then, he drew near and came close,
53|9| So he was (so near that there was left only the distance between) the strings of two bows (put adjacent to each other) or even nearer (than that).
53|10| And He revealed to His servant what He revealed.
53|11| The heart did not contradict what he saw (with his eyes).
53|12| Will you then dispute with him concerning what he saw?
53|13| Assuredly he saw him during a second descent,
53|14| By the Lote-tree of the utmost boundary,
53|15| Near it is the Garden of Refuge and Dwelling.
53|16| Meanwhile that was covering the Lote-tree which was covering it.
53|17| The sight (of the Messenger) did not swerve (so that he looked elsewhere and saw something different), nor did it go wrong (so that he might have seen an illusion).
53|18| Indeed, he saw one among the greatest signs of His Lord.
53|19| (As compared to that) have you considered al-Lat and al-‘Uzza?
53|20| And the other, the third (idol), al-Manat: (what things are these that you concoct)?
53|21| What? For you the males and for Him the females?
53|22| That is an unfair division indeed!
53|23| They (your false deities) are nothing but made-up names that you and your forefathers have invented; God sent no authority for them. They follow only conjecture and that which they themselves lust after. But now there has certainly come to them guidance from their Lord (Who has created them, and sustains them).
53|24| Or will human attain whatever he craves?
53|25| But (whatever human desires, be it to serve his higher good, or to serve his carnal appetites) to God belong the after(life) and the former (life).
53|26| How many an angel there is in the heavens (even supposing they would intercede for a human) whose intercession does not avail at all except after God has given permission to whomever He wills (to intercede on behalf of whomever He wills) and is pleased with.
53|27| It is those who do not believe in the Hereafter who name the angels (whom they regard as God’s daughters) with feminine names.
53|28| They have no knowledge of this. They follow nothing other than conjecture, and conjecture can never substitute for anything of the truth.
53|29| So withdraw from those who turn away from Our Book and remembrance, and desire nothing but the life of this world.
53|30| Such is their sum of knowledge (limited by desires of the moment, and the falsehoods they have inherited unthinkingly and become used to, limited to the outer surface of things). Surely your Lord knows best him who has gone astray, and He knows best him who goes right (following the Straight Path of his Lord).
53|31| To God belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is on the earth, and (since He knows best him who has gone astray and him who follows the right path) He will recompense those who do evil with what they have done, and recompense those who do good with the best reward.
53|32| Those who avoid the major sins and indecent, shameful deeds (which are in fact included in the major sins), only falling into small fault, – surely your Lord is of extensive forgiveness. He knows you well when He originates you from (the particles of) earth, and when you are hidden (fetuses) in the wombs of your mothers. So do not hold yourselves pure (sinless; it is vain self-justification). He knows best him who keeps from disobedience to God in reverence for Him and piety.
53|33| Have you considered him who turns away (from your call)?
53|34| He has given (the needy) a little, then he is stern (in not giving).
53|35| Does he have knowledge of the Unseen, and so he sees (what is to happen in the future)?
53|36| Or has he not been informed of all (that is to follow and) was in the Scrolls of Moses,
53|37| And of Abraham who discharged his due (fulfilling all his duties to perfection)?
53|38| That no soul, as bearer of burden, is made to bear the burden of another.
53|39| And that human has only that for which he labors,
53|40| And his labor will be brought forth to be seen.
53|41| And afterward he will be repaid for it with fullest payment.
53|42| And in your Lord everything ends.
53|43| And He it is Who (by His Will, Power, and creation) enables to laugh and to weep.
53|44| And He it is Who causes to die and gives life.
53|45| And He creates the pairs, the male and the female,
53|46| From a drop of (seminal) fluid when it is emitted.
53|47| And He has taken on Himself the other bringing forth;
53|48| And He it is Who grants abundant wealth and suffices (all need by His providing).
53|49| And surely He it is Who is the Lord of Sirius.
53|50| And He destroyed the former (tribe of ) ‘Ad,
53|51| And the (tribe of) Thamud; He spared no (disbelieving criminal) among them;
53|52| And the people of Noah before; surely they were further in wrongdoing and further in rebellion.
53|53| (He also destroyed) the overthrown cities (of Lot’s people);
53|54| So that there covered them that which covered.
53|55| Then which of the gifts of your Lord do you dispute about?
53|56| And this (Messenger) is a warner like the warners of old.
53|57| That (the Last Hour) which is bound to draw near has drawn near.
53|58| None besides God can disclose it (or remove the dread and suffering it entails).
53|59| Do you then deem this Discourse (which enables your eternal salvation) strange?
53|60| And do you laugh and not weep (in consideration of your recalcitrance and sinfulness),
53|61| Moreover entertain yourselves (with fun and games)?
53|62| Rather: prostrate before God (in submission) and worship Him (so that He may protect you from the dread and suffering of the Last Hour).
54|1| The Last Hour has drawn near, and the moon has split.
54|2| Whenever they see a miracle, they turn from it in aversion and say: "This is sorcery like many others, one after the other."
54|3| And they have denied (Prophethood and whatever sign the Prophet has shown them), and followed their lusts and caprices. Yet every matter has its appointed time (and so they will come to know the truth).
54|4| And for certain there have already come to them reports (of the Hereafter and former peoples) wherein is ample warning to deter (them from their ways).
54|5| All this (which is included in the Qur’an) is consummate wisdom, but warnings do not avail (such people).
54|6| (Seeing that they reject your call) withdraw from them. The Day will come when the caller will call (all the people) to something exceptionally terrible.
54|7| With eyes downcast, they will come forth from their graves as if they were locusts scattered abroad (in confusion),
54|8| Hastening (in obedience) toward the caller. The unbelievers will say: "This is a hard day."
54|9| Before them the people of Noah denied: they denied Our servant, and said: "This is a madman!" and he was rebuked (with insolence and prevented from preaching).
54|10| So he prayed to his Lord, saying: "I have been overcome, so help me!."
54|11| So We opened the gates of the sky, with water outpouring;
54|12| And We caused the earth to gush forth with springs, so the waters (of the sky and the earth) combined for (the fulfillment of) a matter already ordained.
54|13| And We carried him on a (construction of) wooden planks and nails,
54|14| Running (through the water) under Our Eyes as a reward for one who had (wrongfully) been rejected with ingratitude.
54|15| And indeed We left it (the Ark) as a sign (of the truth), then is there any that remembers and takes heed?
54|16| But see how (severe) was My punishment and (how true) My warnings!
54|17| And indeed (by revealing it through human language) We have made the Qur’an easy for remembrance (of God, and taking heed), then is there any that remembers and takes heed?
54|18| The (tribe of) ‘Ad also denied (their Messenger), then see how (severe) was My punishment and (how true) My warnings:
54|19| We sent upon them a furious windstorm through certain time of enduring disaster;
54|20| Tearing people away as if they were trunks of uprooted palm-trees.
54|21| So see how (severe) was My punishment and (how true) My warnings!
54|22| And indeed (by revealing it through human language) We have made the Qur’an easy for remembrance (of God and for taking heed). Then, is there any that remembers and takes heed?
54|23| The (tribe of) Thamud also denied all the warnings (given to them).
54|24| They said: "What? A mortal from among us, all alone – shall we follow him? Then indeed we would be lost in a strange error and madness!
54|25| "Is the Remembrance and Reminder (sent down) upon him from among us? No. Rather, he is a presumptuous liar (one claiming superiority over us)."
54|26| (We told their Messenger): "Soon they will know who is the presumptuous liar.
54|27| "We will surely send the she-camel as a trial for them (in response to their insistently asking you to show a miracle). So watch them (and observe what they do), and bear patiently (with their misconduct toward you).
54|28| "And inform them that the water is to be shared between her and them; each sharer will be present by the water when it is their turn to drink.
54|29| But (without observing the turn) they (schemed to slaughter the she-camel and) called their comrade (one of the nine ring-leaders); and so he ventured (upon the evil deed), and slaughtered her cruelly.
54|30| And see how (severe) was My punishment and (how true) My warnings:
54|31| We sent upon them a single Blast, and they became like dried chippings of shrubs used as cattle-fodder.
54|32| And indeed (by revealing it through human language) We have made the Qur’an easy for remembrance (of God and for taking heed). Then, is there any that remembers and takes heed?
54|33| And the people of Lot also denied all the warnings (given to them).
54|34| We sent a hurricane of stones upon them, save the family of Lot: We saved them by early dawn,
54|35| As a grace from Us. Thus do We reward those who give thanks.
54|36| Lot had indeed forewarned them of Our striking down, but they disputed the warnings.
54|37| They had harassed him (with frequent coming-and-going) to abuse his guests, and so We blotted out their eyes: taste My punishment and (the consequences of) My warnings!
54|38| The punishment decreed assuredly overtook them early in the morning.
54|39| So taste My punishment and (the consequences of) My warnings!
54|40| And indeed (by revealing it through human language) We have made the Qur’an easy for remembrance (of God and for taking heed). Then, is there any that remembers and takes heed?
54|41| And warnings certainly came also to the clan of the Pharaoh,
54|42| Who denied all Our messages and signs (including the miracles showed to them), and in the end We seized them after the manner of One All-Glorious with irresistible might, All-Omnipotent.
54|43| Now are your unbelievers (O Makkans) better and more powerful than those (whose exemplary histories We have recounted)? Or is there an exemption (from punishment written) for you in the Scriptures?
54|44| Or do they say, "We are a host united and invincible"?
54|45| (But let them know that) the hosts will all be routed, and they will turn their backs and flee.
54|46| Indeed, the Last Hour is their appointed time (for their complete recompense), and the Last Hour will be more grievous and more bitter.
54|47| The disbelieving criminals will be in utter loss away (from Paradise) and burning in the Blazes.
54|48| On that Day they will be dragged in the Fire on their faces: "Taste the touch of Hell!"
54|49| Surely We have created each and every thing by (precise) measure.
54|50| And Our commanding is not other than a single (command), like the twinkling of an eye.
54|51| We have destroyed many peoples like you (in wrongdoing, some of whose stories We have recounted and some not). Then, is there any that will remember and take heed (and so believe in God and follow His Religion)?
54|52| And everything that they did exists (recorded) in (their) notebooks (of deeds).
54|53| Everything small or great is written down.
54|54| And the God-revering, pious ones will be in Gardens and by rivers;
54|55| In the assembly of honor composed of the loyal and truthful in the Presence of the One All-Omnipotent Sovereign.
55|1| The All-Merciful
55|2| He has taught the Qur’an (to humankind and, through them, the jinn);
55|3| He has created human;
55|4| He has taught him speech.
55|5| The sun and the moon are by an exact calculation (of the All-Merciful).
55|6| And the stars and the trees both prostrate (before God in perfect submission to His laws).
55|7| And the heaven – He has made it high (above the earth), and He has set up the balance.
55|8| So that you may not go beyond (the limits with respect to) the balance.
55|9| And observe the balance with full equity, and do not fall short in it.
55|10| And the earth – He has laid it down and furnished for living beings.
55|11| Therein are fruits (of various kinds), and date-palms with sheathed clusters;
55|12| And also corn, with leaves and stalk (for use as fodder), and scented herb.
55|13| Then, (O humankind and jinn) which of the favors of your Lord will you deny?
55|14| He has created human from sounding clay like the potter’s;
55|15| And He has created the jinn from a smokeless (fusing flame of) fire.
55|16| Then, (O humankind and jinn) which of the favors of your Lord will you deny?
55|17| He is the Lord of the two easts and the Lord of the two wests.
55|18| Then, (O humankind and jinn) which of the favors of your Lord will you deny?
55|19| He has let flow forth the two large bodies of water, they meet together
55|20| (But) between them is a barrier, which they do not transgress (and so they do not merge).
55|21| Then, (O humankind and jinn) which of the favors of your Lord will you deny?
55|22| There come forth from them pearl and coral.
55|23| Then (O humankind and jinn) which of the favors of your Lord will you deny?
55|24| His are the ships constructed (by God’s inspiration and running) through the sea (with sails unfurled), lofty like mountains.
55|25| Then, (O humankind and jinn) which of the favors of your Lord will you deny?
55|26| All that is on the earth is perishable;
55|27| But there remains forever the "Face" of your Lord, the One of Majesty and Munificence.
55|28| Then, (O humankind and jinn) which of the favors of your Lord will you deny?
55|29| All that are in the heavens and on the earth entreat Him (in their needs). Every (moment of every) day He is in a new manifestation (with all His Attributes and Names as the Divine Being).
55|30| Then, (O humankind and jinn) which of the favors of your Lord will you deny?
55|31| We will (in time) settle your affairs, O you two most honorable classes of creatures (of the earth endowed with important faculties and therefore having heavy responsibilities)!
55|32| Then, (O humankind and jinn) which of the favors of your Lord will you deny?
55|33| O you assembly of jinn and humankind! If you are able to pass through and beyond the spherical regions of the heavens and the earth, then pass through. You will not pass through except with an authority (spiritual or scientific).
55|34| Then, (O humankind and jinn) which of the favors of your Lord will you deny?
55|35| There will be sent on you both, a flame of fire (to burn) and a smoke (to choke), then you will not help each other (to safety or refuge).
55|36| Then, (O humankind and jinn) which of the favors of your Lord will you deny?
55|37| And finally when the heaven is rent asunder, and it becomes rosy like red hide – !
55|38| Then, (O humankind and jinn) which of the favors of your Lord will you deny?
55|39| On that Day neither humans nor jinn will be questioned about their sins (to know whether they are sinful or not).
55|40| Then, (O humankind and jinn) which of the favors of your Lord will you deny?
55|41| The disbelieving criminals will be known by their marks (especially on their faces), and seized by the forelocks and the feet.
55|42| Then, (O humankind and jinn) which of the favors of your Lord will you deny?
55|43| This is Hell, which the disbelieving criminals deny.
55|44| They will go round between it(s fire) and hot, boiling water.
55|45| Then, (O humankind and jinn) which of the favors of your Lord will you deny?
55|46| But for him who lives in awe of his Lord and of the standing before his Lord (in the Hereafter), there will be two Gardens.
55|47| Then, (O humankind and jinn) which of the favors of your Lord will you deny?
55|48| Having in them trees with thick, spreading branches.
55|49| Then, (O humankind and jinn) which of the favors of your Lord will you deny?
55|50| In them both are two flowing springs.
55|51| Then, (O humankind and jinn) which of the favors of your Lord will you deny?
55|52| In them both are all kinds of fruit in pairs.
55|53| Then, (O humankind and jinn) which of the favors of your Lord will you deny?
55|54| Reclining upon beds lined with silk brocade, and the fruits of the two Gardens within reach.
55|55| Then, (O humankind and jinn) which of the favors of your Lord will you deny?
55|56| In them are pure, chaste-eyed spouses (whose glances are fixed on their spouses only), whom no man or jinn has touched before.
55|57| Then, (O humankind and jinn) which of the favors of your Lord will you deny?
55|58| Like rubies and coral (they will seem, in rare beauty and radiance).
55|59| Then, (O humankind and jinn) which of the favors of your Lord will you deny?
55|60| Is the recompense of excellence (in obedience to God) other than excellence?
55|61| Then, (O humankind and jinn) which of the favors of your Lord will you deny?
55|62| And besides these two, there are yet two other Gardens.
55|63| Then, (O humankind and jinn) which of the favors of your Lord will you deny?
55|64| Dark green throughout,
55|65| Then, (O humankind and jinn) which of the favors of your Lord will you deny?
55|66| In them both are springs gushing forth.
55|67| Then, (O humankind and jinn) which of the favors of your Lord will you deny?
55|68| In them both are fruits, and date-palms and pomegranates.
55|69| Then, (O humankind and jinn) which of the favors of your Lord will you deny?
55|70| In them both are maidens good in character and beautiful.
55|71| Then, (O humankind and jinn) which of the favors of your Lord will you deny?
55|72| Pure maidens assigned for them in secluded pavilions.
55|73| Then, (O humankind and jinn) which of the favors of your Lord will you deny?
55|74| Whom no man or jinn has touched before.
55|75| Then, (O humankind and jinn) which of the favors of your Lord will you deny?
55|76| (The people of those Gardens) reclining on green cushions and rich, beautiful mattresses.
55|77| Then, (O humankind and jinn) which of the favors of your Lord will you deny?
55|78| Blessed and Supreme is the Name of your Lord, the One of Majesty and Munificence.
56|1| When the Event to happen happens,
56|2| There is no denying its happening –
56|3| Abasing some and exalting others;
56|4| When the earth is shaken with a violent shock;
56|5| And the mountains are shattered and crumble
56|6| So they become dust scattered;
56|7| You (all conscious, responsible beings) will be sorted out into three groups
56|8| Thus: the people of the Right (the people of happiness and prosperity, who receive their Records in their right hands): how happy and prosperous are the people of the Right!
56|9| And the people of the Left (the people of wretchedness, who will receive their Records in their left hands): how wretched are the people of the Left!
56|10| And the foremost (in faith and good deeds, and serving God’s cause) will be the foremost (in receiving and enjoying God’s mercy).
56|11| Those are the ones near-stationed to God,
56|12| In Gardens abounding in bounty and blessings.
56|13| A good many of them are from among the first (to have embraced God’s Religion);
56|14| And a few from the later (generations).
56|15| (They will be seated) on lined thrones (encrusted with gold and precious stones),
56|16| Reclining upon them, facing one another.
56|17| There will go round them immortal youths,
56|18| With goblets, and ewers, and a cup from a clear-flowing spring,
56|19| From which no aching of the head ensues, nor intoxication of the mind;
56|20| And with fruits such as they choose,
56|21| And with the flesh of fowls such as they desire;
56|22| And (there will be) pure maidens, most beautiful of eye,
56|23| Like pearls kept hidden (in their shells).
56|24| A reward for all (the good) that they used to do.
56|25| They will hear there neither vain talk nor accusing speech;
56|26| (They will hear) only speech (wishing) peace and security after peace and security.
56|27| And the people of the Right (the people of happiness and prosperity who will receive their Records in their right hands): how happy and prosperous are the people of the Right!
56|28| Amidst cherry trees laden with fruit,
56|29| And banana trees with fruit piled high,
56|30| And shade long-extended,
56|31| And water gushing (and flowing constantly),
56|32| And fruits (of every other kind) abounding,
56|33| Never cut off, nor forbidden;
56|34| And (with them will be their) spouses ennobled with beauty and spiritual perfection:
56|35| We have brought them into being in a new creation;
56|36| And We have made them virgins,
56|37| Full of love for their husbands, and equal in age,
56|38| For the people of the Right (the people of happiness and prosperity):
56|39| A good many of them are from among the first (to have embraced God’s Religion);
56|40| And a good many are from the later (generations).
56|41| And the people of the Left (who will be given their Records in their left hands): how wretched are the people of the Left!
56|42| In the midst of scorching wind and hot, boiling water,
56|43| And the shadow of black smoke,
56|44| (A shadow) neither cooling nor refreshing.
56|45| Indeed, before that, they were lost in excess of pleasures (without moral scruples);
56|46| And would persist in committing the greatest sin (of unbelief or associating partners with God and denying the afterlife).
56|47| And would say: "What? After we have died and become dust and bones, will we indeed be raised from the dead?
56|48| "And also our forefathers of old?"
56|49| Say: "Those of old and those of later times
56|50| "Will all be brought together at an appointed time on a Day well-known."
56|51| Then: O you who have strayed (from the Straight Path), who deny (the afterlife),
56|52| You will surely eat of the tree of Zaqqum;
56|53| And you fill up your bellies with it.
56|54| Thereafter you will drink of hot, boiling water;
56|55| You will drink as the camel raging with thirst drinks.
56|56| This will be their welcome on the Day of Judgment.
56|57| It is We Who have created you. So will you not confirm as truth (what We convey to you as truth)?
56|58| Have you considered the semen that you emit?
56|59| Is it you who create it, or are We the Creator?
56|60| It is also We Who decree death among you – and We cannot be overcome,
56|61| So that We may replace you (with new generations like you), and bring you about in a new mode and form of existence you do not know.
56|62| For certain you know the first creation (how you are brought into the world), then should you not reflect on (and anticipate the second creation)?
56|63| Have you ever considered the seed you sow (in the ground)?
56|64| Is it you who cause it to grow, or is it We Who make it grow?
56|65| If We so willed, We would surely make it into chaff, and then you would not cease to exclaim:
56|66| "We are indeed in a great loss (with our money, time, and efforts gone to waste).
56|67| "Rather, we are left utterly deprived (of our livelihood)."
56|68| Have you ever considered the water that you drink?
56|69| Is it you who send it down from the cloud or is it We Who send it down?
56|70| If We so willed, We would make it bitter and salty. Then, should you not give thanks?
56|71| Have you ever considered the fire that you kindle?
56|72| Is it you who bring into being the tree for it, or is it We bring it into being?
56|73| We have made it something for reflection (on Our handiwork and Our grace in making the creation useful and beautiful), and a comfort (especially) for the dwellers (and wayfarers) in the desert.
56|74| Therefore, glorify the Name of your Lord, the Supreme (declaring His being absolutely above having any defects and partners).
56|75| I swear by the locations of the stars (and their falling),
56|76| – It is indeed a very great oath, if you but knew. –
56|77| Most certainly it is a Qur’an (recited) most honorable,
56|78| In a Book well-guarded.
56|79| None except the purified ones can reach it (to obtain the knowledge it contains. And none except those cleansed of material and spiritual impurities should touch it).
56|80| It is a Book being sent down in parts from the Lord of the worlds.
56|81| Is it this Discourse that you hold in low esteem?
56|82| And do you make your share of it denying it?
56|83| Then, how is it you do not – when the soul comes up to the throat (of a dying human),
56|84| While you are looking on –
56|85| And while We are nearer to him (the dying human) than you are, but you do not see (that) –
56|86| Then, how is it you do not – if you are not bound to Us in dependence (subject to Our will) –
56|87| (How is it that) you do not restore the soul (of that dying human), if you are truthful (in your claim)?
56|88| Now, if he (that dying human) is of those near-stationed to God,
56|89| Then (there is for him) comfort in eternal relief (from all kinds of hardships and pains), and abundance, and a Garden of bounty and blessing.
56|90| If he is of the people of the Right (the people of happiness and prosperity who will receive their Records in their right hands),
56|91| Then "Peace be upon you" (will be what you will always hear) from the people of the Right.
56|92| But if he is one of those who denied (Our Message and Our Messengers), who strayed (from the Straight Path),
56|93| Then his entertainment is boiling water
56|94| And roasting in a Blazing Flame.
56|95| Surely this (Qur’an) is certain truth.
56|96| So glorify the Name of your Lord, the Supreme (affirming that He is exalted above any falsehood).
57|1| Whatever is in the heavens and the earth glorifies God; and He is the All-Glorious with irresistible might, the All-Wise.
57|2| To Him belongs the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth. He gives life and causes to die. He has full power over everything.
57|3| He is the First, the Last, the All-Outward, and the All-Inward. He has full knowledge of everything.
57|4| He it is Who has created the heavens and the earth in six days, then He established Himself on the Throne. He knows whatever goes into the earth (such as rain and seeds), and whatever comes forth out of it (such as moisture, plant and animal life-forms), and whatever descends from the heaven (such as rain, light, and angels), and whatever ascends into it (such as vapor, and supplications). And He is with you wherever you may be. And God sees well all that you do.
57|5| To Him belongs the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth. To God are all matters ultimately referred, (and whatever He wills occurs).
57|6| He makes the night pass into the day and He makes the day pass into the night (and so makes each grow longer or shorter). And He has full knowledge of whatever lies (hidden) in the bosoms.
57|7| Believe in God and His Messenger, and spend (in God’s cause) out of all that He has entrusted to you – those among you who believe and spend (in God’s cause), for them there is a great reward.
57|8| What is the matter with you that you do not believe in God (as His being God requires), when the Messenger calls you to believe in your Lord (Who has created and sustains you), and He has indeed taken your pledge, if you are true believers.
57|9| He it is Who sends down to His servant Revelations clear as evidence and in meaning in order to lead you out of all kinds of darkness into the light. Surely God is All-Pitying, All-Compassionate toward you.
57|10| What is the matter with you that you do not spend in God’s cause, when God’s is the inheritance of the heavens and the earth. Not equal among you are those who spend before the victory comes and fight (for God’s sake, and those who do not): they are greater in rank than those who spend after the victory comes and fight later. However to all God has promised what is the best (Paradise). God is fully aware of all that you do.
57|11| Whoever lends God a goodly loan, God will increase it manifold (to his credit), and he will have an honorable, generous reward (in addition).
57|12| On that Day you will see the believing men and the believing women (led swiftly toward Paradise), with their light shining forth before them and on their right hands. "Glad tidings for you today! Gardens through which rivers flow, (into which you will enter) to abide therein. This is indeed the supreme triumph."
57|13| On that Day the hypocritical men and the hypocritical women will say to those who believe: "Wait for us that we may have some light from your light." It will be said: "Turn back (if you can, to the world where such light was to be obtained), and seek light (through your deeds you did there)." Just then a wall of separation will be put between them, with a gate therein (through which the hypocrites, so as to increase their regret, will observe the state of the believers). The inner side of the wall (which will separate the believers from the hypocrites) – there will be in it the mercy (of eternal happiness), and outside it there will be the punishment (of eternal doom)
57|14| They (the hypocrites) will call out to the believers: "Were we not with you (in the world)?" They will reply: "True! But you (willfully) put yourselves in the way of temptation, and hesitated and doubted (waiting on events to choose which side to be on and not assuming yourselves to stand by the truth of Islam), and false expectations (that God’s Religion would one day be defeated) deluded you, until God’s decree (of death) came to you; and the deluder (Satan) deluded you (with wrong conceptions) about God.
57|15| "And this Day no ransom will be taken from you, nor from those who disbelieved. Your final refuge is the Fire; that is your harbor suited to you. How evil a destination to arrive at!"
57|16| Has not the time yet come for those who believe that their hearts should soften with humility and submit (to God to strive in His cause) in the face of God’s Remembrance (the Qur’an) and what has come down of the truth (the Divine teachings)? And (has not the time yet come) that they should not be like those who were given the Book before? A long time has passed over them (after they received the Book) and so their hearts have hardened; and many among them (have been) transgressors.
57|17| Know that God revives the earth after its death (and He may revive the decaying hearts in the same way). We have indeed made clear the signs and Revelations (to enable such revival and) that you may reason and understand.
57|18| Those men and women who give alms (by spending out of their wealth in both the prescribed and supererogatory duties of alms-giving), and lend to God a goodly loan (by spending either in His cause or for the needy), it will be increased manifold to their credit, and they will have an honorable, generous reward in addition.
57|19| Those who believe in God and His Messengers (those whose actions prove their profession of faith) – they are, in the sight of their Lord, the loyal and truthful (to God in whatever they do and say), and the witnesses (who have borne testimony to the truth with their lives). They have their (particular) reward and their (particular) light. But those who disbelieve and deny Our manifest signs and Revelations – they will be companions of the Blazing Flame.
57|20| Know that the present, worldly life is but a play, vain talk and ostentation, and mutual boasting among you, and competing in wealth and children – it is like when rain comes down and the vegetation grown by it pleases the farmers, (but) then it dries up and you see it turn yellow, then it becomes straw; and in the Hereafter there is a severe punishment, but also (there is) forgiveness from God and His good pleasure (which are everlasting); whereas the present, worldly life is but a transient enjoyment of delusion.
57|21| And (rather than competing for the things of this world) race with one another to forgiveness from your Lord, and to a Garden the vastness of which is as the vastness of heaven and earth, prepared for those who truly believe in God and His Messengers. That is God’s bounty, which He grants to whom He wills. God is of tremendous bounty.
57|22| No affliction occurs on the earth (such as drought, famine, and earthquakes) or in your own persons (such as disease, damage in your property, and loss of loved ones), but it is recorded in a Book before We bring it into existence – doing so is surely easy for God –
57|23| So that you may not grieve for what has escaped you, nor exult because of what God has granted you: God does not love anyone proud and boastful –
57|24| Those who act niggardly (in spending of what God has granted them) and urge others to be niggardly: whoever turns away (from carrying out God’s command to spend in His cause and for the needy), then surely God is All-Wealthy and Self-Sufficient (absolutely independent of all His creatures), All-Praiseworthy (as your Lord, Who provides for you and the needs of all other beings).
57|25| Assuredly We have sent Our Messengers with manifest truths (and clear proofs of their being Messengers), and We have sent down with them the Book and the Balance so that (relations among) humankind may live by equity. And We have sent down iron in which is stern might and benefits for humankind, so that God may mark out those who help (the cause of) God and His Messengers, though they do not see Him. Surely God is All-Strong, All-Glorious with irresistible might.
57|26| We certainly sent as Messengers Noah and Abraham, and established in their line Prophethood and the Book. Among them (their offspring) there have been those who have followed the right guidance, but many among them have been transgressors.
57|27| Thereafter, We sent, following in their footsteps, others of Our Messengers, and We sent Jesus son of Mary, and granted him the Gospel, and placed in the hearts of those who followed him tenderness and mercy. And monasticism: they innovated it – We did not prescribe it to them – only to seek God’s good pleasure, but they have not observed it as its observance requires. So We have granted those among them who have truly believed their reward, but many among them have been transgressors.
57|28| O you who believe! Keep from disobedience to God in reverence for Him and piety, and truly believe in His Messenger (Muhammad). He will grant you twofold of His mercy (one for your believing in all the previous Prophets and one for the Last Prophet), and He will appoint for you a light to move (on the Straight Path in this world, leading to Paradise in the Hereafter), and He will forgive you. God is All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate.
57|29| (This is told you so) that the people of the Book should know that they cannot determine or restrict anything of God’s grace, (and neither they nor Muslim believers will be able to attain anything of it unless they believe in Muhammad together with all the previous Prophets), and that all grace is in God’s Hand, He grants it to whom He wills. God is of tremendous grace.
58|1| God has indeed heard (and accepted) the words of the woman who pleads with you concerning her husband and refers her complaint to God. God hears the dialogue between you. Surely God is All-Hearing, All-Seeing.
58|2| Those among you who declare their wives to be unlawful for them by using of them the expression "Be as my mother’s back to me," (should know that) their wives are not their mothers. Their mothers are none other than the women who gave them birth. Such men certainly utter a word abhorred (by the Shari‘ah) and a falsehood. Yet God is surely All-Pardoning (He overlooks the faults of His servants), All-Forgiving.
58|3| Those who declare their wives unlawful for them (by using of them that abhorred expression) and thereafter wish to go back on the words they have uttered must free a slave before they (the spouses) touch each other. This is what you are urged to do. And God is fully aware of what you do (so do not seek to evade this act of penance and expiation for your wrong).
58|4| Whoever does not find (means to do that), let him fast two (lunar) months consecutively before they (the spouses) touch each other. And he that is not able to do so, (his penance shall be) to feed sixty destitute ones (two meals). This is in order that you perfect your faith in God and His Messenger (so that you believe in the truth of whatever God has enjoined and His Messenger conveyed to you, and live accordingly). These are the bounds of God. And for the unbelievers there is a painful punishment.
58|5| Those who oppose God and His Messenger (in the observance of God’s bounds) will certainly be abased (in the world) even as those (who did likewise) before them were abased. We have certainly sent down clear Revelations (to guide you to happiness in both worlds). And for the unbelievers there is a humiliating punishment.
58|6| On the day when God will raise them all from the dead, and make them truly understand all that they did (in the world, and call them to account): God has had it written down, though they have forgotten it. God is witness over everything.
58|7| Have you not considered that God knows whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth? There is not a secret counsel between three persons but He is the fourth of them, nor between five but He is the sixth of them, nor less than that nor more but He is with them wherever they may be. Thereafter He will make them truly understand all that they do (and call them to account) on the Day of Resurrection. Surely God has full knowledge of everything.
58|8| Have you not considered those who were forbidden to hold secret counsels, and yet reverted to what they had been forbidden, and held secret meetings to commit sins (such as drinking alcohol, gambling, and evading the Prayer), and for (urging one another to) offensiveness and disobedience to the Messenger (in his commands and prohibitions). (It is these very people who) when they come to you, salute you with a salutation that God has never taught you and with which He has never saluted you, and say to one another (in derision): "Why does God not punish us for what we say (if Muhammad is truly His Prophet)?" Hell will suffice them, they will enter it to roast. How evil a destination to arrive at!
58|9| O you who believe! If you hold secret counsels, do not hold secret counsels to commit sins, or for (urging one another to) offensiveness, and disobedience to the Messenger; but rather hold counsels for godliness, and righteousness, and piety. Keep from disobedience to God in reverence for Him and piety, to Whom you will be gathered.
58|10| Secret counsels (held for other reasons) are only (a provocation) from Satan, in order that he may cause grief to the believers; yet he cannot harm them in anything unless by God’s leave; and in God let the believers put their trust.
58|11| O you who believe! When you are told, "Make room in the assemblies (for one another and for new comers)," do make room. God will make room for you (in His grace and Paradise). And when you are told, "Rise up (and leave the assembly)," then do rise up. God will raise (in degree) those of you who truly believe (and act accordingly), and in degrees those who have been granted the knowledge (especially of religious matters). Surely God is fully aware of all that you do.
58|12| O you who believe! When you intend to consult the Messenger in private, offer something in alms (to the needy) before your consultation. That is better for you and purer. Yet if you do not find (means to do so), then God is surely All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate.
58|13| Is it that you are afraid of offering something in alms before your consultation (with him)? (If so) and you have not done it, and God has turned to you in forgiveness, then establish the Prayer in conformity with its conditions, and pay the Prescribed Purifying Alms, and obey God and His Messenger. God is fully aware of all that you do.
58|14| Have you not considered those who take for confidants and guardians a people whom God has condemned to punishment? They are neither of you (O believers) nor of the others (whom they take for confidants and guardians). They swear to a lie (that they are of you), while they know (it to be a lie).
58|15| God has prepared for them a severe punishment. Evil indeed is that which they do habitually.
58|16| They take their oaths as a covering (to screen their misdeeds and themselves from accusation), and bar (people) from God’s way. Therefore there is for them a humiliating punishment.
58|17| Neither their wealth nor their children will avail them anything against God. They are companions of the Fire: they will abide therein.
58|18| The Day when God will raise them all from the dead, they will swear to Him as (now) they swear to you. They fancy that they will have some standing (through their oaths). Be aware: they are but liars.
58|19| Satan has subdued them and so caused them to forget remembrance of God. Those are the party of Satan. Be aware: the party of Satan, they are the losers (the self-ruined).
58|20| Those who oppose God and His Messenger – surely those will be among the most abased.
58|21| God has decreed: "I will most certainly prevail, I and My Messengers." Surely God is All-Strong, All-Glorious with irresistible might.
58|22| You never find a people who truly believe in God and the Last Day loving toward those who oppose God and His Messenger, even if they be their (own) parents, or their children, or their brothers (and sisters), and their clan. Those (are they) in whose hearts God has inscribed faith and has strengthened them with a spirit from Him (which is the source of their spiritual vigor and intellectual enlightenment). And He will admit them into Gardens through which rivers flow, therein to abide. God is well-pleased with them and they are well-pleased with Him. Those are the party of God. Be aware: the party of God are those who are the prosperous.
59|1| Whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth glorifies God. He is the All-Glorious with irresistible might, the All-Wise.
59|2| He it is Who drove out those who disbelieve from among the People of the Book from their (fortified) homes as the first instance of gathering (them for punishment and banishing from the heartland of Islam). You did not think that they would go forth (so easily), just as they thought that their strongholds would protect them against God. But (the will of) God came upon them from where they had not reckoned (it could come): He cast dread into their hearts. And so they were wrecking their homes by their own hands, as well as by the hands of the believers. Learn a lesson, then, O people of insight.
59|3| Had it not been that God had decreed banishment for them, He would certainly have punished them (with death and expropriation) in this world. And for them in the Hereafter there is the punishment of the Fire.
59|4| This is because they defied and opposed God and His Messenger. Whoever deifies and opposes God, then surely God is severe in retribution.
59|5| Whatever (of their) palm-trees you may have cut down or left them standing on their roots, it was by God’s leave and so that He might disgrace the transgressors.
59|6| What of theirs God bestowed as gains of war on His Messenger – and you did not spur any horse or riding-camel for it, but God gives His Messenger mastery over whomever He wills. God has full power over everything –
59|7| What God has bestowed on His Messenger as gains of war from the peoples of the townships: (one-fifth of) it belongs to God, and to the Messenger, and his near kinsfolk, and orphans, and the destitute, and the wayfarer (lacking means to sustain a journey), so that it should not become a fortune circulating among the rich among you. Whatever the Messenger gives you accept it willingly, and whatever he forbids you, refrain from it. Keep from disobedience to God in reverence for Him and piety. Surely God is severe in retribution.
59|8| It is also for the poor Emigrants, who have been driven from their homes and their property, seeking favor with God and His approval and good pleasure, and who help (the cause of) God and His Messenger. Those are they who are truthful (in their profession of faith and loyalty to its commands).
59|9| Those who, before their coming, had their abode (in Madinah), preparing it as a home for Islam and faith, love those who emigrate to them for God’s sake, and in their hearts do not begrudge what they have been given, and (indeed) they prefer them over themselves, even though poverty be their own lot. (They too have a share in such gains of war.) Whoever is guarded against the avarice of his own soul – those are the ones who are truly prosperous.
59|10| And all those who come after them (and follow in their footsteps) pray: "O our Lord! Forgive us and our brothers (and sisters) in Religion who have preceded us in faith, and let not our hearts entertain any ill-feeling against any of the believers. O our Lord! You are All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate (especially toward Your believing servants).
59|11| Have you not considered those who are hypocrites: they say to their brothers who disbelieve from among the People of the Book: "If you are driven away (from Madinah), we will certainly go out with you, and we will never obey anyone against you. If war is waged against you, we will most certainly help you." God bears witness that they are indeed liars.
59|12| For if they are indeed driven away, they will never go out with them, and if war is waged against them, they will never help them. Even supposing they would help them (in such an eventuality), they would most certainly turn their backs in flight, and so they would not receive help (from anywhere, and be destroyed because of their manifest treachery to the Muslims).
59|13| The dread they have of you in their hearts is more intense than their fear of God. This is because they are a people who are devoid of understanding and so cannot grasp the truth.
59|14| They will never fight against you as a united body (in alliance with the Hypocrites, with the Jews of Khaybar and others), unless it be from within fortified strongholds or from behind high walls. Severe is their belligerent discord among themselves (except when not opportunistically allied in warfare against you). You think of them as one body, but in fact their hearts are at odds with one another: This is because they are a people who do not reason (and come to an understanding of the situations they face).
59|15| Just like those (the Jews of the Banu Qaynuqa‘) who, a short time before them (the Jews of the Banu Nadir), tasted the evil result of their own doings – and (in the Hereafter) for them there is (also) a painful punishment.
59|16| (The hypocrites have deceived them) just like Satan, when he says to human, "Disbelieve (in God)!" Then when he disbelieves, he says (to human): "Surely I am quit of you, for surely I fear God, the Lord of the worlds!"
59|17| So the end of both (Satan and those whom he has deceived, and the hypocrites and those whom they have betrayed) is that they will find themselves in the Fire to abide therein. That is the recompense of the wrongdoers.
59|18| O you who believe! Keep from disobedience to God in reverence for Him and piety to deserve His protection, and let every person consider what he has forwarded for the morrow. Keep from disobedience to God in reverence for Him and piety. Surely God is fully aware of all that you do.
59|19| And do not be like those who are oblivious of God and so God has made them oblivious of their own selves. Those, they are the transgressors.
59|20| Not equal are the companions of the Fire and the companions of Paradise. The companions of Paradise, they are the triumphant.
59|21| If We had sent down this Qur’an on a mountain, you would certainly see it humble itself, splitting asunder for awe of God. Such parables We strike for humankind so that they may reflect (on why the Qur’an is being revealed to humankind and how great and important their responsibility is).
59|22| God is He save Whom there is no deity; the Knower of the unseen (all that lies beyond sense-perception) and the witnessed (the corporeal realm). He is the All-Merciful, the All-Compassionate.
59|23| God is He save Whom there is no deity; the Sovereign, the All-Holy and All-Pure, the Supreme Author of peace and salvation and Supreme Author of safety and security Who bestows faith and removes all doubt, the All-Watchful Guardian, the All-Glorious with irresistible might, the All-Compelling of supreme majesty, the One Who has exclusive right to all greatness. All-Glorified is God in that He is absolutely exalted above what they associate with Him.
59|24| He is God, the Creator, the All-Holy Maker, the All-Fashioning. To Him belong the All-Beautiful Names. Whatever is in the heavens and on the earth glorifies Him, (declaring Him to be absolutely above having any defects). He is the All-Glorious with irresistible might, the All-Wise.
60|1| O you who believe! Do not take My enemies and your enemies for friends, offering them love and affection, while they have disbelieved in the truth that has come to you and driven the Messenger and yourselves away (from your homes) only because you believe in God, your Lord (Who has created you and sustains you). If you (now) have set forth (from your homes) to strive in My way and to seek My approval and good pleasure, (then do not take them for friends). You reveal to them your secret in secrecy out of your love and friendship, but I am better aware (than yourselves) of what you do in secret as well as of what you disclose. Whoever does so among you has surely strayed from the right way.
60|2| Should they gain the upper hand over you, they will be to you as enemies (not friends), and stretch forth their hands and tongues against you with malice, and they long for you to disbelieve.
60|3| Your relatives, not even your own children, will be of any benefit to you on the Day of Resurrection. God will distinguish and part you from each other (according to how you believed and acted in the world). God sees well all that you do.
60|4| Indeed you have had an excellent example to follow in Abraham and those in his company, when they said to their (idolatrous) people (who were their kin): "We are quit of you and whatever you worship besides God. We have rejected you (in your polytheism), and there has arisen between us and you enmity and hate forever until you believe in God alone (as the only One to be worshipped." (So it was) except for Abraham’s saying to his father: "I most surely will plead for God’s forgiveness for you, though I have no power at all to do anything for you against God." (And their prayer was): "O Our Lord! It is in You that We have put our trust, and it is to You that we turn in utmost sincerity and devotion, and to You is the homecoming.
60|5| "O Our Lord! Do not make us a prey to those who disbelieve (lest, in overcoming us they think their unbelief to be true and increase therein). And forgive us, our Lord (– especially those of our sins that may cause us to fall prey to those who disbelieve). You are the All-Glorious with irresistible might, the All-Wise."
60|6| You certainly have in them an excellent example to follow for everyone who looks forward to God and the Last Day. Whoever turns away: then (let him know that) God is He Who is the All-Wealthy and Self-Sufficient (absolutely beyond need), the All-Praiseworthy.
60|7| (When you obey God in His commands and prohibitions), it may be that God will bring about love and friendship between you and those of them with whom you are in enmity. God is All-Powerful, and God is All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate.
60|8| God does not forbid you, as regards those who do not make war against you on account of your Religion, nor drive you away from your homes, to be kindly to them, and act towards them with equity. God surely loves the scrupulously equitable.
60|9| God only forbids you, as regards those who make war against you on account of your Religion and drive you away from your homes, or support others to drive you away, to take them for friends and guardians. Whoever takes them for friends and guardians, those are the wrongdoers.
60|10| O you who believe! When believing women come to you as emigrants, test them, (though only) God knows best their faith. Then, if you have ascertained that they are believers, do not return them to the unbelievers. They are not (being believers) lawful (as wives) for the unbelievers nor are the unbelievers lawful (as husbands) for them. But return to them (the unbelievers) whatever they expended (by way of bridal-due when they wed those women). And there will be no blame on you (O believers) if you marry them when you have given them their bridal-due. Also, (on the other side) do not continue to retain disbelieving women in marriage, and ask for the return of whatever you expended as their bridal-due (if they remain among or join the unbelievers), just as the disbelieving men (whose wives have emigrated to you after embracing Islam) have the right to demand the return of whatever they spent. That is God’s judgment and His law; He lays down the law and judges between you. God is All-Knowing, All-Wise.
60|11| If anything of the bridal-dues of your (former) disbelieving wives (who remain among or have joined the unbelievers) has passed to the unbelievers, and afterwards you have your turn (of victory) over them, then pay to those whose wives have gone away the equivalent of what they expended (as bridal-due). And keep from disobedience to God in reverence for Him and piety, in Whom you are believers.
60|12| O Prophet! When the believing women (who have professed Islam) come to you to swear allegiance to you – that they will never associate partners with God in any way, and will not steal, and will not commit any illegal sexual intercourse, and will not kill their children, and will not indulge in slander (such as attributing any of their children to other than their own father) that they have willfully devised, and that they will not disobey you in anything that is proper – then accept their allegiance and ask God for their forgiveness. Surely God is All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate.
60|13| O you who believe! Do not take for friends and guardians a people who have incurred God’s condemnation and punishment: (people) who are bereft of any hope in the Hereafter (because of what their wickedness has earned), just as the unbelievers are bereft of any hope of (ever seeing again) those in the graves.
61|1| All that is in the heavens and all that is on the earth glorifies God. He is the All-Glorious with irresistible might, the All-Wise.
61|2| O you who believe! Why do you say what you do not do (as well as what you will not do)?
61|3| Most odious it is in the sight of God that you say what you do not (and will not) do.
61|4| God surely loves those who fight in His cause in ranks as though they were a firm and solid structure.
61|5| And (remember) when Moses said to his people: "O my people! Why do you affront me while you know indeed that I am the Messenger of God sent to you?" And so, when they swerved from the right way, God made their hearts swerve from the truth. God does not guide the transgressing people.
61|6| And Jesus son of Mary said: "O Children of Israel! Surely I am the Messenger of God sent to you, confirming (whatever of the truth is contained in) the Torah which was revealed before me, and bringing the glad tidings of a Messenger to come after me, whose name is Ahmad." But when he came to them (the whole of humankind including the later generations of the Children of Israel) with the manifest signs (of his being God’s Messenger), they said: "This (which he preaches and does) is clearly (nothing but) sorcery."
61|7| Who is more in wrong than him who fabricates falsehood in attribution to God, when he is being invited to Islam (which is what the promised Messenger is conveying to them?) God surely does not guide the wrongdoing people.
61|8| They long to extinguish God’s light with (a breath from) their mouths (as if it entailed no more than extinguishing a candle with a breath), but God will surely perfect His light, however hateful (it may be) to the unbelievers.
61|9| He it is Who has sent His Messenger with the guidance and the Religion of truth (based on truth, and embodying it) that He may make it prevail over all religions, however hateful it may be to those who associate partners with God.
61|10| O you who believe! Shall I direct you to a bargain (a deal) that will save you from a painful punishment?
61|11| That you believe in God and His Messenger, and strive hard in God’s cause with your wealth and persons. Doing so is what is to your own good, if you but knew it.
61|12| So that He may forgive you your sins and admit you into Gardens through which rivers flow, and into delightful dwellings in Gardens of perpetual bliss. That is the supreme triumph.
61|13| And yet another (blessing) which you love: Help from God and a near victory soon to come (which will lead to further victories). Give glad tidings to the believers.
61|14| O you who believe! Be helpers of God(’s cause and Messenger), even as Jesus son of Mary said to his disciples: "Who will be my helpers (on this way) to God?" The disciples said: "We are the helpers (in the cause) of God." And so it happened that some of the Children of Israel believed (in him and his Message) and others disbelieved (thus becoming two groups). So We strengthened those who believed against their enemies, and they became the uppermost.
62|1| All that is in the heavens and all that is on the earth glorifies God, the Absolute Sovereign, the All-Holy and All-Pure, the All-Glorious with irresistible might, the All-Wise.
62|2| He it is Who has sent among the unlettered ones a Messenger of their own, reciting to them His Revelations, and purifying them (of false beliefs and doctrines, and sins, and all kinds of uncleanness), and instructing them in the Book and the Wisdom, whereas before that they were indeed lost in obvious error.
62|3| And (with the same mission, He has sent him) to other peoples than them who have not yet joined them (in faith). He is the All-Glorious with irresistible might, the All-Wise.
62|4| That is God’s grace. He grants it to whom He wills. Surely God is of tremendous grace.
62|5| The parable of those entrusted to carry the Torah, who subsequently do not carry it out in practice, is that of a donkey carrying a load of books (it transports what it does not understand). How evil is the example of those who (ignore what their Book teaches and) deny God’s Revelations (sent down for them and containing news of the Last Messenger)! God does not guide the wrongdoing people.
62|6| Say: "O you who are Jews! If you claim that you are the favorites of God to the exclusion of all other people, then wish for death, if you are truthful (in your claim)."
62|7| But they will never wish for it because of what they have forwarded (to the Hereafter of sins and offenses) with their own hands. God has full knowledge of the wrongdoers.
62|8| Say: "Death, from which you flee, will surely meet you in any case. Then you will be returned to the Knower of the Unseen and the witnessed, and He will make you understand all that you were doing (and call you to account).
62|9| O you who believe! When the call is made for the Prayer on Friday, then move promptly to the remembrance of God (by listening to the sermon and doing the Prayer), and leave off business (and whatever else you may be preoccupied with). This is better for you, if you but knew.
62|10| And when the Prayer is done, then disperse in the land and seek (your portion) of God’s bounty, and mention God much (both by doing the Prayer and on other occasions), so that you may prosper (in both worlds).
62|11| Yet (it happened that) when they saw (an opportunity for) business or pastime, they broke away for it and left you standing (while preaching the sermon). Say: "What is with God is better (for you) than pastimes and business. God is the Best to be sought as provider with the ultimate rank of providing."
63|1| When the hypocrites come to you, they say: "We bear witness that you are indeed God’s Messenger." God knows that you are indeed His Messenger, and God bears witness that the hypocrites are certainly lying (they do not believe in the truth of what they say).
63|2| They make their oaths a shelter (to hide their inner unbelief and protect themselves in the Muslim community), and so divert themselves (and seek to bar others) from God’s way. Evil indeed is what they habitually do.
63|3| That is because they declared faith but thereafter (inwardly) disbelieved, so a seal has been set on their hearts so that they do not grasp the truth (and cannot recover the ability to reach to it).
63|4| When you see them, their outward form pleases you, and (their posture and speech are attractive and effective so that) you give ear to their words when they speak. (In reality) they are like blocks of wood propped up and (draped over) in striped cloaks. They think (being themselves treacherous) every shout (they hear) to be against them. They are the enemies themselves, so beware of them. May God destroy them (they are liable to destruction by God)! How they are turned away from the truth (and pursue evil purposes)!
63|5| When it is said to them, "Come, and let the Messenger of God ask forgiveness for you (from God)," they turn away their faces, and you see them drawing back in arrogance.
63|6| It is alike for them whether you ask forgiveness for them or do not ask forgiveness for them: God will never forgive them (so that they may return to guidance and hope for happiness in both worlds). God surely does not guide transgressors (whose hearts are infected with irremediable hypocrisy).
63|7| It is they who say (to their comrades): "Do not spend on those (impoverished Muslims) who are with God’s Messenger, so that they may disperse (from around him)." But the treasures of the heavens and the earth belong to God (Who provides for whom He wills as He wills, so the hypocrites have no power to withhold anything from those impoverished Muslims). But the hypocrites do not grasp this (being incapable of truth).
63|8| They say: "For certain, if we return to Madinah, those with more status and power will drive out from it the weaker and lowlier ones." But all glory and might belong to God, and (by His leave) to His Messenger and the believers. But (being incapable of knowledge of the truth) the hypocrites do not know this.
63|9| O you who believe! Let not your wealth nor your children (distract and) divert you from the remembrance of God. Those who do so, they are the losers.
63|10| And spend (in God’s cause and for the needy) out of whatever We provide for you before death comes to any of you and he says: "My Lord! If only You would grant me respite for a short while, so that I may give alms, and be one of the righteous!"
63|11| But never will God grant respite to a soul when its appointed term has come. God is fully aware of all that you do.
64|1| Whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth glorifies God. To Him belongs the sovereignty (absolute ownership and dominion of everything) and for Him are all praise and gratitude; and He has full power over everything.
64|2| He it is Who has created you, but among you are those who are unbelievers, and among you are those who are believers. God sees well all that you do.
64|3| He has created the heavens and the earth with truth (meaningfully and for definite purpose, and on solid foundations of truth), and has formed you, and made your forms so well. And to Him is the homecoming.
64|4| He knows all that is in the heavens and on the earth, and knows all that you keep concealed as well as all that you disclose. God has full knowledge of whatever lies hidden in the bosoms (of His creatures).
64|5| Have there not come to you the illustrative histories of those who disbelieved before, and therefore tasted the evil results of their deeds? And (in the Hereafter) there is for them a painful punishment.
64|6| This is because the Messengers (appointed for them) came to them consistently with manifest truths (and clear proofs of their being Messengers), but (consistently) they said, "Shall a mere mortal guide us?", and so they disbelieved and turned away (from the warning and hope offered to them). God was independent (of any need of them: it was they who needed to believe in and obey Him). God is All-Wealthy and Self-Sufficient (on Whom the whole creation is dependent), All-Praiseworthy.
64|7| Those who disbelieve claim that they will never be raised from the dead. Say: "Yes indeed, by my Lord, you will certainly be raised from the dead, then you will certainly be made to understand all that you did (in the world and called to account for it)." That is easy for God.
64|8| Believe, then, (O humankind) in God and His Messenger, and the light (i.e. the Qur’an) that We send down! God is fully aware of all that you do.
64|9| On the Day when He will assemble you all for the Day of Assembly – that will be the day of loss for some (the unbelievers) and gain for some (the believers). Whoever believes in God and does good, righteous deeds, He will blot out from them their evil deeds (which they sometimes happen to commit), and admit them into Gardens through which rivers flow, therein to abide forever. That is the supreme triumph.
64|10| But as for those who disbelieve and deny Our Revelations, they will be the companions of the Fire, therein to abide: how evil a destination to arrive at!
64|11| No affliction befalls except by God’s leave. Whoever believes in God (truly and sincerely), He guides his heart (to true knowledge of His eternal Will and how He acts with regard to the life of His creatures, and so leads him to humble submission to Him, and to peace and serenity). God has full knowledge of all things.
64|12| Obey God and obey the Messenger. If you turn away (from that command, know that) what rests with Our Messenger is only to convey the Message fully and clearly.
64|13| God, there is no deity but He: so in God let the believers put their trust.
64|14| O you who believe! Among your spouses and children there may be enemies for you, so beware of them. Yet, if you pardon, forbear, and forgive (their faults toward you and in worldly matters), then (know that) God is All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate.
64|15| Your worldly possessions and your children are but a source of temptation and trial (for you); and God it is with Whom is a tremendous reward.
64|16| Keep, then, from disobedience to God in reverence for Him and piety as far as you can, and listen attentively and submit (to His commands), and obey Him, and spend (in His cause and for the needy) as it is to the betterment of your souls. Whoever is guarded against the avarice of his soul, those are they who are truly prosperous.
64|17| If you lend God a goodly loan, He will increase it manifold to you and will forgive you. God is All-Responsive (to gratitude), All-Clement (forbearing before many of the faults of His servants).
64|18| (And He is) the Knower of the unseen and the witnessed, the All-Glorious with irresistible might, the All-Wise.
65|1| O (most illustrious) Prophet! When you (Muslims) intend to divorce women, divorce them considering their waiting-period (as appointed in Law), and reckon the period (with due care), keeping from disobedience to God, your Lord, in reverence for Him and piety. (While the divorce is taking effect, during their waiting-period) do not drive them out from their houses (where they have lived with their husbands), nor shall they themselves leave, except in case they have committed an open indecency. These are the bounds set by God. Whoever exceeds the bounds set by God has surely wronged his own self. You do not know: it may be that afterward God will enable some new situation (to come about between the concerned parties).
65|2| Then, when they reach the end of their waiting-term, either retain them in a fair manner and in observance of their rights, or (the waiting-period having ended) part with them in a fair manner and in observance of their rights. And (as the commended way, in either case) call upon two (Muslim) men of probity from among you as witnesses, and establish the testimony for God (with due consciousness of your responsibility to Him). Anyone who believes in God and the Last Day is exhorted to act so. Whoever keeps from disobedience to God in reverence for Him and piety, He enables a way out for him (of every difficulty),
65|3| And provides for him from where he does not reckon. Whoever puts his trust in God, He is sufficient for him (for all his needs). God surely executes what He decrees; assuredly God has appointed a measure for everything.
65|4| Those of your women who have passed the age of monthly courses (or those who for some reason do not have monthly periods) – if you are in uncertainty about it – their waiting-period is three (lunar) months. As for the women who are pregnant (whether divorced or widows), their waiting-period is until they deliver their burden. Whoever keeps from disobedience to God in reverence for Him and piety, He makes his affair easy for him.
65|5| All that (which has been said) is God’s commandment which He has sent down to you. Whoever keeps from disobedience to God in reverence for Him and piety, He blots out from him his evil deeds, and vastly enlarges reward for him.
65|6| House them (the divorced women during their waiting-period in a part of the house) where you dwell and provide for them, according to your means; and do not harass them so as to straiten conditions for them (thus forcing them to leave). If they are pregnant, maintain them until they deliver their burden; and if (after delivery and the waiting-period has ended) they suckle (the baby) for you, give them their due payment. Take counsel with each other (about the matter and payment for suckling) according to customary good and religiously approvable practice. If you find yourselves making difficulties (and so unable to come to an agreement), then let another (woman) suckle (the baby) on behalf of him (the baby’s father, who must settle the expense).
65|7| Let him who has abundant means spend accordingly; and whoever is granted his provision in (narrower) measure, let him spend out of what God has granted him. God does not charge a soul with a duty except in what He has (already) granted it (of capacity to discharge that duty). God will bring about, after hardship, ease.
65|8| How many a township has turned in arrogance from the commandment of its Lord and His Messengers, and so We called them to account with a severe reckoning (by exposing them to awesome calamities), and punished them with a dire punishment.
65|9| So they tasted the evil result of their own doings and the outcome of their doings was ruin.
65|10| God has prepared for them a severe punishment (in addition, in the Hereafter). So keep from disobedience to God in reverence for Him and piety to deserve His protection, O people of discernment who have believed! Indeed God has sent down to you a Reminder (this Book of guidance to what is true, instructing you in what is for your good and what is against it).
65|11| (And as its embodiment, He has also sent you) a Messenger reciting (and so conveying) to you God’s signs and Revelations which show the truth clearly and illuminate your way, so that He may lead you out of all kinds of darkness into the light, and keep you firm therein. Whoever (truly and sincerely) believes in God and does good, righteous deeds, He will admit him into Gardens through which rivers flow, therein to abide forever. God has indeed granted him an excellent provision (as faith and good deeds in this world and Paradise in the Hereafter).
65|12| God is He Who has created seven heavens and of the earth the like of them; His commands (concerning the creation and its operation, and the life of the inhabitants of the heavens and earth) descend through them, so that you may know for certain that surely God has full power over everything, and that God indeed encompasses all things in (His) Knowledge.
66|1| O Prophet (you who are the greatest representative of Prophethood)! Why do you forbid (yourself) what God has made lawful to you? You seek to please your wives. And God is All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate.
66|2| God has already decreed for you (O believers) on the breaking of your oaths (to do what is not just and right, and the expiation thereof). God is your Guardian, and He is the All-Knowing, the All-Wise.
66|3| (It so happened that) the Prophet confided something to one of his wives, and when she divulged it (to another), and God acquainted him of it, he made known part of it, and missed out part. And when he informed her of it, she asked: "Who has told you this?" He said: "He informed me Who is the All-Knowing, the All-Aware."
66|4| If you two (wives of the Prophet) turn to God in repentance (then that is indeed what you should do); for the hearts of both of you swerved (from what is right). But if you back each other up against him, (be mindful that) God Himself is His Guardian, and that Gabriel, and the righteous ones among the believers, and all the angels besides, are his helpers.
66|5| It may happen that his Lord, if he should divorce you (O wives of the Prophet), will give him in your place wives better than you – submissive to God (muslimah), true in faith (mu’minah), devout in obedience to God, penitent, dedicated to worship and fasting – widows or virgins.
66|6| O you who believe! Guard yourselves and your families (through the enabling discipline of Islamic faith and worship) against a Fire whose fuel is human beings and stones. Over it are angels stern and strict (in executing the command to punish), who do not disobey God in whatever He commands them, and carry out what they are commanded (to carry out).
66|7| "O you who disbelieve! Do not offer excuses for yourselves this Day! You are only being recompensed for what you used to do (in the world)."
66|8| O you who believe! Turn to God in sincere and reforming repentance. It is hoped that your Lord will blot your evil deeds from you and admit you into Gardens through which rivers flow, on a Day when God will not disgrace nor disappoint the Prophet and those who believe in his company. Their (the believers’) light will shine and spread before them and on their right hands, as they are saying: "Our Lord! Perfect our light (by Your grace so that we may reach Paradise), and forgive us. Surely You have full power over everything!"
66|9| O Prophet! Strive hard against the unbelievers and the hypocrites (as occasion and conditions require), and be stern against them. Their final refuge is Hell: how evil a destination to arrive at!
66|10| God presents the wife of Noah and the wife of Lot as an example for those who disbelieve. They were married to two of Our righteous servants yet betrayed them (by rejecting the Messages they brought from God and collaborating with the unbelievers). But they (their husbands) availed them nothing against God and it was said to them: "Enter the Fire with all those who enter it!"
66|11| And God presents the wife of the Pharaoh as an example for those who believe. She prayed: "My Lord! Build for me a home in Paradise in nearness to You, and keep and save me from the Pharaoh and his conduct, and save me from the wrongdoing people."
66|12| And also Mary, the daughter of ‘Imran, who kept herself chaste (body and soul), so We breathed into it out of Our Spirit, and who affirmed the truth of the words of her Lord (His Revelations – commandments, promises and warnings – to His Messengers), and His Books, and she was of those devoutly obedient to God.
67|1| Blessed and Supreme is He in Whose Hand is the Sovereignty; and He has full power over everything.
67|2| He Who has created death and life, so that He may try you (and demonstrate to yourselves) which of you is better in deeds; and He is the All-Glorious with irresistible might (Whose will none can frustrate), the All-Forgiving (Who forgives many of His servants’ sins so that they learn from being tested).
67|3| He Who has created seven heavens in harmony. You do not see any fault or incongruity in the creation of the All-Merciful. Look yet again: can you see any rifts?
67|4| Then look again and yet again, (and however often you do so, with whatever instruments to aid your looking) your sight will fall back to you dazzled (by the splendor of God’s creation), and awed and weakened (being unable to discern any flaw to support any excuse for claiming that there could be any sharing in the dominion of the universe).
67|5| And, indeed, We have adorned the lowest heaven (the heaven of the world) with lamps (stars), and made (out of) them missiles to drive away devils; and for them We have prepared (in the Hereafter) the punishment of the Blaze.
67|6| And also for those who disbelieve in their Lord is the punishment of Hell. How evil a destination to arrive at!
67|7| When they are cast into it, they will hear its raucous breath (by which they are sucked in) as it boils up,
67|8| Almost bursting with fury. Every time a group is cast into it, its keepers will ask them: "Did no warner ever come to you?"
67|9| They will say: "Yes, indeed, a warner came to us but we denied (him) and said (to him): "God has never sent down anything, you are only in a great error."
67|10| They will say: "If only we had listened (to him) or reasoned (and distinguished what was to our benefit from what was to our harm, and acted accordingly), we would not (now) be among the companions of the Blaze."
67|11| Thus will they acknowledge their sins, but God’s mercy will (then) be far from the companions of the Blaze!
67|12| As for those who stand in awe of their Lord though unseen (beyond their perception), for them there is forgiveness (to bring unforeseen blessings), and a great reward.
67|13| Whether you keep concealed what you intend to say or speak it out loud, He surely has full knowledge of all that lies in the bosoms.
67|14| Is it conceivable that One Who creates should not know? He is the All-Subtle (penetrating to the most minute dimensions of all things), the All-Aware.
67|15| He it is Who has made the earth subservient to you (as if a docile animal), so go about through its shoulders (uplands) and eat of His provision; but (be ever mindful that) to Him will be the Resurrection.
67|16| And yet, are you secure that He Who is above everything will not cause the earth to swallow you up then, when it is in a state of commotion?
67|17| Or are you secure that He Who is above everything will not send against you a deadly sand-storm? Then you will know how My warning is.
67|18| Indeed, those before them denied (the truth and were destroyed). So (reflect on) how awesome was My disowning them!
67|19| Have they never considered the birds above them, flying in lines with wings they spread out and fold in? Nothing holds them up except the All-Merciful. He indeed sees everything very well.
67|20| Who is there that will be an "army" for you, (a means of strength and support) to help you (to survive or succeed), apart from the All-Merciful? The unbelievers are surely in nothing but delusion.
67|21| Who is there that can provide for you if He should withhold His provision? No, but they persist in disdain and aversion (in obstinate flight from truth and reality).
67|22| (Now consider:) Is one who goes prone upon his face (with no breadth or depth to his line of sight, barely seeing what is touching his face) better guided, or one who goes upright (with a clear line of sight to what is ahead of him) on a straight path?
67|23| Say: "He it is Who has brought you into being and endowed you with hearing, and eyes, and hearts. How little you give thanks!
67|24| Say: "He it is Who has multiplied you on the earth, and (it is) to Him you will be gathered (to give account of your life on that earth).
67|25| They say (questioning with derision): "When is this promise (of gathering) to be fulfilled, if you are truthful (in your claim)?"
67|26| Say: "The knowledge (of that, and true and full knowledge of all things) is with God. And I am but a plain warner."
67|27| But then, when they see it close at hand, the faces of those who disbelieve turn black with grief, and it will be said to them (who had been so mocking): "This is what you were calling for (derisively)."
67|28| Say: "Have you ever considered (this): whether God destroys me and those in my company or He has mercy on us (and enables us to attain victory), then who is there that can protect the unbelievers from a painful punishment?"
67|29| Say: "He is the All-Merciful. In Him We believe and in Him we put our trust, so you will soon come to know who it is that is lost in obvious error."
67|30| Say: "Have you ever considered (this): If your water should vanish underground (leaving you with no source of water), who is there that can bring to you (a source to replace it of) gushing water?"
68|1| Nun. By the Pen and what they write with it line by line.
68|2| You are not, by the grace of your Lord, a madman.
68|3| And yours for sure is a reward constant and beyond measure.
68|4| You are surely of a sublime character and do act by a sublime pattern of conduct.
68|5| Soon you will see and they will see
68|6| Which of you is afflicted with madness.
68|7| Surely your Lord is He Who knows best who is astray from His way, and He knows best those who are rightly guided.
68|8| So pay no heed to (the desires of) those who persistently deny (God’s Message).
68|9| They wish you to compromise (with them in matters of faith), so they would compromise (with you).
68|10| Pay no heed to any contemptible oath-maker (who swears much with no consideration of truth, and no will to act on his word),
68|11| A defamer, circulating slander (in all directions),
68|12| Who hinders the doing of good, transgressor of all bounds (of sense or decency), one addicted to sinning;
68|13| Cruel and ignoble, and in addition to all that, morally corrupt
68|14| Because he has wealth and many sons.
68|15| When Our Revelations are recited to him, he says: "Fables of the ancients."
68|16| We will brand him on the nose (to mark indelibly his disgrace).
68|17| For sure We try them (with drought as they rely on their wealth and children We have granted them and reject Our call), just as We tried the owners of the garden. They swore that they would assuredly harvest its produce the next day.
68|18| They made no allowance (in their oaths, being oblivious of the rights of the needy and oblivious of God’s will).
68|19| Then a visitation from your Lord encompassed it while they were sleeping.
68|20| So by morning it had become bleak.
68|21| So they cried out to one another having risen for the morning:
68|22| "Hurry to your cultivated land if you mean to harvest (its produce)!"
68|23| So they set out, confiding to one another:
68|24| "(Take care) that no destitute enter there on you today."
68|25| So early they went, firmly resolved in intent (to collect the harvest and not share it with the destitute).
68|26| But when they saw it, they said: "We have assuredly arrived at the wrong place!"
68|27| (Then when they realized that it was indeed their garden:) "No, rather we are made destitute!"
68|28| The one more equitable among them said: "Did I not say to you: Will you not glorify God?"
68|29| They said: "All-Glorified is our Lord! Indeed we have done wrong (by regarding ourselves as self-sufficient and not dependent on Him)."
68|30| Then they approached one another, reproaching themselves.
68|31| They said: "Oh, woe to us! We were habituated to arrogance and rebellion.
68|32| "It may be that our Lord will grant us something better than this instead. Surely to our Lord do we turn with hope."
68|33| That is (an example of) the punishment (such as the ingrate rebellious may be made to endure in the world); and certainly the punishment of the Hereafter is greater, if they but knew!
68|34| For the God-revering, pious there are Gardens of bounty and blessing with their Lord.
68|35| Do We ever treat those who have submitted to God like the disbelieving criminals (who have submitted only to their own lusts and fancies)?
68|36| What is the matter with you (that you can judge so)? How can you judge (that all are valued alike in God’s sight whether they are Muslims or not)?
68|37| Or do you have a Book (revealed by God) that you read
68|38| Wherein you find that you will indeed have whatever you prefer (to have)?
68|39| Or do you have a covenant with Us confirmed by Us on oath as binding until the Day of Resurrection, that you will have whatever you judge (should be yours)?
68|40| Ask them (seeing that they do not have such a covenant) which of them will vouch for that?
68|41| Or do they have partners (with God who guarantee them whatever they wish for themselves)? Then let them produce their partners if they are truthful (in their claim).
68|42| On the Day when the truth will be manifest and they are in trouble, and being called to prostrate, they will be incapable of it:
68|43| Downcast will be their eyes, with abasement overwhelming them. Assuredly they were called to prostrate while they were yet safe and whole (in this world, but they did not).
68|44| So leave Me with such as deny this Word (the Qur’an). We will lead them on to perdition step by step from where they do not know.
68|45| But I grant respite to them (so that they may mend their ways). My scheme (all that is willed for them) is firm and unfailing.
68|46| Or is it that you ask them for a wage (in return for your calling them to Our Word), and so they are weighed down with debt?
68|47| Or is the Unseen within their reach that they write down (prescribing and stipulating what is to come, and how they are to be judged)?
68|48| So wait patiently for your Lord’s judgment, and do not be like the companion of the fish, when he called out choking inwardly (with distress).
68|49| If there had not reached him grace from his Lord (Who accepted his repentance), he would indeed have been cast forth on the desert shore, being reproached.
68|50| But his Lord chose him and enabled him to be among the specially chosen, righteous servants.
68|51| Those who disbelieve would (if they could) strike you down with their looks because of hatred and enmity, when they hear the Reminder, and they say: "Surely he is a madman."
68|52| But it is not other than a Reminder for all beings.
69|1| The Sure Reality.
69|2| What is the Sure Reality?!
69|3| And what enables you to perceive what the Sure Reality is?
69|4| The (tribes) of Thamud and ‘Ad denied the Sudden, Mighty Strike.
69|5| Now as for the (tribe of) Thamud – they were destroyed by the overwhelming (catastrophe).
69|6| And the (tribe of) ‘Ad – they were destroyed with a furious, roaring windstorm,
69|7| Which God made to prevail against them for seven nights and eight days, uninterruptedly, so that you could have seen people lying overthrown in it, as though they were hollow trunks of palm-trees.
69|8| Now do you see any of them remaining?
69|9| And there was the Pharaoh, and many other communities before him, and the cities overthrown (where Lot’s people lived): all of them indulged in the unpardonable sins.
69|10| And they rebelled against their Lord’s Messenger (sent to each to warn them), and so He took hold of them with a severe seizing.
69|11| It was We Who, when the water (of the Flood in the time of Noah) burst beyond limits, carried you (i.e. your believing ancestors) in the on-moving Ark,
69|12| So that We might make it a reminder for you (to be transmitted from generation to generation), and that heeding ears might take it in and retain it.
69|13| And when (the Last Hour comes and) the Trumpet is blown with a single blast,
69|14| And the earth, and the mountains (on it) are removed and burst within, and are crushed with a single crushing.
69|15| It is on that Day that the Event to happen will happen.
69|16| And the sky split asunder, and so, on that Day it will be most frail,
69|17| And the angels will be at its ends; and above them, eight will bear the Throne of your Lord on that Day.
69|18| On that Day you will be arraigned for judgment, and no secret of yours will remain hidden.
69|19| Then as for him who is given his Record in his right hand, he will say: "Here, take and read my Record!
69|20| "I surely knew that (one day) I would meet my account."
69|21| And so he will be in a state of life pleasing to him,
69|22| In a lofty Garden,
69|23| With clusters (of fruit) within easy reach.
69|24| "Eat and drink to your hearts’ content for all that you sent ahead in advance in days past (in anticipation of this Day)."
69|25| But as for him whose Record is given in his left hand, he will say: "Ah, would that I had never been given my Record,
69|26| "And that I had known nothing of my account!
69|27| "Oh, would that death had been (and nothing thereafter had followed).
69|28| "My wealth has availed me nothing,
69|29| "And all my authority (my power over all that I had) has gone from me!"
69|30| (And the command will come): "Lay hold of him and shackle him (by the neck, the hands, and the feet)!
69|31| "Then in the Blazing Flame let him to roast.
69|32| "Then, fasten him with a chain the length of which is seventy cubits."
69|33| For he surely did not believe in God, the Supreme,
69|34| And did not urge to the feeding of the destitute.
69|35| And so, he will have none to befriend him this Day,
69|36| Nor any food except foul pus.
69|37| None eat it except the sinful (those guilty of denying God or associating partners with Him and oppressing people).
69|38| No indeed! I swear by all that you can see,
69|39| And all that you cannot see,
69|40| It surely is the speech (conveyed to you by) an illustrious, noble Messenger.
69|41| And not a poet’s speech (composed in a poet’s mind). How little is what you believe! (It is so limited by the poverty of your souls and hearts.)
69|42| Nor is it a soothsayer’s speech (pretending to foretell events). How little it is that you reflect and be mindful! (It is so limited by the poverty of your minds.)
69|43| (No indeed!) It is a Revelation being sent down in parts from the Lord of the worlds.
69|44| If he (the Messenger) had dared to fabricate some false sayings in attribution to Us,
69|45| We would certainly have seized him with might,
69|46| Thereafter We would certainly have cut his life-vein.
69|47| Then not one from among you could have shielded and saved him from Us.
69|48| And it is a sure Reminder (bringing hope and guidance) for the God-revering, pious.
69|49| We are most certainly aware that among you are some who deny (it).
69|50| It will surely be a bitter regret for the unbelievers.
69|51| And this (the whole Qur’an) is surely certain truth.
69|52| So glorify the Name of your Lord, the Supreme.
70|1| A questioner (in mocking denial of the Day of Resurrection) has asked about the punishment certain to befall,
70|2| (And prepared for) the unbelievers; none can ward it off (from them).
70|3| (It is) from God, Whose are the stairs of ascent.
70|4| The angels and the Spirit ascend to Him (thereby), in a day the measure of which is fifty thousand years (of your normal worldly years).
70|5| So (O Messenger) endure (their insolence) with becoming patience.
70|6| They see it (the punishment) as far off (beyond their reason and perception),
70|7| But We see it as (certain to come and) near at hand.
70|8| The Day when the sky will be like molten metal;
70|9| And the mountains will be like multi-colored tufts of wool.
70|10| And no loyal friend will ask after his friend,
70|11| Though they will be in sight of each other. Every disbelieving criminal will yearn to ransom himself from the punishment of that Day even by his sons,
70|12| And his wife and his brother,
70|13| And all his kinsfolk who sheltered him,
70|14| And whoever else is on the earth, all of them, so that he might then save himself.
70|15| By no means! It is a furiously flaming fire,
70|16| Tearing away the skin.
70|17| It will call to itself those who turn their backs (on the call to faith) and turn away (from worship of God),
70|18| And amass wealth and withhold it (from spending in God’s cause and for the needy).
70|19| Surely human has been created with a restless, impatient disposition.
70|20| Fretful when evil visits him;
70|21| And niggardly when good visits him.
70|22| Except those who are devoted to the Prayer.
70|23| Those who are constant in their Prayer.
70|24| And those in whose wealth there is a right acknowledged (by them)
70|25| For such as have no means other than begging, and such as are denied help (because, having self-respect, they cannot beg and are thought to be well-off).
70|26| And those who affirm as true the Day of Judgment.
70|27| And those who are fearful of their Lord’s punishment (and live accordingly).
70|28| Indeed, their Lord’s punishment is that of which no one can ever feel secure.
70|29| And those who strictly guard their private parts, and their chastity and modesty,
70|30| Save from their spouses or (as a permission for men) those (bondsmaids) whom their right hands possess, for with regard to them they are free from blame.
70|31| But whoever seeks beyond that, such are those who exceed the bounds (set by God).
70|32| And those who are faithful to their trusts (which either God or society or an individual places in their charge) and to their pledges (between them and God or other persons or society).
70|33| And those who are upholders (of right and justice) by bearing true witness and without avoiding giving testimony.
70|34| And those who safeguard their Prayers (including all the rites of which they are constituted).
70|35| Those will be in Gardens, high-honored.
70|36| What is the matter with those who disbelieve, that (with the intent of mockery) they hasten on toward you with staring eyes fixed on you,
70|37| From the right and from the left, in crowds?
70|38| Does every one of them covet admission into the Garden of bounty and blessing (regarding himself as supremely deserving Paradise without the effort of faith)?
70|39| By no means! We have surely created them out of that (simple matter) which they know very well,
70|40| So, I swear by the Lord of the points of sunrise and sunset, that surely We are able
70|41| To replace them with (others) better than them (in respect of faith in God and in their worship of Him), and We are not to be frustrated (in doing what We will).
70|42| So leave them plunging in their falsehoods and amusements until the Day that they have been promised.
70|43| The Day when they come forth from their graves in haste as if they were hurrying to a goal,
70|44| Downcast will be their eyes, abasement overwhelming them. That is the Day that they have been repeatedly promised.
71|1| We sent Noah as Messenger to his people (and commanded him): "Warn your people before a painful punishment comes to them."
71|2| He said: "O my people! I am indeed a plain warner to you (and I urge you:)
71|3| "Worship God alone and keep from disobedience to Him in reverence for Him and piety, and obey me,
71|4| "So that He may forgive you your sins (which you have committed so far) and grant you respite until a term appointed by Him (instead of destroying you because of your sins). The term appointed by God, when it comes, is never deferred. If you but knew!"
71|5| (After long ages spent in conveying God’s Message, he turned to his Lord in prayer and) he said: "My Lord, I have surely called my people night and day;
71|6| "But my call has only caused them to flee more and more (from accepting the truth).
71|7| "And every time I have called them so that You may forgive them, they have thrust their fingers in their ears, and wrapped themselves up in their garments, and grown obstinate and more and more arrogant (in refusing my call).
71|8| "Then I have called them in a loud (emphatic) manner;
71|9| "Then again, I have called them in public, and I have spoken to them confidentially in private.
71|10| "I have said: ‘Ask your Lord for forgiveness, for surely He has always been All-Forgiving.
71|11| ‘He will release (the rain-bearing clouds in) the sky over you, with abundance of rain;
71|12| ‘And will strengthen you by increasing you in wealth and children, and make for you gardens, and make for you running waters.
71|13| ‘What is the matter with you that you do not want to see majesty in God (to worship Him),
71|14| ‘Seeing that He has created You in different, successive stages?
71|15| ‘Do you not see how God has created the seven heavens in harmony?
71|16| ‘And He has set up within them the moon as a light (reflected), and has set up the sun as a lamp.
71|17| ‘And God has caused you to grow from earth like a plant (in a mode of growth particular to you).
71|18| ‘Thereafter He will return you into it, and He will bring you forth from it in resurrection.
71|19| ‘God has made for you the earth a wide expanse,
71|20| ‘So that you may move on it along the ways through mountains and valleys.’"
71|21| Noah (turned to his Lord, and) said: "My Lord! They have disobeyed me and followed those whose wealth and children have increased them only in loss and self-ruin.
71|22| "And they have made tremendous schemes (to prevent my call and people’s acceptance of it).
71|23| "And they have said: ‘Do not ever abandon your deities; do not abandon (in particular) Wadd, nor Suwa’, nor Yaghuth, and Ya‘uq, and Nasr!’
71|24| "And they have indeed led many astray. And (O God,) increase not these wrongdoers in anything but further straying (by way of just punishment for all that they have done)."
71|25| And because of their (unforgivable) sins, they were drowned (in the Flood), and were made to enter a (punishing) Fire; and so they found none who could help them against God.
71|26| Noah also said: "My Lord! Do not leave on the earth any from among the unbelievers dwelling therein!
71|27| "If You do leave them, they will lead Your servants astray, and they will beget none but shameless and dissolute thankless unbelievers.
71|28| "My Lord! Forgive me and my parents, and everyone who joins my household as a believer, and all the believing men and believing women, and do not increase the wrongdoers in anything but ruin."
72|1| Say (O Messenger): "It has been revealed to me that a company of the jinn gave ear (to my recitation of the Qur’an), then (when they returned to their people) they said: ‘We have indeed heard a wonderful Qur’an,
72|2| ‘Guiding to what is right in belief and action and so we have believed in it; and we (affirm that we) will not associate any as partner with our Lord.
72|3| ‘And that He – exalted is the majesty of our Lord – has taken neither consort nor child.
72|4| ‘And that the foolish among us uttered an enormity against God.
72|5| ‘And that (we were mistaken when) we thought that humankind and jinn would never speak a falsehood against God.
72|6| ‘(But we have come to see that) there have indeed been men from among humankind who took refuge in some men from among the jinn, and so (the former) increased them (the latter) in conceit, rebellion and wrongdoing.
72|7| ‘And they (those men) have thought, as you have thought, that God would never raise anyone (as Messenger from among them).
72|8| ‘But now when we sought to reach heaven, we found it filled with stern guards and flaming fires (shooting-stars).
72|9| ‘We used to be established in position to overhear (its inhabitants); but now whoever attempts to listen finds a flaming fire in wait for him.
72|10| ‘We (being prevented from overhearing) did not know whether evil is intended for those who live on the earth or their Lord wills for them right guidance and good.
72|11| ‘There are among us such as are righteous (in conduct and apt to believe) and there are those who are otherwise. We have been sects with divergent paths.
72|12| ‘We have come to know that we can by no means frustrate God (in His will on the earth), nor can we frustrate Him by flight.
72|13| ‘And when we heard the guidance (embodied in the Qur’an), we (immediately) believed in it. Whoever believes in his Lord has no fear of loss (of being wronged in return for his faith and for the good deeds required by faith), or disgrace.
72|14| ‘And among us are some who have wholly submitted to God, just as there are among us some who have deviated into disobedience to God. Whoever has submitted to God wholly, then such have sought and attained to right guidance (in belief and action).
72|15| ‘But as for those who have deviated into disobedience to God, they have become firewood for Hell.’"
72|16| If they (humankind and jinn) followed the (Right) Road (of Islam, without deviation), We would certainly grant them water (and provision) in abundance;
72|17| We try them in that (which We grant them). Whoever turns away from his Lord’s Reminder (His Book of instruction), He will drive him into an ever-growing punishment (enveloping him in its severity).
72|18| All places of worship (and all parts of the body with which one prostrates ) are for God, and all worship is due to Him alone, so do not worship anyone along with God.
72|19| Yet, when God’s servant rises to pray, they (the polytheists) are all but upon him in swarms (with loud, derisive shouting to prevent his recitation of the Qur’an being heard).
72|20| Say: "I worship only my Lord and do not associate anyone as partner with Him."
72|21| Say: "It is not in my power to cause you harm or bring you good by guiding you (to the Straight Path)."
72|22| Say: "No one could ever protect me from God (if I were to disobey Him), nor could I find a refuge except in Him.
72|23| "(What I can and must do is) only to convey (the truth) from God and His Messages." And whoever disobeys God and His Messenger, for him there is surely the fire of Hell, to abide therein forever.
72|24| (Let them continue to see you as few in number and weak and therefore belittle you, but) when they see what (the Fire) which they are promised, they will come to know who is really weaker in helpers and fewer in number.
72|25| Say: "I do not know whether (your coming face to face with) what you are promised is near, or whether my Lord sets for it a distant term."
72|26| (He alone is) the Knower of the Unseen (what lies beyond human perception), and He does not disclose His Unseen to anyone
72|27| Except to a Messenger whom He has chosen (and is well-pleased with – He informs him of the Unseen as much as He wills –); and He dispatches a watchful guard before him (between him and his audience) and a watchful guard behind him (between him and the origin of the Revelation);
72|28| In order that He may establish that they (the Messengers) have for certain conveyed the messages of their Lord. He encompasses all that they have (of the Revelation), and He has recorded everything one by one.
73|1| O you enwrapped one!
73|2| Rise to keep vigil at night, except a little,
73|3| Half of it, or lessen it a little;
73|4| Or add to it (a little); and pray and recite the Qur’an calmly and distinctly (with your mind and heart concentrated on it).
73|5| We will surely charge you with a weighty Word (and with applying it in your daily life and conveying it to others).
73|6| Rising and praying at night impresses (mind and heart) most strongly and (makes) recitation more certain and upright.
73|7| For by day you have extended preoccupations.
73|8| And keep in remembrance the Name of your Lord (and mention It in your Prayer), and devote yourself to Him whole-heartedly.
73|9| The Lord of the east and the Lord of the west; there is no deity but He, so take Him alone for one to rely on and to entrust your affairs to.
73|10| And endure patiently all that they say (against you), and stay aloof from their way (and part from them) in a becoming manner (not as they treat you; rather with forbearance and good advice).
73|11| And leave Me alone to deal with those who enjoy God’s worldly blessings and yet obstinately persist in denying (Our Revelations), and grant them respite for a little while.
73|12| We have (in store for the likes of them) heavy fetters and a Blazing Flame,
73|13| And food that chokes, and a painful punishment.
73|14| On that Day the earth and the mountains will be violently shaken, and the mountains will be as a heap of slipping sand.
73|15| Surely We have sent to you (O people) a Messenger, a witness against you (one who will testify in the Hereafter as to your deeds in response to God’s Message), just as We sent a Messenger to the Pharaoh.
73|16| But the Pharaoh rebelled against the Messenger, and so We seized him with a calamitous grasp.
73|17| Then how will you, if you persist in unbelief, guard yourselves against a Day which will turn the children gray-headed?
73|18| The sky will cleft open thereby. His promise (of Resurrection and Judgment) is certainly to be fulfilled.
73|19| This is a reminder and admonition, and so let him, who wills, take a path to his Lord.
73|20| Surely your Lord knows that you (O Messenger) rise and keep vigil sometimes nearly two-thirds of the night or (other times) a half of it or a third of it, and so do some of those who are in your company as believers. God determines the measure of the night and day (which He has created). He knows that you (O believers) are unable to sustain (such long vigils every night) and He has turned to you in mercy: so recite (when you do the Prayer) from the Qur’an what is easy for you (to sustain as regular practice). He knows that there will be among you who are sick, and others going about the land seeking of God’s bounty, and still others fighting in God’s cause. Recite from it, then, as much as is easy (for you). But establish the Prayer in conformity with its conditions as prescribed, pay the Prescribed Purifying Alms (the Zakah), and lend God a good loan (by spending in His cause and for the needy). Whatever of good you forward (to your future, eternal life) for your own selves, you will find it with God, better and greater in reward (than all that you have left behind in the world and much increased in value). And seek God’s forgiveness (in all circumstances and eventualities). God is All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate (especially toward His believing, penitent servants).
74|1| O you cloaked one (who has preferred solitude)!
74|2| Arise and warn!
74|3| And declare your Lord’s (indescribable and incomparable) greatness.
74|4| And keep your clothing clean!
74|5| Keep away from all pollution.
74|6| Do not consider your fulfillment of these orders as a kindness (to God and people).
74|7| And for the sake of your Lord be patient (in fulfilling your duty toward God and people).
74|8| Then, when the Horn is sounded,
74|9| That Day will be a day of hardship,
74|10| For the unbelievers, not easy.
74|11| Leave Me (to deal) with him whom I created alone,
74|12| And I enabled for him abundant wealth,
74|13| And children around him as means of power;
74|14| And I have granted him all means and status for a comfortable life.
74|15| And yet, he desires that I should give more.
74|16| By no means! Surely he has been in obstinate opposition to Our Revelations.
74|17| I will oblige him to a strenuous climb.
74|18| He pondered and he calculated (how he could disprove the Qur’an in people’s sight).
74|19| Be away from God’s mercy, how he calculated!
74|20| Yea, may God preserve him from the evil eye! how he calculated!
74|21| Then he looked around (in the manner of one who will decide on a matter about which he is asked).
74|22| Then he frowned and scowled.
74|23| Then he turned his back and (despite inwardly acknowledging the Qur’an’s Divine origin), grew in arrogance,
74|24| And he said: "This is nothing but sorcery (of a sort transmitted from sorcerers) from old times.
74|25| "This is nothing but the word of a mortal."
74|26| I will make him enter a pit of Hell.
74|27| What enables you to perceive what that pit is?
74|28| It leaves none (but entirely burns everyone of those thrown into it), nor does it spare anyone (so that they might die and escape).
74|29| It scorches up the skin.
74|30| Over it there are nineteen (keepers).
74|31| We have appointed none but angels as keepers of the Fire, and We have not caused their number to be anything but a trial for those who disbelieve, that those who were granted the Book before may become certain (that Muhammad, who explains everything revealed to him without any hesitation in the face of all antagonism and derision, is God’s Messenger), and those who believe may grow more firm in faith; and that both they who were granted the Book before and the believers may feel no doubt at all; and those in whose hearts there is a sickness and the unbelievers may say: "What does God mean by this description?" Thus God leads astray whom He wills, and guides whom He wills. None knows your Lord’s hosts except He. All this is but a reminder to the mortals (so that they may take heed and act accordingly).
74|32| No indeed (the Qur’an is not as the unbelievers claim)! By the moon,
74|33| And by the night when it retreats,
74|34| And by the morning when it shines forth,
74|35| Surely it (the Qur’an) is of the greatest (of God’s signs);
74|36| A warning for humankind,
74|37| For everyone of you, whether he goes forward (by choosing faith and good deeds) or hangs back (because his choice of unbelief and sin pulls him away from the Straight Path).
74|38| Every person is held in pledge for what he earns (through his deeds),
74|39| Except the people of the Right (the people of happiness and prosperity who receive their Records in their right hands. God will forgive them and reward them with much more than they earned).
74|40| Dwelling in Gardens (whose beauty cannot be perceived while in the world), they will put questions to one another
74|41| About the disbelieving criminals, (and convey the answers they give):
74|42| "What has brought you into the pit?"
74|43| They will reply: "We were not of those who prayed (who turn to God in sincere worship);
74|44| "Nor did we use to feed the destitute.
74|45| "We used to plunge (in falsehood and sin) together with those who plunged (in it).
74|46| "And we used to deny the (coming of the) Day of Judgment.
74|47| "Until what is certain to come did come upon us."
74|48| And so, of no benefit to them will be the intercession of any who are entitled to intercede, (even if they are allowed to intercede).
74|49| What, then, is the matter with them that they turn away in aversion from the Reminder (the Qur’an),
74|50| As though they were frightened wild donkeys
74|51| Fleeing from a lion!
74|52| Indeed, every one of them desires that he should be given a Book (particular to him) opened out.
74|53| By no means! Indeed, they do not (believe in and, therefore, do not) fear the Hereafter.
74|54| By no means! This (Qur’an) is a reminder and admonition (sufficient for all).
74|55| So, whoever wills receives admonition and takes heed.
74|56| Yet they will not receive admonition and take heed unless God wills; He is the Lord of righteousness and piety, and the Lord of forgiveness.
75|1| I swear by the Day of Resurrection,
75|2| And I swear by the self-accusing human soul;
75|3| Does human think that We will never assemble his bones (to resurrect him)?
75|4| Yes indeed, We are able to make whole his very fingertips.
75|5| But human (by willful choice) denies what lies ahead of him (the other life, because he desires to live only as he pleases).
75|6| He asks: "When is the Day of Resurrection?"
75|7| When the eyesight is confounded (through fear),
75|8| And the moon is darkened,
75|9| And the sun and the moon are joined together,
75|10| On that Day human will say: "Where is the escape?"
75|11| By no means! No refuge (to flee to)!
75|12| To your Lord the journey’s end will be on that Day.
75|13| Human will be made understand on that Day all (the good and evil) that he has forwarded (to his afterlife while in the world), and all (the good and evil) that he has left behind.
75|14| Indeed, human will be an eye-witness (providing evidence) against himself,
75|15| Even though he puts forth his excuses.
75|16| (O Prophet!) Move not your tongue to hasten it (for safekeeping in your heart).
75|17| Surely it is for Us to collect it (in your heart) and enable you to recite it (by heart).
75|18| So when We recite it, follow its recitation;
75|19| Thereafter, it is for Us to explain it.
75|20| Yes indeed! but you (people) love and prefer what is before you (the present, worldly life),
75|21| And abandon that which is to come later (the Hereafter).
75|22| Some faces on that Day will be radiant (with contentment),
75|23| Looking up toward their Lord.
75|24| And some faces on that Day will be despondent,
75|25| Knowing that a crushing calamity is about to be inflicted on them.
75|26| No indeed! (No doubt remains for the meaning of life) when it (the last breath) comes up to the throat,
75|27| And it is said, "Who is the wizard (who can save him)?"
75|28| While he (who is dying) is certain that it is the (moment of) parting.
75|29| And (in the agony of death) one leg is intertwined with the other;
75|30| To your Lord is, on that Day, the driving.
75|31| He did not affirm the truth (of the Divine Message conveyed to him), nor did he do the Prayer;
75|32| Rather, he denied and turned away.
75|33| Thereafter he went back to his family in gleeful conceit.
75|34| So: well have you deserved (this doom), well have you deserved (it).
75|35| Again, well have you deserved it and well deserved.
75|36| Does human think that he is to be left to himself (to go about as he pleases)?
75|37| Was he not once a mere drop of semen poured forth?
75|38| Then he became a clot clinging (to the womb wall), and He created and fashioned (him) in due proportions.
75|39| Then He made of him a pair, male and female.
75|40| Is not He (Who does that, equally) able to bring the dead back to life?
76|1| Did there pass (– and surely there did pass –) over human a stretch of time when he was a thing not mentioned and remembered (as human)?
76|2| We have surely created human from a small quantity of mingled fluids, moving him from one state to another, and (finally) We have made him one hearing and seeing (so that he may hear God’s Message and see His signs).
76|3| And We have shown him the right way, whether he be grateful (and follow this way) or ungrateful (and follow the way opposed to the right one).
76|4| We have surely prepared for the thankless unbelievers chains, and fetters, and a Blaze.
76|5| The virtuous and godly will surely drink from a cup with heavenly wine flavored with heavenly additives.
76|6| A spring from which God’s (virtuous and godly) servants will drink (their fill), causing it to gush abundantly.
76|7| (They are those who) fulfill the vow (the promises and responsibilities that they undertake), and who fear a Day whose evil is extensive and encompassing (everyone that deserves it).
76|8| They give food, however great be their need for it, with pleasure to the destitute, and to the orphan, and to the captive, (saying):
76|9| "We feed you only for God’s sake; we desire from you neither recompense nor thanks (we desire only the acceptance of God).
76|10| "We are surely fearful of a Day from our Lord, (a Day) of frowning and severity (toward the guilty)."
76|11| So God will surely preserve them from the evil of that Day and enable them to find radiance and joy.
76|12| He will reward them for all that they endure: a Garden (of Paradise) and garments of silk.
76|13| Reclining therein on thrones. They will find therein neither (burning) sun nor severe cold.
76|14| And its shade will come down low over them, and its clusters of fruit hang down low within their reach.
76|15| And they will be served with vessels of silver and goblets like crystal,
76|16| Crystal-clear, made of silver – they themselves determine the measure of the drink (as they wish.)
76|17| And there they will be given to drink of a cup flavored with ginger (of Paradise),
76|18| (Filled from) a spring therein called Salsabil (as it flows smoothly and continuously as they wish).
76|19| There will go round them youths of perpetual freshness; when you see them you would think them scattered pearls.
76|20| And wherever you have a look therein, you will see unimaginable delight and a great kingdom.
76|21| Upon those (servants) will be garments of fine green silk and brocade, and they will be adorned with armbands of silver; and their Lord will favor them with the service of a pure drink.
76|22| "This is what has been (prepared) for you as a reward, and your endeavor has been recognized and accepted."
76|23| It is We Who send down the Qur’an on you (O Messenger) in parts,
76|24| So wait patiently for your Lord’s judgment, and pay no heed to (the desires and caprices of) any of them who is a willful sinner or a thankless unbeliever.
76|25| And remember and mention the Name of your Lord (in worship) in the early morning and in the afternoon.
76|26| And during part of the night prostrate to Him, and glorify Him a long part of the night.
76|27| Those (sinful unbelievers) love and prefer that which is in advance (the present, worldly life), and neglect a grievous Day ahead of them.
76|28| It is We Who have created them and made firm their composition, and whenever We will, We can change their structure and character entirely.
76|29| All this is an admonition and reminder, and so let him who wills, take a path to his Lord.
76|30| You cannot will unless God wills. Surely God is All-Knowing, All-Wise.
76|31| He admits whom He wills into His mercy; and as to the wrongdoers, He has prepared for them a painful punishment.
77|1| By the companies (of angels) sent one after another for some good results,
77|2| And then moving as fast and forcefully as tempests.
77|3| And by those enfolding the Scrolls of Revelation,
77|4| And serving (for right and wrong) to be separated with all clarity,
77|5| And so bringing down the Revelation,
77|6| In order that some may have the means to ask for forgiveness and that some may be warned,
77|7| Surely what you are promised is bound to take place,
77|8| When the stars are effaced,
77|9| And when the sky is rent asunder,
77|10| And when the mountains are blown away (as dust),
77|11| And when the time for the Messengers (to bear witness for or against their communities) is appointed.
77|12| For what day has the term (of all this) been set?
77|13| For the Day of Judgment and Distinction (between people according to how they believed and acted in the world).
77|14| What enables you to perceive what the Day of Judgment and Distinction is?
77|15| Woe on that Day to those who deny (the Day)!
77|16| Did We not destroy the ancient peoples (who denied)?
77|17| So do We make the later generations (of the same standing) follow them (in being destroyed).
77|18| For thus do We deal with the disbelieving criminals.
77|19| Woe on that Day to those who deny!
77|20| (How and why do you dare to deny?) Did We not create you from a humble fluid?
77|21| Then We placed it in a firm, secure place (to remain)
77|22| For a known, pre-ordained term (of gestation).
77|23| Thus have We determined (everything related to your existence), and how excellent We are in determining!
77|24| Woe on that Day to those who deny!
77|25| Have We not made the earth a receptacle
77|26| Both for the living and the dead?
77|27| And set therein mountains firm, lofty in stature, and given you to drink the sweet water (gushing out of them).
77|28| Woe on that Day to those who deny!
77|29| "Move towards that (Fire) which you used to deny!
77|30| "Move towards the shadow (of black smoke ascending) in three columns.
77|31| It will neither give (cooling) shade nor will it be of any avail against the flame.
77|32| It (the Fire) will throw out sparks like castles,
77|33| (Scattered abroad) as if they were yellow camels.
77|34| Woe on that Day to those who deny!
77|35| This will be a Day when they (the deniers) will not utter a word;
77|36| Nor will they be allowed to offer excuses.
77|37| Woe on that Day to those who deny!
77|38| "This is the Day of Judgment and Distinction (between people, according to how they believed and acted in the world). We have assembled you and the earlier ones (from earlier communities who were also deniers).
77|39| "So if you have a scheme (to save yourselves from My punishment), then apply it (against Me)!"
77|40| Woe on that Day to those who deny!
77|41| Surely the God-revering, pious will be amidst pleasant shade and springs;
77|42| And fruit of whatever kinds they desire.
77|43| "Eat and drink to your hearts’ content for all that you used to do (in the world)."
77|44| Thus do We reward those who are devoted to doing good, aware that God is seeing them.
77|45| Woe on that Day to those who deny!
77|46| Consume (the riches of the world) and enjoy your life but for a little while, for you are criminals, committed to accumulating sin!
77|47| Woe on that Day to those who deny!
77|48| When they are told, "Bow down (before God in humility and worship Him)!" they do not bow down.
77|49| Woe on that Day to those who deny!
77|50| In what other Word, beyond this (Qur’an), will they believe?
78|1| What are they asking each other about?
78|2| About the awesome tidings,
78|3| About which they are in disagreement.
78|4| No indeed! (They have no need to disagree or question one another about it:) Soon they will come to know!
78|5| Again, no indeed! Soon they will come to know!
78|6| Have We not made the earth as a cradle,
78|7| And the mountains as masts?
78|8| And We have created you in pairs.
78|9| And We have made your sleep for rest.
78|10| And We have made the night as a cloak (covering both you and the world).
78|11| And We have made the day for seeking livelihood.
78|12| And We have built above you seven firm heavens.
78|13| And We have set up (therein) a lamp blazing and resplendent.
78|14| And We send down out of the rain-clouds water in abundance,
78|15| So that We may produce with it grain and plants,
78|16| And gardens dense and luxuriant.
78|17| Now assuredly, the Day of Judgment and Distinction is a time appointed (as the result of all that takes place in this world).
78|18| The Day when the Trumpet is blown and you all come forth in hosts.
78|19| And the heaven is opened (for the descent of angels), and becomes as if gates (so that the world of angels and the world of humankind join each other).
78|20| And the mountains are set in motion and so become as if they had never existed.
78|21| Surely Hell lies as a place for surveillance,
78|22| For the (disbelieving) rebellious, (and) a destined home (which they prepared for themselves while in the world),
78|23| Wherein they will remain for ages.
78|24| There they will taste neither coolness nor any drink,
78|25| Except boiling water and pus,
78|26| As a recompense fitting (for their sins).
78|27| For they used not to expect to be called to account (for their deeds);
78|28| And denied Our Revelations (and all Our other signs in the universe) with willful, obstinate denial.
78|29| And every thing (that they did) We wrote down as a record.
78|30| So: "Taste (the fruit of your deeds), and We will not increase you except in suffering."
78|31| For the God-revering, pious there will surely be triumph:
78|32| Gardens and vineyards,
78|33| And youthful, full-breasted maidens of equal age.
78|34| And a cup full to the brim.
78|35| They will hear therein neither vain talk nor falsehood.
78|36| (All this as) a reward from your Lord, a gift according to (His) reckoning in full satisfaction.
78|37| The Lord of the heavens and the earth and (all) that is between them, the All-Merciful. No one will have the power to address Him.
78|38| On that Day the Spirit and the angels stand in ranks. No one will speak except him whom the All-Merciful allows, and he speaks what is right.
78|39| That Day (of Judgment) is the Day absolutely true (on which the truth will prevail). So whoever wills, then, let him take a way of return to his Lord.
78|40| We have surely warned you against a punishment near at hand. On that Day a person will look at what he has forwarded (from the world) with his own hands, and the unbeliever will say: "Oh, would that I were mere dust (instead of being a responsible being with consciousness and free will)!"
79|1| By those (angels) who immediately fly out and plunge (with God’s command), and plunge (into fulfilling it);
79|2| By those (angels) who move gently and eagerly (because of the command they have received);
79|3| By those (angels) who swiftly float (through space to fulfill God’s command);
79|4| And so hasten along as if in a race;
79|5| And thus fulfill the commands (in the operation of the universe),
79|6| (The Last Hour will have come) on the Day when a blast (of the Trumpet) will convulse (the world);
79|7| Followed by the succeeding one.
79|8| Hearts on that Day will be throbbing in distress;
79|9| Their eyes downcast.
79|10| Yet, they (the unbelievers) say: "Will we really be restored to our former state (of life)?
79|11| "Will we when we have become bones rotten and crumbled away?"
79|12| They say (in derision): "Then, that would be a return with loss!"
79|13| It will indeed be but a single cry,
79|14| And then, they will all have been awakened to life on the plain (of Supreme Gathering).
79|15| Has the report of Moses come to you?
79|16| When His Lord called out to him in the sacred Valley of Tuwa’:
79|17| "Go to the Pharaoh, for he has exceedingly rebelled.
79|18| "And say to him: ‘Would you (do you have intent or inclination to) attain to purity?
79|19| ‘Then I will guide you to your Lord so you stand in awe of Him (and behave with humility).’ "
79|20| He (went to the Pharaoh and) showed him the great sign (the miracle of the Staff).
79|21| But the Pharaoh denied (his Messengership) and defied (him).
79|22| Thereafter he turned away and set out to struggle (with him).
79|23| Then he gathered (his men and hosts), and made a proclamation,
79|24| Saying: "I am your Supreme Lord!"
79|25| And so God seized him and made an example of him, of punishment in the later and the earlier (life).
79|26| For sure, in this there is certainly a lesson for anyone who has awe of and therefore humility before God.
79|27| (O humankind!) Are you harder to create or is the heaven? He has built it.
79|28| He has raised its vault and put it in an order.
79|29| And He obscured its night and brought out its light of day.
79|30| And after that He has spread out the earth in the egg-shape (for habitability).
79|31| Out of it He has brought forth its waters and its herbage;
79|32| And the mountains He has set firm:
79|33| (All this) as a means of life for you and your animals.
79|34| But when the great overwhelming event comes;
79|35| On that Day human will recall (and understand) for what he strove.
79|36| And the Blazing Flame will come into view for all who see.
79|37| And so, whoever rebelled (against God),
79|38| And preferred the life of this world,
79|39| The Blazing Flame will be his (final) refuge.
79|40| But as for him who lived in awe of his Lord, being ever conscious of His seeing him and of the standing before Him (in the Hereafter), and held back his carnal soul from lusts and caprices,
79|41| Surely Paradise will be his (final) refuge.
79|42| They ask you (O Messenger) about the Last Hour: "When will it come to anchor?"
79|43| But how could you have knowledge about its time,
79|44| With your Lord alone rests (the exact knowledge) of its term.
79|45| You are only a warner to those who are in awe of it.
79|46| It will be, on the Day they see it, as if they had remained (in the world) but for the afternoon (of a day) or its morning.
80|1| He (a disbelieving, haughty man) frowned and turned away,
80|2| Because (while he was talking with the Messenger) the blind man approached him.
80|3| What would inform you (O haughty one) but that he might grow in purity (by doing good deeds)?
80|4| Or that he might grow mindful (of God’s Message), and the reminder benefit him?
80|5| As for him who deems himself to be independent (not needy of Divine guidance because of pride in his wealth and status),
80|6| You (O Messenger) attend to him (so that he may accept Islam and reform),
80|7| Though you are not accountable if he does not grow in purity (through acceptance of faith and fulfilling its obligations and responsibilities).
80|8| But as for him who came to you eagerly,
80|9| And he was in awe of God,
80|10| You divert your attention from him (to the other).
80|11| No indeed! It surely is a reminder and an admonition (that suffices for all who come to it with an open heart).
80|12| So whoever wills receives admonition and takes heed.
80|13| (It is recorded) in scrolls greatly honored,
80|14| Exalted (in God’s sight) and perfectly purified (of falsehood, vanity, and inconsistency);
80|15| (Borne) by the hands of angel-envoys,
80|16| Noble and virtuous.
80|17| Human is ruined – for how thankless and disbelieving he is!
80|18| (Does he never consider) from what thing He has created him?
80|19| From a drop of (seminal) fluid; He has created him and fashioned him in measured proportions (for his shape and for his life).
80|20| Thereafter He has made the path (to God) easy for him,
80|21| Thereafter He causes him to die and buries him.
80|22| Thereafter, when He wills, He raises him again to life.
80|23| No indeed! Human has not fulfilled what God enjoined on him.
80|24| Then, let human consider his food (and so reflect on his Lord’s Mercy and the truth of Resurrection),
80|25| That We pour down the water in abundance;
80|26| Then We split the earth in clefts;
80|27| And so We enable grain to grow therein,
80|28| And grapes, and edible plants,
80|29| And olive-trees and date-palms,
80|30| And gardens dense with foliage,
80|31| And (diverse other) fruits and herbage,
80|32| As a means of livelihood for you and your animals.
80|33| But when the piercing Cry (heralding the Resurrection) sounds;
80|34| On that Day when a person flees from his brother,
80|35| And from his mother and father,
80|36| And from his spouse and his children;
80|37| Everyone on that Day has concern of his own enough to make him heedless (of anything else).
80|38| Some faces will on that Day be radiant with happiness
80|39| Smiling, rejoicing at good tidings.
80|40| And some faces will on that Day be dust-stained;
80|41| Veiled in darkness:
80|42| Those are the unbelievers, shameless and dissolute.
81|1| When the sun is folded up (and darkened);
81|2| And when the stars fall (losing their luster);
81|3| And when the mountains are set moving;
81|4| And when (highly prized) pregnant camels are left untended;
81|5| And when the wild beasts (as also the domesticated ones) go forth from their places of rest (in terror of the destruction of the world, and then, following their revival, are gathered together before God, for the settlement of their accounts);
81|6| And when the seas rise up boiling;
81|7| And when the souls are coupled (the righteous men with pure, righteous spouses, and the evil ones with their evil spouses and with devilish companions);
81|8| And when the female infant, buried alive, is questioned
81|9| For what crime she was killed;
81|10| And when the scrolls (of the deeds of every person) are laid open;
81|11| And when the heaven is torn away (with all the truths becoming manifest);
81|12| And when the Blazing Flame is kindled (to fierce heat);
81|13| And when Paradise is brought near (for the God-revering, pious to enter);
81|14| Every person will (then) come to know what he has prepared (for himself).
81|15| Oh, I swear by the stars which recede (disappearing in the sun’s light),
81|16| And rise in their course, and then set (disappearing again);
81|17| And by the night as it inclines to depart,
81|18| And the morning as it breathes,
81|19| That this (which informs you of all the events mentioned) is the Word (brought) by an honored messenger (Gabriel),
81|20| Endowed with power, with high rank and esteem before the Lord of the Supreme Throne;
81|21| One obeyed (by his aides), and trustworthy (in fulfilling God’s orders, most particularly conveying the Revelation).
81|22| Your companion (the Messenger who has spent his life among you) is not a madman;
81|23| Indeed he saw him (Gabriel) on the clear horizon.
81|24| He is not niggardly (in conveying to you Revelation and knowledge) of the Unseen (what lies beyond the reach of your perception).
81|25| Nor is it (this Qur’an) the Word of any devil excluded from God’s Mercy.
81|26| Then, where are you going?
81|27| It is nothing other than a Reminder (and instruction) for all conscious beings;
81|28| For any of you who wills to take a straight path (and follow it without deviance).
81|29| But you cannot will (to do so) unless God wills, the Lord of the worlds.
82|1| When the heaven is cleft open;
82|2| And when the stars fall in disorder and are scattered;
82|3| And when the seas burst forth (spilling over their bounds to intermingle);
82|4| And when the graves are overturned (and pour out their contents);
82|5| Everyone will come to understand all (the good and evil) that he has forwarded (to his afterlife while in the world), and all (the good and evil) that he has left behind (undone).
82|6| O human! What is it that deludes you concerning your Lord, the All-Munificent?
82|7| He Who has created you, fashioned you, and proportioned you (in measures perfect for the purpose of your creation);
82|8| Having constituted you in whatever form He has willed.
82|9| No indeed! But (being deluded) they deny the Last Judgment (in the other world);
82|10| Yet there are angel-guardians (watching) over you –
82|11| Noble and honorable, recording,
82|12| Who know what you do.
82|13| The virtuous and godly ones will indeed be in (the Gardens of) perpetual bliss;
82|14| While the (disbelieving) shameless, dissolute ones will indeed be in the Blazing Flame.
82|15| They will enter it to roast (therein) on the Day of Judgment.
82|16| They will never be absent from it.
82|17| What enables you to perceive what the Day of Judgment is?
82|18| Again: What is it that enables you to perceive what the Day of Judgment is?
82|19| The Day on which no soul has power to do anything in favor of another. The command on that day will be God’s (entirely and exclusively).
83|1| Woe to those who deal in fraud;
83|2| Those who, when they are to receive their due from others, demand that it be in full;
83|3| But when they measure or weigh out for others, they make it less (than the due).
83|4| Do those (people) not know that they are bound to be raised from the dead,
83|5| For an awesome Day,
83|6| The Day when all humankind will rise (from their graves and) stand before the Lord of the worlds?
83|7| No indeed! The record of the shameless dissolute one is surely in sijjin (a lowly register, portending eternal punishment).
83|8| What enables you to perceive what sijjin is?
83|9| A register inscribed indelibly and sealed.
83|10| Woe on that Day to those who deny –
83|11| Those who deny the Day of Judgment!
83|12| Which none denies except everyone exceeding the bounds (set by God), everyone addicted to sinning,
83|13| Who, when Our Revelations are conveyed to him, says: "Fables of the ancients!"
83|14| By no means! But what they themselves have earned has rusted upon their hearts (and prevents them from perceiving the truth).
83|15| By no means! Assuredly they will on that Day be veiled from (the mercy of) their Lord.
83|16| Then they will certainly enter in the Blazing Flame to roast.
83|17| Thereafter they will be told: "This is what you used to deny (while in the world)."
83|18| No indeed! The record of the virtuous and godly ones is surely in ‘illiyyin (a lofty register, portending elevated stations).
83|19| What enables you to perceive what ‘illiyyin is?
83|20| It is a register inscribed indelibly and sealed.
83|21| Those who are near-stationed to God will attest to it.
83|22| The virtuous and godly ones will certainly be in (Gardens of) bounty and blessing;
83|23| On thrones, looking around (at the blessings of Paradise).
83|24| You will recognize on their faces the brightness of bliss.
83|25| They will be served to drink pure wine under the seal (of Divine sanction and preservation).
83|26| Its seal is a fragrance of musk. And to that (blessing of Paradise), then, let all those who aspire (to things of high value) aspire as if in a race (with each other).
83|27| Its admixture will be from tasnim (the most delightful drink out of the loftiest spring of Paradise).
83|28| A spring from which those near-stationed to God drink.
83|29| Those who disbelieved and were committed to accumulating sin used to laugh at those who believed;
83|30| Whenever they passed by them, they winked at one another (in derision).
83|31| And when they returned to their families, they would return full of quips (about how they mocked the believers).
83|32| When they saw those (who believed), they would say: "Look: those have indeed gone astray."
83|33| Yet they were not appointed as keepers over them (that they should presume to pass judgment on them).
83|34| So on this Day (of Judgment) those who believed will laugh at the unbelievers.
83|35| On thrones, looking on (at the condition of the unbelievers in Hell).
83|36| (Now see:) Are the unbelievers being paid for what they used to do?
84|1| When the heaven is split asunder,
84|2| Obeying its Lord, as in truth it is expected to do so and always does;
84|3| And when the earth is flattened out,
84|4| And casts forth whatever is in it and becomes empty,
84|5| Obeying its Lord, as in truth it is expected to do so and always does;
84|6| O human! You are ever toiling toward your Lord in a labor to be re-encountered (before His judgment).
84|7| Then, as for him who will be given his Record in his right hand,
84|8| Surely he will be reckoned with by an easy reckoning,
84|9| And will return in joy to his household (prepared for him in Paradise).
84|10| But as for him who will be given his Record (in his left hand) from behind his back,
84|11| He will surely pray for destruction,
84|12| And enter the Flame to roast.
84|13| For indeed he used to be in joyous conceit among his household (in his earthly life).
84|14| He thought that he would never return (to God for judgment).
84|15| No indeed! Rather, his Lord was ever seeing him.
84|16| So I swear by the afterglow of sunset,
84|17| And the night, and all that it enshrouds (by degrees),
84|18| And the moon, as it grows full,
84|19| You will most certainly move on from one state to another (congruous with it).
84|20| What, then, is the matter with them that they do not believe,
84|21| And when the Qur’an is recited to them, they do not prostrate in submission (to its Message)?
84|22| Rather: those who disbelieve deny (it and its Message).
84|23| And God has full knowledge of what they harbor (in their hearts).
84|24| So give them the glad tidings of a painful punishment.
84|25| Except for those who believe and do good, righteous deeds: for them there is a reward constant and beyond measure.
85|1| By the heaven with its constellations,
85|2| And by the Promised Day,
85|3| And by the one who witnesses and that which is witnessed.
85|4| Ruined were the people of the ditch,
85|5| Of the fire kept burning with fuel.
85|6| When they were seated over it,
85|7| And were themselves witnesses of what they did to the believers.
85|8| They detested them for no other reason than that they believed in God, the All-Glorious with irresistible might, the All-Praiseworthy,
85|9| (They believed in) Him, to Whom belongs the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth. God is indeed a witness over everything.
85|10| Those who persecute the believing men and the believing women and then do not repent, for them there surely is the punishment of Hell, for them there is the punishment of burning fire.
85|11| But those who believe and do good, righteous deeds, for them there are Gardens through which rivers flow. That is the great triumph.
85|12| Surely the grip of your Lord is indeed severe.
85|13| He it is Who originates and brings forth anew.
85|14| And He is also the All-Forgiving, the All-Loving;
85|15| The Lord of the Throne, the All-Sublime.
85|16| One Who freely does whatever He wills.
85|17| Has there come to you the report of the hosts –
85|18| The Pharaoh and the (tribe of) Thamud (whom God seized and punished severely)?
85|19| Yet those who disbelieve (among your people) persist in denying (the Divine Message).
85|20| But all the while God encompasses them from all sides.
85|21| Indeed it is a glorious Qur’an (– a sublime Book revealed and recited),
85|22| In a Preserved Tablet (guarded from every accursed devil, and secure from any falsehood).
86|1| By the heaven and that which comes at night.
86|2| What enables you to perceive what it is that comes at night?
86|3| It is the bright piercing star.
86|4| There is not a soul but over it is a guardian.
86|5| Let human, then, consider from what he has been created.
86|6| He has been created from some of a lowly fluid gushing forth.
86|7| It proceeds (as a result of incitement) between the (lumbar zone in the) vertebra and the ribs.
86|8| Surely He (Who has created human from a lowly fluid) is able to restore him (to life after his death)
86|9| On the Day when all things (that remained or were kept) secret will be made manifest;
86|10| And he will have no power, nor a helper (against God’s punishment).
86|11| I swear by the heaven ever-revolving (with whatever is in it and recurring patterns of rainfall),
86|12| And by the earth, bursting (with the growth of plants):
86|13| Surely it (the Qur’an) is a decisive Word distinguishing (between truth and falsehood).
86|14| It is not (a word) in jest.
86|15| They (who reject it) are busy making schemes;
86|16| And I am "making a scheme."
86|17| So let the unbelievers remain at will; let them continue to remain at will for a little while.
87|1| Glorify the Name of your Lord, the Most High,
87|2| Who creates and fashions in due proportions,
87|3| And Who determines (a particular life, nature, and goal for each creature), and guides (it toward the fulfillment of that goal);
87|4| And Who brings forth herbage,
87|5| Then turns it to dark-colored, rotten stubble.
87|6| (For the guidance of humankind,) We will establish the Qur’an in your heart and have you recite (it to others), so you will not forget (anything of it)
87|7| Except what God wills. Surely He knows all that is manifest and all that is hidden (including your outward and inward states).
87|8| We will guide you to the easiest path (in all your affairs).
87|9| So remind and instruct (them in the truth), in case reminder and instruction may be of use.
87|10| He who stands in awe of God will be mindful of the instruction.
87|11| But the most wicked one remains aloof from it;
87|12| He who will enter the Great Fire (of Hell) to roast.
87|13| He will neither die therein (to be saved from punishment) nor live.
87|14| Prosperous indeed is he who purifies himself (of sins, and of his wealth by spending from it in God’s cause and for the needy);
87|15| And who mentions the Name of his Lord and does the Prayer.
87|16| But you (O humankind) are disposed to prefer the life of this world;
87|17| While the Hereafter is better and more lasting .
87|18| This is surely contained in the former Scrolls.
87|19| The Scrolls of Abraham and Moses.
88|1| Has the account of the Overwhelming come to you?
88|2| Some faces will on that Day be downcast,
88|3| Having toiled (in the world) only to weariness (with no portion in the Hereafter).
88|4| They will enter the hot, burning Fire to roast;
88|5| They will be given to drink from a boiling spring.
88|6| No food will there be for them but a poisonous thorny plant:
88|7| It will neither nourish nor avail against hunger.
88|8| And some faces on that Day will be in delight,
88|9| Well-pleased with (the fruit of) their endeavor (in the world),
88|10| In a lofty Garden,
88|11| Wherein they will hear no idle talk.
88|12| Therein will be a flowing spring,
88|13| Therein couches raised high,
88|14| And goblets placed ready,
88|15| And cushions arrayed,
88|16| And rich carpets spread out.
88|17| Do they not consider the camels, how they are created?
88|18| And the heaven, how it has been raised high?
88|19| And the mountains, how they have been set firm?
88|20| And the earth, how it has been spread out?
88|21| And so remind and exhort (them), for you are one (whose duty is) to remind and exhort.
88|22| You are not one to dictate (faith) to them.
88|23| But whoever turns away (averse to reminder and exhortation), and disbelieves (in what is conveyed to him),
88|24| God will punish him with the greatest punishment (of Hell).
88|25| Indeed to Us is their return;
88|26| Thereafter it is for Us to call them to account.
89|1| By the dawn,
89|2| And ten nights,
89|3| And the even and the odd,
89|4| And the night as it journeys on (towards an end).
89|5| Is there not in that a solemn oath for one endowed with reason (to reflect upon, so that it may guide him to the truth and keep him away from evils)?
89|6| Have you not considered how your Lord dealt with the (tribe of) ‘Ad,
89|7| (The people of) Iram with many-columned (i.e. monumental) buildings,
89|8| The like of which had not been created in the land?
89|9| And with (the tribe of) Thamud, who hewed rocks in the valley (to make dwellings)?
89|10| And with the Pharaoh, who had formidable strongholds?
89|11| (All of) these rebelled (and transgressed all bounds) in the lands (where they lived);
89|12| And increased manifold disorder and corruption therein.
89|13| Therefore your Lord let loose on them a scourge of punishment (coming in different forms).
89|14| Your Lord is ever on the watch (over human and tests him in the blessings with which He favors him).
89|15| And so, human – when his Lord tries him by bestowing favors on him – says: "My Lord has honored me."
89|16| But whenever He tries him by straitening his means of livelihood, then he says, "My Lord has humiliated me."
89|17| No indeed! You (O people) do not treat the orphan with kindness and generosity;
89|18| And do not urge one another to feed the destitute.
89|19| And you consume inheritance (belonging to you or others) with greed (without distinction of the lawful and unlawful);
89|20| And you love wealth with a boundless ardor for it and for hoarding.
89|21| No indeed! When the earth is pounded to dust with pounding after pounding;
89|22| And your Lord comes (unveils His Power and Majesty), and the angels in row upon row;
89|23| And on that Day Hell is brought (forward); on that Day human will come to understand (what being favored with bounties meant and how he should have responded), but what will that understanding (then) avail him?
89|24| He will say: "Would that I had forwarded (some good deeds) for my life (to come)!"
89|25| None can punish as He will punish on that Day;
89|26| And none can bind as He will bind (on that Day).
89|27| (But to the righteous God will say:) "O you soul at rest (content with the truths of faith and God’s commands and His treatment of His creatures)!
89|28| "Return to your Lord, well-pleased (with Him and His treatment of you), and well-pleasing to Him.
89|29| "Enter, then, among My servants (fully content with servanthood to Me)!
89|30| "And enter my Paradise!"
90|1| I swear by this (sacred) city (Makkah),
90|2| – And you (O Messenger) are a dweller in this city. –
90|3| And by him (Abraham) who begets, and him (Muhammad) whom he begot;
90|4| We have assuredly created human in (a life of) trial and hardship.
90|5| Does human think that no one has power over him?
90|6| He says: "I have consumed abundant wealth!"
90|7| Does he, then, think that no one ever sees him?
90|8| Have We not made for him a pair of eyes,
90|9| And a tongue and two lips,
90|10| And shown him the two ways (one to follow and one to avoid)?
90|11| Yet he makes no effort to make the ascent.
90|12| What enables you to perceive what the ascent is?
90|13| It is the freeing of a bondsman (a slave or a captive);
90|14| Or feeding, on a day of privation,
90|15| An orphan near of kin,
90|16| Or a poor wretch in misery;
90|17| And being, besides, of those who believe and exhort one another to patience and exhort one another to pity and compassion.
90|18| Those are they who are the people of happiness and prosperity (who will be given their Records in their right hands on Judgment Day).
90|19| But those who disbelieve in Our Revelations – they are the people of wretchedness (who will be given their Records in their left hands),
90|20| On them is Fire closed over.
91|1| By the sun and its brightness;
91|2| And the moon as it follows it (reflecting its light);
91|3| And the day as it reveals it (the sun);
91|4| And the night as it enshrouds it;
91|5| And the heaven and that (All-Magnificent One) Who has built it;
91|6| And the earth and that (All-Magnificent One) Who has spread it;
91|7| And the human selfhood and that (All-Knowing, All-Powerful, and All-Wise One) Who has formed it to perfection;
91|8| And Who has inspired it with the conscience of what is wrong and bad for it and what is right and good for it:
91|9| He is indeed prosperous who has grown it in purity (away from self-aggrandizing rebellion against God);
91|10| And he is indeed lost who has corrupted it (in self-aggrandizing rebellion against God).
91|11| The (tribe of) Thamud denied (the Divine Message and their Messenger, and displayed their denial) in their arrogant rebellion,
91|12| (Especially) when (finally) the most wicked among them (instigated by his people) rushed forward.
91|13| The Messenger of God (Salih) said (warning them, and reminding them again of the terms of their pledge): "It is the she-camel of God, and observe her turn in drinking."
91|14| But they denied him and slaughtered her, and so their Lord crushed them for their sin, and leveled them (with the ground);
91|15| And He (being the All-Knowing and All-Powerful and All-Just) does not fear the outcome (of events).
92|1| By the night as it enshrouds (the earth in its darkness);
92|2| And the day as it rises bright;
92|3| And that (All-Magnificent One) Who has created the male and the female:
92|4| Surely your endeavor is diverse (in character and ends).
92|5| Then, as for him who gives (out of his wealth for God’s good pleasure), and keeps from disobedience to Him in reverence for Him and piety,
92|6| And affirms the best (in creed, action, and the reward to be given),
92|7| We will make easy for him the path to the state of ease (salvation after an easy reckoning).
92|8| But as for him who is niggardly and regards himself as self-sufficient in independence of Him,
92|9| And denies the best (in creed, action, and the reward to be given),
92|10| We will make easy for him the path to hardship (punishment after a hard reckoning).
92|11| And his wealth will not avail him when he falls to ruin.
92|12| It is surely for Us to bestow guidance;
92|13| And to Us belong the Hereafter as well as the former (life).
92|14| And so I warn you of a Fire blazing fiercely.
92|15| None will enter it to roast but the most wicked,
92|16| Who denies (My Message) and turns away.
92|17| And far removed from it (the Fire) will be he who keeps farthest away from disobedience to God in greater reverence for Him and piety;
92|18| Who spends his wealth (in God’s cause and for the needy), so that he may grow in purity;
92|19| Without anyone who has favored him so that he should spend in return for it, or expecting any reward in return for what he spends.
92|20| (Rather, he spends) only in longing for the good pleasure of his Lord, the Most High.
92|21| He will certainly be contented (he with his Lord and his Lord with him).
93|1| By the forenoon,
93|2| And the night when it has grown dark and most still,
93|3| Your Lord has not forsaken you, nor has He become displeased with you.
93|4| Assuredly, what comes after will be better for you than what has gone before.
93|5| And assuredly He will increasingly grant you his favors one after another and you will be contented.
93|6| Did He not find you an orphan and give shelter (to you)?
93|7| And find you unguided (by God’s Messengership), and guide (you)?
93|8| And find you in want, and make you self-sufficient?
93|9| Therefore, do not oppress the orphan;
93|10| Nor chide and drive away the petitioner.
93|11| And as for the favor of your Lord, proclaim it!
94|1| Have We not expanded for you your breast,
94|2| And eased you of the burden,
94|3| Which weighed so heavily on your back;
94|4| And (have We not) exalted for you your renown?
94|5| Then, surely, with hardship comes ease;
94|6| Surely, with hardship comes ease.
94|7| Therefore, when you are free (from one task), resume (another task);
94|8| And seek and strive to please your Lord.
95|1| By the fig and the olive,
95|2| And Mount Sinai,
95|3| And this City secure:
95|4| Surely We have created human of the best stature as the perfect pattern of creation;
95|5| Then We have reduced him to the lowest of the low,
95|6| Except those who believe and do good, righteous deeds, so there is for them a reward constant and beyond measure.
95|7| What, then, (O human,) causes you, after all (these realities), to deny the Last Judgment?
95|8| Is not God the Best of judges and the Most Powerful of sovereigns?
96|1| Read in and with the Name of your Lord, Who has created –
96|2| Created human from a clot clinging (to the wall of the womb).
96|3| Read, and your Lord is the All-Munificent,
96|4| Who has taught (human) by the pen –
96|5| Taught human what he did not know.
96|6| No indeed, but (despite all His favors to him), human is unruly and rebels,
96|7| In that he sees himself as self-sufficient, independent (of his Lord).
96|8| But to your Lord surely is the return (when everyone will account for their life).
96|9| Have you considered the one who would impede and forbid
96|10| A servant (of God) when he prays?
96|11| Have you considered if he is (and surely he is) on the right way;
96|12| Or exhorts others to righteousness and piety?
96|13| Have you considered if he himself denies the truth and turns away (from it)?
96|14| Does he (who would impede the servant in his Prayer) not know that God sees (all that people do)?
96|15| No indeed! If he does not desist, We will certainly seize and drag him by the forelock,
96|16| A lying, sinful forelock!
96|17| Then let him summon (to his help his) council,
96|18| We will summon the guards of Hell.
96|19| By no means! Pay no heed to him (in his attempt to prevent the Prayer), but prostrate and draw near (to God).
97|1| We have surely sent it (the Qur’an) down in the Night of Destiny and Power.
97|2| What enables you to perceive what the Night of Destiny and Power is?
97|3| The Night of Destiny and Power is better than a thousand months.
97|4| The angels and the Spirit descend in it by the permission of their Lord with His decrees for every affair;
97|5| (It is) a sheer mercy and security (from all misfortunes, for the servants who spend it in devotions in appreciation of its worth). (It is) until the rising of the dawn.
98|1| Those who reject faith (in the Qur’an and God’s Messenger) from among the People of the Book and the polytheists would not abandon (the way they were supposed to follow) and deviate (into the way of unbelief) until there had come to them the Clear Evidence, –
98|2| A Messenger from God, reciting and conveying (to them teachings absolutely free from any falsehood) from purified pages (which only those cleansed of material and spiritual impurities may touch),
98|3| In which are right, ever-true ordinances (concerning belief, thought, and action).
98|4| Those who were given the Book before did not split into parties until after the Clear Evidence (of the truth) came to them.
98|5| But they were not enjoined anything other than that they should worship God, sincere in faith in Him and practicing the Religion purely for His sake, as people of pure faith, and establish the Prayer in accordance with its conditions, and pay the Prescribed Purifying Alms; and that is the upright, ever-true Religion.
98|6| Surely those who disbelieve (after the Clear Evidence has come to them) –from among the People of the Book and from among the polytheists– will be in the fire of Hell (a seed of which they bear in their hearts), abiding therein. They are the worst of creatures.
98|7| And those who believe and do good, righteous deeds – they are the best of creatures.
98|8| Their reward is with their Lord: Gardens of perpetual bliss through which rivers flow, abiding therein forever. God is well-pleased with them, and they are well-pleased with Him. That is for him who stands in awe of his Lord.
99|1| When the earth quakes with a violent quaking destined for it,
99|2| And the earth yields up its burdens;
99|3| And human cries out, "What is the matter with it?" –
99|4| On that day she will recount all its tidings,
99|5| As your Lord has inspired her to do so.
99|6| On that day all humans will come forth in different companies, to be shown their deeds (that they did in the world).
99|7| And so, whoever does an atom’s weight of good will see it;
99|8| And whoever does an atom’s weight of evil will see it.
100|1| By the chargers that run panting,
100|2| Striking sparks of fire,
100|3| Rushing to make sudden raids at morn,
100|4| Raising thereby clouds of dust,
100|5| Storming thereby into a host, cleaving it:
100|6| Surely human is ungrateful to his Lord;
100|7| And to this he himself is a sure witness;
100|8| And most surely he is violent in love of wealth.
100|9| Does he think he will not come to know when all that is in the graves is raised and brought out,
100|10| And all that is in the breasts is laid open and made out?
100|11| Surely their Lord on that Day will be fully aware of them.
101|1| The sudden, mighty strike!
101|2| What is the sudden, mighty strike?
101|3| What enables you to perceive what the sudden, mighty strike is?
101|4| The day (when it occurs) humans will be like moths scattered about;
101|5| And the mountains will be like carded wool.
101|6| And then, the one whose scales are heavy (with faith and good deeds),
101|7| He will be in a life of contentment.
101|8| Whereas the one whose scales are light (as devoid of faith and accepted good deeds),
101|9| He will have his home in a bottomless pit,
101|10| What enables you to perceive what it is?
101|11| It is a fire burning fiercely.
102|1| Competing in increase of worldly goods (seeking and then boasting of the acquisition of things, wealth, pedigree, and posterity) distracts you (from the proper purpose of life),
102|2| Until you come to the graves.
102|3| No indeed! You will surely come to understand (when death comes to you).
102|4| Again, no indeed! You will surely come to understand it (when you are raised from the dead).
102|5| No indeed! If only you knew with certainty of knowledge (then you would not disorder priorities).
102|6| You will most surely see the Blazing Flame!
102|7| Then (when you go to the other world), you will most surely see it with the eye of certainty.
102|8| And on that Day you will most surely be questioned as to all the favors (bestowed on you).
103|1| By Time (especially the last part of it, heavy with events),
103|2| Most certainly, human is in loss,
103|3| Except those who believe and do good, righteous deeds, and exhort one another to truth, and exhort one another to steadfast patience (in the face of misfortunes, and suffering in God’s way, and in doing good deeds, and not committing sins).
104|1| Woe to every one who slanders and vilifies,
104|2| Who (sees himself above others because he) has amassed wealth and (without expending it in God’s cause and for the needy) counts it (in greedy love for it).
104|3| He thinks that his wealth will make him last forever!
104|4| By no means! He will most certainly be hurled into the Consuming Disaster.
104|5| What enables you to perceive the Consuming Disaster?
104|6| It is God’s fire, set ablaze,
104|7| Which penetrates deep into hearts (and burns within, as it burns outside).
104|8| Surely it will close in upon them
104|9| In extended columns.
105|1| Have you considered how your Lord dealt with the people of the Elephant?
105|2| Did He not bring their evil scheme to nothing?
105|3| He sent down upon them flocks of birds (unknown in the land),
105|4| Shooting them with bullet-like stones of baked clay (an emblem of the punishment due to them),
105|5| And so He rendered them like a field of grain devoured and trampled.
106|1| (At least) for (God’s constant) favor of concord and security to the Quraysh,
106|2| Their concord and security in their winter and summer journeys,
106|3| Let them worship the Lord of this House (the Ka‘bah),
106|4| Who has provided them with food against hunger, and made them safe from fear.
107|1| Have you considered one who denies the Last Judgment?
107|2| That is the one who repels the orphan,
107|3| And does not urge the feeding of the destitute.
107|4| And woe to those worshippers (denying the Judgment),
107|5| Those who are unmindful in their Prayers,
107|6| Those who want to be seen and noted (for their acts of worship),
107|7| Yet deny all assistance (to their fellowmen).
108|1| We have surely granted you (unceasing) abundant good;
108|2| So pray to your Lord, and sacrifice (for Him in thankfulness).
108|3| Surely it is the one who offends you who is cut off (from unceasing good, including posterity).
109|1| Say: "O you unbelievers (who obstinately reject faith)!
109|2| "I do not worship that which you worship.
109|3| "Nor are you worshipping what I worship.
109|4| "Nor will I ever worship that which you worship.
109|5| "And nor will you ever worship what I worship.
109|6| "You have your religion (with whatever it will bring you), and I have my religion (with whatever it will bring me).
110|1| When God’s help comes and victory (which is a door to further victories),
110|2| And you see people entering God’s Religion in throngs,
110|3| Then glorify your Lord with His praise, and ask Him for forgiveness, for He surely is One Who returns repentance with liberal forgiveness and additional reward.
111|1| May both hands of Abu Lahab be ruined, and are ruined are they!
111|2| His wealth has not availed him, nor his gains.
111|3| He will enter a flaming Fire to roast;
111|4| And (with him) his wife, carrier of firewood (and of evil tales and slander),
111|5| Around her neck will be a halter of strongly twisted rope.
112|1| Say: "He, God, the Unique One of Absolute Unity.
112|2| "God, the Eternally-Besought-of-All (Himself in no need of anything).
112|3| "He begets not, nor is He begotten.
112|4| "And comparable to Him there is none."
113|1| Say: "I seek refuge in the Lord of the daybreak
113|2| "From the evil of what He has created,
113|3| "And from the evil of the darkness (of night) when it overspreads,
113|4| "And from the evil of the witches who blow on knots (to cast a spell),
113|5| "And from the evil of the envious one when he envies."
114|1| Say: "I seek refuge in the Lord of humankind,
114|2| "The Sovereign of humankind,
114|3| "The Deity of humankind,
114|4| "From the evil of the sneaking whisperer (the Satan),
114|5| "Who whispers into the hearts of humankind,
114|6| "Of the jinn and humankind."

{
    "author": "Ali Unal"
}