1|1| In the name of Allah, the Gracious, the Merciful.
1|2| The praise is for Allah, Lord of the worlds,
1|3| The Gracious, the Merciful,
1|4| Master of the Judgement Day !
1|5| You, we worship, and You, we ask for help.
1|6| Guide us to the Straight Path —
1|7| Path of those upon whom You have bestowed favours, not of those who have incurred Your wrath, nor of those who have gone astray !
2|1| Alif-lam-meem. 
2|2| This is the Book - no doubt therein - of guidance for the pious, the Allah-fearing -
2|3| Those who believe in the Unseen, establish the Prayer and spend out of what We have provided for them,
2|4| "...and be attentive at every place of worship and invoke Him alone to make the Religion exclusive for Him..." "...invoke Him in fear and in hope..." "And remember your Lord within yourself humbly and without being loud..." "And woe unto the prayer-offerers who are neglectful of their prayers!" - these and some other Verses of the Qur'aan tell us how to establish the Prayer. 
2|5| Those are on guidance from their Lord, and those are the ones who are successful!
2|6| For those, indeed, who suppress the Truth, it is all the same whether you warn them or you do not: they shall believe not!
2|7| Allah has set a seal on their minds and on their sense of hearing. And in their discernment is a blind. And for them, a severe punishment!
2|8| And among mankind there are some who say, "We believe in Allah and in the Last Day." And yet they believe not!
2|9| They are trying to deceive Allah and those who believe, and they deceive none but themselves but perceive it not!
2|10| In their minds is a disease, and Allah has increased the disease for them. And for them, a painful punishment as they have been lying!
2|11| And when they are told, "Make no mischief on the earth," they say, "We are but trying to improve things."
2|12| Nay! In fact, they are the ones who make mischief, but they perceive it not!
2|13| And when they are told, "Believe like those who believe," they say, "Shall we believe as the fools did?" Nay! In fact, they are the ones who are the fools, but they know not!
2|14| And when they meet those who believe, they say, "We believe," and when they are closeted with their own satanic folk, they say, "We surely are with you! We have been but mocking."
2|15| Allah mocks at them and leaves them to lose their way committing their excesses.
2|16| These are the people who bartered away right guidance for straying away therefrom. But their barter deal benefited them not, and they failed to become guided!
2|17| Their situation is as the situation in which someone kindled a fire. But when it lighted up its environs, Allah snatched away their light and left them, in darknesses, unable to see!
2|18| Being deaf, dumb and blind, they return not!
2|19| Or, their situation is as in a rainstorm from the sky, that is accompanied by darknesses and thunder and lightning! They thrust their fingers in their ears to keep out the thunderbolts, fearing death. And Allah encompasses the suppressors of Truth!
2|20| The lightning almost snatches their sights away! Whenever it flashes for them, they move forward in its light, and, when darkness falls on them, they stop. And, had Allah so willed, He could indeed have taken away their hearing and their sights. Allah certainly has power over everything!
2|21| O mankind! Worship your Lord - Who created you and those before you, so that you may become God fearing -
2|22| The Lord Who made the earth a habitable placefor you, and the sky, a generator of means to provide sustenance ! And He sent down water from the sky. Then He brought out therewith — from the produce — sustenance for you. Do not then knowingly instal false rivals to Allah.
2|23| And if you are in doubt concerning what We have sent down unto Our Devotee, then come up with a Chapter like one thereof and call your witnesses — other than Allah — for your aid, if you are truthful.
2|24| But, if you do it not — and you can never do it — then fear the Fire fuelled by humans and stones, and kept ready for suppressors of the Truth.
2|25| And gladden the minds of those who believe and do good deeds, with prophesy that there would certainly be for them gardens underneath which the rivers flow. Everytime they are served there with the food of a fruit, they will say, "This is what we had been served with before," and they will be given things resembling one another. And for them therein will be mates purified. And therein will they have lives eternal!
2|26| Indeed, Allah blushes not at quoting an example of even a fly or of anything tinier. Those, then, who believe, know this to be nothing but the Truth from their Lord. And those who suppress the Truth, question, "What is Allah's intention in giving such an example?" By it, He sends many astray; and, by it, He guides many to the Right Path. And He send astray none by it, but the wicked!
2|27| They (the wicked) are those who go back on their declaration, recognizing Allah as their Lord, after it (the declaration) was solemnly affirmed. And they cut asunder what Allah has commanded to be adhered to. And they spread corruption on the earth. Those are the people, doomed!
2|28| How can you suppress the Truth about Allah!? It was He Who gave you life when you were but dead. He will then make you die and raise you up again to life. And to Him you will then return!
2|29| He it is Who created for you all that is on the earth. He then rose over towards the atmoshere and outer space and set them right, into seven spheres and skiesh. And He does have knowledge of all things.
2|30| And when your Lord said to the angels, "I am indeed going to establish a vicegerent on the earth", they said, "Will You establish therein those who would spread discord therein and shed blood? And we glorify You with praises, and sanctify You!" He (Allah) said, "I know that which you do not know."
2|31| And He taught Adam all the names. Then He placed them before the angels. Then He said to them, "Describe to me these names, if you do really know the truth."
2|32| They said, "Glory to You! We do have no knowledge other than what You have taught us. You indeed are the One having knowledge of everything and the One possessing all wisdom!"
2|33| Said He, "O Adam! Describe to them the names of these things." And when he described to them the names thereof, He said, "Did I not tell you that I know the secrets of the atmosphere and skies beyond and of the earth, and that I know what you declare and what you have been concealing?"
2|34| And when We asked the angels to prostrate before Adam, prostrated they all except for Iblees. He (Iblees) refused and was proud and became one of the suppressors of Truth!
2|35| And We said, "O Adam! Dwell you and your wife in the Garden. And eat and live therein, both of you, in ease and affluence, wherever you wish. But come not near this tree, for then you both will be among the wicked! " 
2|36| Then the Satan made them slip therefrom and got them out from where they were. And We said, "Down you go, in reciprocal enmity. And on the earth, for a while, will there be board and lodging for you."
2|37| Adam thereupon learned/received Words from his Lord, Who then pardoned him. Surely, He is the One Who forgives, the One Merciful!
2|38| We said, "Down you go all from this place! Then whenever Guidance comes to you from Me, all those who follow My Guidance shall have no fear, nor shall they grieve."
2|39| "And those who suppress the Truth, and belie Our Verses/signs, those will be dwellers of the Fire, therein to remain, for ever! " 
2|40| O Children of Israel ! Remember My favour which I bestowed upon you, and fulfil your terms of the Covenant with Me and I will fulfil my terms. And Me, then, you hold in awe!
2|41| And believe in what I have sent down in confirmation of that which is with you. And be not the first to suppress it. And do not trade my Verses/signs for a little benefit. And Me, then, you fear!
2|42| And confound not the truth with the falsehood and thus knowingly conceal the truth!
2|43| And say the prayer properly and give in charity. And bow with those who bow !
2|44| You tell people to be good and you forget your own selves? And you read the Book! Do you not then understand!?
2|45| And seek divine help with the patience and the proper prayer ! And this indeed is the hard thing except for those who dread -
2|46| - Those, who think that they certainly shall meet their Lord and that unto Him they certainly shall return! 
2|47| O Children of Israel! Remember My Favour which I bestowed upon you. And remember that I gave you preference over the Worlds.
2|48| And fear that Day when none can be of any avail on anything to another, when no intercession will be accepted from anyone nor any ransom taken, and when they will be given no help! 
2|49| And there was that time when We delivered you from Pharaoh's people! They were inflicting on you a terrible torment: they were slaughtering your sons and sparing the lives of your womenfolk. And therein was a mighty trial from your Lord!
2|50| And the time when We split the sea for you! We then saved you. And We drowned Pharaoh's people. And you had been watching!
2|51| And the time when We gave an appointment to Moses of forty nights! You then took to the calf after he left. And you were indulging in wickedness!
2|52| Then, after that, We forgave you that you might express gratefulness! 
2|53| And there was that time when We gave to Moses the Book, and the standard by which to distinguish between right and wrong, so that you might be guided.
2|54| And that time when Moses said to his people, "O my people! You did indeed wrong your own selves by taking to the worship of the calf. So turn in repentance to your Creator and kill those selves of yours! That will be better for you with your Creator." Allah then accepted your repentance. Truly, He is the One to accept repentance, the One Merciful!
2|55| And that time when you said, "O Moses! We won't believe you until we see Allah with our own eyes." The thunderbolt then struck you as you were watching!h 
2|56| We then raised you up after your death, so you might be grateful!
2|57| We caused the clouds to provide you with shade. And We sent down the manna and the quail: "Eat of the good, lawful and pure things We have provided for you." They could do no wrong to Us, but they were doing wrong to themselves!h 
2|58| And the time when We said, "Enter this place and eat and live therein, in ease and affluence, wherever you wish. And enter the gate, prostrating and praying for forgiveness (hittatun). We shall forgive you your sins and grant much more, of our mercy, to the good people."
2|59| But then the wicked people changed the word to one other than what they were asked to utter! We thereupon sent down upon those wicked people a disgraceful calamity from the sky because they had been transgressing.h 
2|60| And when Moses asked for water for his people, We said, "Strike the stone with your stick." Sprang forth therefrom, then, twelvesprings. Everyone knew one's own place for water. "Eat and drink of that which Allah has provided and do not act wickedly on the earth spreading corruption."
2|61| And when you said, "O Moses! We cannot indeed endure but one kind of food. So invoke your Lord on our behalf to bring forth for us agricultural products like herbs, cucumbers, garlic, lentils and onions." He said, "Would you change what is better for what is worse? Go you down to a town! You will certainly get there what you want!" And they were hit by the ignominy and the poverty, and they incurred Allah's wrath. That was because they were suppressing Allah's signs/Verses and they were killing the Prophets wrongfully. That was because they disobeyed and they were crossing the limits.
2|62| Indeed, those who believe and those who are Jews, the Christians and the Saabieen — whosoever believed in Allah and in the Last Day, and acted righteously — for them then, of course, is their reward with their Lord. And fear shall overpower them not; nor shall they grieve!
2|63| And that time when We took your pledge and raised the Mountain over you! "Hold on to what We have given you steadfastly! And do repeatedly refer to and remember its contents in order that you become pious!"
2|64| You then turned away, thereafter! Had it not been for Allah's Grace upon you and His Mercy, you would certainly have been among the doomed!
2|65| And you did indeed know those of you who committed transgression on Sabbath. So We told them, "Be you monkeys, despised!"
2|66| We set it then as an exemplary punishment for those present at that time and for those who lived thereafter. And We made it a lesson for the pious!
2|67| And that time when Moses told his people, "Allah does command you to sacrifice a cow "! They said, "Are you teasing us?" He said, "I seek refuge with Allah from being among the ignorant!"
2|68| They said, "Invoke your Lord for us to make clear to us what she is to be like." Said he, "HE does say that the cow should be neither old, nor young, but of an age in between. Now carry out what you have been commanded to do! " 
2|69| They said, "Invoke, for us, your Lord to make clear to us of what colour she is to be!" He said, "HE does say that the cow should be yellow — bright in colour, pleasing to the beholders."
2|70| They said, "Invoke, for us, your Lord to make clear to us what she is to be like; for, all cows look alike to us! And now, Allah willing, we shall indeed be guided!"
2|71| He said, "HE does say that the cow should be one that is not trained to till the earth or water the field. It should be sound in body, with no scar or blemish in her." They said, "You have now come with the Truth!" They sacrificed her then; and they were not keen on doing it!
2|72| And when you killed a person! You then quarrelled therein. And Allah is the One Who would bring out what you were hiding.
2|73| So We asked them to raise him up from something thereof. Thus does Allah give life to the dead , and show you His signs so that you may understand.
2|74| Then, thereafter, your minds became as hard as stones or harder still! And, indeed, through some of the stones, do the rivers flow. And some, indeed, break; and the water springs out therefrom. And some stones, indeed, fall down for fear of Allah.And Allah is not unaware of what you do!
2|75| Are you confident then that they will believe now, for your sake!?And a section of them had already been listening to Allah's Word; and then, after understanding it, they had perverted what they had understood - knowingly!
2|76| And when they meet those who believe, they say, "We do believe." alone, one with another, they say, "Do you tell them what Allah has opened to you, to enable them to quarrel with you therewith, before your Lord? Have you no sense?"
2|77| Do they not know that Allah is well aware of what they conceal and what they declare?
2|78| And among them are illiterates who know nothing of the Book - they know nothing but their own desires/fancies. And they do not but guess!
2|79| Woe thenunto those who write the book with their own hands, but claim it to be from Allah so as to trade it for a little gain! Woe then unto them for what their hands wrote, and woe unto them for what they earn.
2|80| And they say, "The Fire shall not touch us, but for a few days." Say, "Have you taken from Allah a pledge, which He would not breach? Or is it that you say of Allah what you know not?!"
2|81| Yes, indeed, whosoever earns evil, and his wrong has engulfed him, he would be among dwellers of the Fire, therein to abide!
2|82| And those who believe and do righteous deeds! Those shall be the dwellers of Paradise, therein to abide!h 
2|83| And when We made a covenant with Children of Israel that they shall not worship anyone but Allah and shall be good to parents, near ones, the orphans and the poor, that they shall speak to the people nicely, establish proper prayerhand give the Zakaat! You then — except for a few of you — went back on your promises. And you are people wont to slide back to bad habits!
2|84| And when We made a covenant with you that you shall not shed your blood and shall not drive your own people out of your homes! You then affirmed. And you did bear witness!
2|85| Yet, it is you who kill your own people and drive a section from among you out of their homes, aiding and abetting in sin and hostility against them. And if they come to you as captives, you ransom them, and it is, in the first place, unlawful for you to drive them out! Do you then believe in part of the Scripture while you suppress another part thereof? Recompense to whoever does so amongst you, is nothing but ignominy in this world. And on Resurrection Day, they will be condemned to intense torment. And Allah is not unaware of what they doh.
2|86| Those are the people who have purchased the life of this world for the Hereafter! So then the severity of the punishment shall not be lessened for them; nor shall they be helped.
2|87| And We did give Moses the Book; and, after him, We caused a succession of Messengers to follow him in his track. And We gave Jesus, son of Mary, clear signs and fortified him with the Holy Spirith. Didn't you become arrogant and behave haughtily whenever a Messenger came to you with what wasn't in accord with your carnal desires? You then accused some of being false; and some, you killed!
2|88| And they say, "Our minds are closed." Nay! Allah has cursed them because of their suppression of the Truth. Few then are those who do believe!
2|89| And when there came to them a Book from Allah confirming that which is with them — and they had earlier been praying for victory over those who suppressed the Truth — and when there came to them that which they recognisedh, they suppressed it! So Allah's curse is on those who suppress the Truth.
2|90| Disgusting is what theyh sell their own selves for! They suppress the truth about Allah's revelations, rebelliously, just because Allah, in His Grace, bestows His revelations upon whomsoever He wills among His worshippers. They have thus incurred wrath upon wrath. And for the suppressors of Truth is a disgaceful punishment!
2|91| And when it is said to them, "Believe in what Allah has sent down," they say, "We believe in that which has been sent down upon us." And they suppress the Truth in what has been sent down thereafter. And what has been sent down thereafter is the Truth, confirming what is with them! Say, "Why then did you kill Allah's Prophets afore, if you indeed were believers?"h 
2|92| And indeed did Moses come to you with clear signs; then you took to the Calfh thereafter! And you were wicked.
2|93| And when We made a Covenant with you and raised the Mount over you, "Hold fast to that which We have given you and listen!", they said, "We hear; and we obey not!" Their minds were drunk with the thought of the Calf because of their suppresssion of the Truth. Say, "What you order therewith is harming your belief, if you do indeed believe!"
2|94| Say, "Were the abode in the Hereafter, close to Allah, exclusively for you among all Mankind, pine you for death if you truly believe so!"
2|95| And they shall never do that because of the deeds they have sent ahead. And Allah is fully aware of the wicked people! 
2|96| And you will indeed find themto be persons greedy for life — more so even than the polytheists! Every one of them longs for a life of a thousand years. But no long life can serve as a saviour for him/her from the punishment. And Allah is vigilant over all they do.
2|97| Say, "Whoever is an enemy of Gabriel," - He indeed it is who brings down upon your mind, with Allah's permission, this that confirms what preceded it, and which is guidance and harbinger of good tidings for the believers -
2|98| "Whoever is an enemy of Allah, of His Angels, of His Messengers, of Gabriel and of Michael, Allah is certainly then enemy of the suppressors of Truth!"
2|99| And indeed have We sent down to you clear Verses. And none do suppress the Truth thereof, except the rebels. 
2|100| Every time they made a covenant, didn't a section among them throw it over? Nay! Believe they not - do many of them!!
2|101| And when there came to them a Messenger from Allah, confirming what is with them, a section of those, who were given the Book, threw Allah's Book behind their backs, as if they knew nothing!
2|102| And, during the reign of Solomonh, they followed what the satanic folk recited to them. And Solomon did not suppress the Truth, but the satanic folk did. They taught the people sorcery and what came down at Babylon upon the two Angels, Haaroot and Maaroot. And the two did not teach it to anyone till they informed him/her, "We are but a test for you. Do not then suppress the Truth." Even then, people learnt from the two that with which they could bring about separation between man and his wife - and they could not harm anyone therewith except by Allah's leave - and they learnt what harmed, and not what benefited, them. And they did know that whoever bought it, would have no share of happiness in the Hereafter. And vile indeed was what they traded their own selves for, if only they knew!
2|103| And had they indeed believed and observed piety, better surely would be their lot with Allah - if only they knew!,
2|104| O you who believe! Say not, "Raayinaa"h, but say, "Anzurnaa" and listen. And for those who suppress the Trut : a grievous punishment!
2|105| Neither do those who suppress the Truth among the people of the Book, nor do the polytheists wish for any good to come down upon youfrom your Lord. And Allah graces whomsoever He wishes with His Favours. And Allah is the Benefactor, Supreme!
2|106| Against that which do We abrogate of a Verse , or do We cause it to be forgotten, We bring forth a better one or one that is similar to it!, Are you not aware that, certainly, Allah is in control of everything?
2|107| Are you not aware that, certainly, it is Allah who has absolute sovereignty over the heavens and the earth? And none is there for you, other than Allah, as a wali nor anyone who can help! 
2|108| Orh, do you want to question your Messenger just as was Moses questionedbefore? And the one, who exchanges Faith for suppression of the Truth, has indeed gone astray from the Right Path.h 
2|109| Many among the people of the Book, after what rendered the Truth manifest unto them, would wish, out of their own jealousy, that if only they could turn you back after your attaining to Faith! Forgive and forget for now, until further orders from Alla. Surely, Allah is in control of everything.
2|110| And establish the proper prayer and give the Zakaat! And whatever good you send forth for your own selves, you'll find it with Allah. Surely, Allah is well aware of what you do!
2|111| And theysay, "None shall enter the Paradise except for one who has been a Jew/Christian!" That is what they just desire. Say, "Produce your evidence, if you are truthful!"
2|112| Yes, indeed! Anyone who surrenders one's self for Allah and is a doer of righteous deedshbesides — for such a one is one's reward with one's Lord. And no fear shall such people have, nor shall they grieve!
2|113| And say the Jews, "Not on any base are the Christians!" And say the Christians, "Not on any base are the Jews!" And they do recite the Book!! Thus — in statements similar to theirs — did those, who knew not, speak.Then, on the Day of Resurrection, shall Allah judge between them in matters in which they differed.
2|114| And who can do a greater wrong than one who forbids anyone, in places for prostrating to Allah, from eulogizing His Name therein, and who works for their ruin/desertion? Those places! They ought not to have entered those places, except in awe!! For them, in this world, disgrace; and for them, in the Hereafter, severe punishment!!!
2|115| And for Allah are the East and the West. So, whichever way you turn, there the divine Face of Alla ! Allah is indeed all encompassing, all knowing!
2|116| And theysay, "Allah has a son!" HE is much too glorified to have one!! HIS, on the other hand, is everything that is in the heavens and the earth!!! All are obedient to Him.
2|117| Originator of the heavens and the earth! And when He decides to accomplish anything, He just tells it, "Be!" And, it is!! 
2|118| And those, who know not, said, "If only Allah would talk to us, or a sign would come to us!" Likewise did those, who lived earlier to them, say things similar to what these people said. Their mind-sets are alike. WE have certainly made the signs clear to the people who have been firm in their Faith.
2|119| WE have indeed sent you, in Truth, to give glad tidings, and to warn! And you will not be subjected to any inquisition as regards the dwellers of the blazing Fire.h 
2|120| And the Jews shall not be pleased with you, and nor shall the Christians, till you follow their creed.h Say, "Allah's guidance — it is theh Guidance!" And, if you were to follow their desires, after what has come to you of knowledge, shall there be none to patronise you, nor anyone to help you, against Allah.
2|121| Those, upon whom We have bestowed the Book, recite and follow it as it ought to be recited and followed. Those are the ones who believe therein! And those who wantonly suppress and deny the Truth thereof — those are the ones doomed!
2|122| O Children of Israel! Remember My Favour that I bestowed upon you. And remember that I gave you preference over the Worlds.
2|123| And fear the Day when none can be of any avail on anything to another or any ransom accepted. And no intercession shall benefit any one; nor shall they be helped! 
2|124| And when his Lord put Abraham to trial with Commands, and he fulfilled those Commands, He said, "I am going to make you a leader for mankind." He (Abraham) said, "And from among my offspring?" HE said, "MY word (of promise) extends not to the wicked!"
2|125| And behold! WE made the Househa secure place of assembly for mankind. — And take the place where Abraham stood has a place of worship! — And We bade Abraham and Ishmaelh to cleanse My House for those who would go around it and spend some time there in devotion, and who would bow and prostrate.
2|126| And when Abraham prayed "O my Lord! Make this land safe, secure and peaceful, and make provisions for its residents from its produce — for those who believe in Allah and in the Hereafter", Allah replied, "And, for a while, I shall keep contented the one who suppresses the Truth and then shall draw him/her to punishment by the Fire!h And how vile a destination!!"
2|127| And while raising the foundations of the House, Abraham and Ishmael prayed, "O our Lord! May You accept thish from us. Surely, You are the One Who listens, the One Who knows!
2|128| "O our Lord! Turn us into persons who submit unto You;and out of our progeny, make a community that would submit unto You. And show us the rites that would symbolise our submitting to You.hAnd accept our repentance. Surely, You are the One to accept repentance, the One Merciful!
2|129| "O our Lord! Raise among them a Messenger from amonst them to recite to them Your Verses, to teach to them the Book and the Wisdom and to purify them.h Indeed, You are the One Omnipotent, the One Wise!"
2|130| And who would turn away from Abraham's creed, but one who has made a fool of oneself? And We did indeed select him in this world. And, of course, in the Hereafter, he shall be among the righteous! 
2|131| When his Lord told him, "Submit", he obeyed: "I submit to the Lord of the worlds!" 
2|132| And Abraham did advise his sons in this regard, and so did Jacob , "O my sons! Indeed, Allah has chosen the Religion for you. Die you not then except in the state of complete surrender unto Him!"
2|133| Orh, were you the witnesses when death approached Jacob and he asked his sons, "Whom will you worship after I am gone?" They said, "We shall worship the One, you have worshipped and your forefathers, Abraham, Ishmael and Isaac, had worshipped — the One and only, deserving to be worshipped — and we do indeed submit unto That One!"
2|134| That was a community, now dead and gone! To it what it earned, and to you what you have earned. And you shall not be questioned on what they did!
2|135| And they say, "Be a Jew, or a Christian, to be rightly guided." Say, "Nay! Be of Abraham's Creed, devoutly.h And he was not one from among the polytheistsh."
2|136| You say , "We do believe in Allah. And we do believe in what has been sent down to us, and in what had been sent down upon Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob and the descendent Tribes. And we do believe in what had been given to Moses and Jesus, and to the Prophets from their Lord. We differentiate not between any of them. And we do submit unto Him." 
2|137| If they then believe in what, and in the manner in which, you have believedh, they certainly are on right guidance. And if they turn away, then they indeed are on the other side of the divide. Allah will suffice you against them. And He is the One Who hears all, the One Who knows all!
2|138| Allah has done the painting!And who could be better than Allah in painting? And worship Him, we do!
2|139| Sayh, "Do you quarrel on Allah with us? And He is our Lord as well as yours! And to us, our deeds; and to you, yours. And we do sincerely submit to Him!"
2|140| "Or say you that Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob and the Tribes were but Jews or Christians?" Say, "Is it you who know or is it Allah Who knows? And who can be wicked other than the one who suppresses the evidence, from Allah, that is with him?! And Allah is not unaware of what you do."
2|141| That was a community, now dead and gone! To it, what it earned and to you what you have earned. And you shall not be questioned on what they did!
2|142| The fools among the people will say, "What turned them from their Qibla , which they had been facing?" Say, "The East and the West are all Allah'sh. HE guides whom He wills to the Straight Pat !"
2|143| And, in like manner, have We made youan equitably balanced focal community so that you be witnesses over mankind; and the Messenger is a witness over you. And We did not but make the Qiblah, you had been facingh, a test to distinguish one who would obey the Messenger from the one who would turn about on one's heels. And it has been indeed hard — but not for those whom Allah has guided. And Allah is not One to let your Faith go waste. Surely, Allah is kind and merciful indeed to mankind!
2|144| WE did observe your face turning towards the sky; so We now turn you to the Qiblah you would like to have. Turn your face then towards the Sacred Place of Worship. And wherever you be, turn yourfaces towards it. And those on whom the Book has been bestowed know it for certain that this is the Truth from their Lord. And Allah is not unaware of what they do!
2|145| And were you to confront those to whom the Book has been bestowed , with all the evidenceh, they would still not follow your Qibla. Nor are you going to follow their Qiblah. Nor is any section of them going to follow the Qiblah of any other. And were you to follow their desires after what has come to you of the knowledge, then, surely and certainly, you would be, in that event, one among the wrongdoers!
2|146| And those, to whom We have given the Book, recognize itas they would recognize their sons! And, surely, a group of them do indeed conceal the Truth, and they know they do!! 
2|147| The Trutfrom your Lord! Be not then one among those who are in doubt.
2|148| And for every direction He is its Focus; compete then in doing good! Wherever you are, Allah will bring you all together. Surely, Allah has power over everything!
2|149| And turn your face, whersoever youh hail from, towards the Sacred Place of Worship! And it is, indeed, the Truth from your Lord. And Allah is not unaware of what you do.h 
2|150| And turn your face, whersoever you hail from, towards the Sacred Place of Worship!h And wherever you be, turn your faces towards it, so that people — except those who have been wicked among them — have no grudges against you. Fear them not then, and fear Me, so that I complete My Favour upon you, and that you become guided!
2|151| Just as We sent down to you a Messenger, from among yourselves, reciting Our Verses to you, purifying you, teaching you the Book and the Wisdomh to , and teaching you what you knew not!
2|152| Keep Me in your rememberance, then; so I keep guiding you. And be grateful to Me, and suppress not the Truth!
2|153| O you who believe! Seek help with patience and prayer. Certainly, Allah is with those who are patient!
2|154| And say not unto those who are killed, in Allah's Path, as dead. Nay! They are alive, but you perceive not. to 
2|155| And, certainly, We shall test you with something of the fear and the hunger, and with the loss in wealth, life and production. And gladden those who are patient, with the prophecy of good future.
2|156| Those who, when any adversity confronts them, say, "We do indeed belong to Allah; and indeed are we to return to Him!" 
2|157| Those are the ones upon whom are blessings from their Lord and His grace; and those are the ones that are rightly guided! 
2|158| Indeed, the Suafaah and the Marwa are among Allah's Symbols. So, whosoever undertakes a pilgrimage to the Houseor does visit it, there is no sinupon him/her in going to and fro between the two. And when anyone willingly follows anything good, Allah is indeed appreciative, knowing!
2|159| Indeed, those who hide what We sent down of the evidences and guidance — even after the clarifications We gave thereof in the Book for mankind — those are the ones whom Allah curses and whom the curse-invokers curse.
2|160| Except for those who repent and reform, and make themselves transparent. Those are the ones upon whom I bestow forgiveness. And forgiving and merciful, I am!
2|161| Indeed, those who suppressed the Truth and died while in that state of suppressing the Truth - upon those is curse of Allah, combined with that of the Angels and of mankind.
2|162| They shall abide therein . They shall get neither relief nor respite from the punishment.
2|163| And the Being worthy of your worship is the One, and Only! None is worthy of worship other than He, the Gracious, the Merciful.
2|164| Indeed, in the creation of the heavens and the earth, in the contrast between the day and the night, in the ship that sails on the sea with things beneficial to mankind, in what Allah sends down of water from the sky bringing the earth back to life after it was dead, in every kind of animals dispersed therein, in the winds changing their directions, and in the clouds under divine control between the sky and the earth, are compelling signs for people who make use of their intelligence.to 
2|165| And, among humans, there are those who take to deserters, besides Allah. They love the deserters like they love Allah. And those who believe do love Allah the most. And if only the wicked persons could see — as they would, when they see the punishment — that absolute power rests with Allah, and that Allah is severe in giving punishment! to 
2|166| When those who were followed disown their followers, and they see the punishment, and their mutual relations are torn asunder!!h 
2|167| And the followers would say, "If only we would have a return, we would disown them as they have disowned us." Thus shall Allah show them their deeds as anguishes upon them themselves. And there shall be no exit for them from the Fire!!!
2|168| O mankind! Consume of that which is lawful and wholesome on the earth, and follow not the Satan's footsteps. Indeed, he is to you an open enemy. 
2|169| He bids you to do nothing but the evil and that which is lewd, and to attribute to Allah what you know not!hto 
2|170| And when they are asked to follow what Allah has sent down, they say, "But we follow what we found our forefathers doing." Even if their forefathers had understood nothing, nor had they been guided!? 
2|171| And the situation of those who suppress the Truth is like the situation wherein someone gives a call to another who hears it not but as some inarticulate cry and sound. Being deaf, dumb and blind, they understand not!
2|172| O those who believe! Eat of good, clean and wholesome food We have provided you with. And be grateful to Allah, if Him it is you worship.
2|173| HE has forbidden upon you but the carrion, the blood, the flesh of the swine, and that which is consecrated to someone other than Allah. But if one has to eat such things under any constraint, and if one does this not out of wilful disobedience or transgression, no blame on such a one! Allah is indeed Forgiving, Merciful.to 
2|174| Indeed, those who conceal what Allah has sent down from the Book and earn a trifling price therefor — they, stomach not but the Fire in their bellies! And Allah will not speak to them on the Day of Resurrection, nor will He purify them. And for them will there be a painful punishment. to 
2|175| Those are the ones who have exchanged right guidance for wrong guidance & error, and exchanged forgiveness for punishment! How persevering then are they, in getting to the Fire!!
2|176| Thus it is, because Allah has sent down the Book in Truth. And, indeed, those who question the Truth in the Book, those are involved in a far-fetched hostility!h 
2|177| It is not the righteousness that you turn your faces towards the East and the West. But the righteous is one who believes in Allah, the Hereafter, the Angels, the Book, the Prophets and who gives material assistance — despite one's love for material possessions — to the near and dear, the orphans, the impoverished, the wayfarer, the beggars and in the freeing of the bonded and who is regular and steadfast in prayers and gives to charity. And the righteous are those who keep their word when they give it and are patient in adversities and afflictions and during conflicts. Those are the true people; and those are the ones who are Allah-fearing! 
2|178| O you who believe! Prescribed for you, is the capital punishment in the matter of murdered persons. If a free man, a slave/servant or a female commits the crime, this prescribed punishment would accordingly be applicable only to that free man, that slave/servant or that female, respectively. But where the guilty person's fellow citizen concerned commutes the sentence, the commutation has to be adequately implemented, and the guilty person has to fulfil the terms of commutation in good measure. That is a remission from your Lord, and His grace! Then whoever transgresses thereafter — for him shall there be a painful punishment. to
2|179| And for you, O people endowed with insight, there is life in the capital punishment; maybe, you take heed! 
2|180| It is prescribed for you that when death confronts any of you, the dying person, if he/she leaves behind any property, makes a will in favour of parents and relatives in a fair manner. Mandatory upon the pious!h to 
2|181| Then if anyone changes it after hearing it as one did, the sin thereof shall certainly be on those who change it. Indeed, Allah hears, He knows!
2|182| And whoever apprehends any wrong or sin on the part of a testator and settles matters between them, then there is no sin on him/her. Indeed, Allah is Forgiving, Merciful!h 
2|183| O you who believe! The fasting is prescribed for you as it was prescribed for those who lived before you, so that you become pious. 
2|184| For a few number of days . However, when any of you is ill or in journey, fasting is to be observed by him on other days to complete the number. And upon those who can afford it, a meal for a poor person is the required fee to gain exemption from a day's fasting. And he who brings himself to doing a better thing, it is all the better for him. And it is fasting that is better for you, if you but knew.h 
2|185| Month of Ramadan in which was revealed the Qur'aan — Guidance for mankind with clear substantiation thereof and the Criterion. One, who gets to witness the month, observes it in fasting. And whoever is ill or in journey, for him the count of the number of days of fasting is to be made up by observing fasts on other days. Allah wants to make things easy — and not difficult — for you to complete the number of days of fasting and hymn the greatness of Allah for the guidance that He has given you, and so that you do feel grateful.
2|186| And when my devotees ask for Me, I am indeed close to them. I respond to the call of a caller, when he calls Me. Let them then respond to Me and believe in Me, so that they tread the right path.
2|187| Permitted to you are sexual relations with your wives at night after a fast. They are garments for you; and you are garments for them. Allah knew you used to betray yourselves; so He has bestowed His mercy upon you and forgiven you. Now then, enjoy sexual relationships with them and seek what Allah has ordained for you. And eat and drink until the light of dawn becomes distinct to you from the darkness preceding dawn. Then, fast till night. And have no sexual relationships with them while you are in the state of retreat, in total devotion to Allah, at the places of worship. These are restrictions ordained by Allah; so go not near these! Thus does Allah make His Verses/signs clear to mankind so that they become pious. to 
2|188| And usurp not property of one another among yourselves falsely, and bribe the authorities therewith in order to knowingly misappropriate part of others' property.h to 
2|189| They ask you about the new moons. Say, "These are fixed points in time, for mankind and the Hajj." And it is not righteousness that you enter the houses from their backsides. The righteousness, on the other hand, comes from those who fear Allah. So enter the houses through their front doors, and fear Allah in order that you may be successful.
2|190| And fight, in the way of Allah, those who fight with you. And transgress not! Indeed, Allah loves not the transgressors.
2|191| And kill them wherever you find them, amd turn them out from where they turned you out. For, persecution is worse than killing. And fight with them not, near the sacred Place of Worship, unless they fight with you therein. But if they fight with you, kill them then; for, such is the 'reward' for the suppressors of Truth. 
2|192| But if they refrain, then Allah is indeed Forgiving, Merciful.
2|193| And fight with them until persecution exists no more, and the way of life leading to Allah is enabled. And if they refrain, no hostility shall there be, except against the persecutors. 
2|194| If they observe the sanctity of the prohibited month, you too observe it. And for breach of the prohibitions, there is the law of quisuaasu ('tit for tat' or 'blow for blow'). So then, whoever transgresses against you, pay him back, in like manner. And fear Allah, and know for certain that Allah is with the pious.to 
2|195| And spend, in Allah's path; and do not throw yourselves into ruin, with your own hands. And do good work. Indeed, Allah loves those who do good work.h to 
2|196| And complete the Hajj and the Umrah for Allato . But if you are prevented, then sacrifice an animal you can afford . And shave not your heads until the animal is duly sacrificed, . But if any of you be sick or has an affliction in the head, he is exempted from this injunction provided he compensates by observing fast, spending for the needy or sacrificing. And when circumstances are favourable to you, then for the one who takes advantage of the Umrah before the Hajj, sacrificing an animal that one can afford is a must. But for the one who cannot afford, three days of fasting during the Hajj and seven after you return home. That is, ten in all. This provision is for the one whose family does not live in the vicinity of the Sacred Place of Worship , . And fear Allah and beware! Allah is severe in punishment.
2|197| The Hajj months are known ones. So he, who has taken a decision to perform the Hajj during those months, should indulge in no sex, commit no transgression and have no quarrels during the Hajj. And Allah is aware of whatever good you do. And take necessary provisions for the journey; but, indeed, the best provision one can take along is piety! And have fear of Me, O you, endowed with insight!
2|198| No offence on you that you seek favour from your Lord.h So, as you pour into parts of Arafaat, remember Allah at the Mash-uaril-huaraam. And remember Him as per guidance given to you. And you were indeed among those led astray, before that.
2|199| Then, pour in where the people pour in, and ask Allah for forgiveness. Allah indeed is Forgiving, Merciful.
2|200| And when you complete your rituals, do remember Allah just as — or even better than how — you would remember your fathers. There are then those among mankind who say, "Our Lord! Give us in this world." And they shall have no share of happiness in the Hereafter!
2|201| And among them are those who say, "Our Lord! Give us that which is good in this world, and that which is good in the Hereafter. And save us from punishment of the Fire!"
2|202| Those are the ones for whom shall there be a due share of what they earned. And Allah is quick in keeping accounts. 
2|203| h Remember Allah during those few days.hAnd no sin upon one who limits the days to two, nor upon one who extends — upon the one who fears Allah! And fear Allah and know, for sure, that you will all be brought together before Him.h 
2|204| And among mankind is one, who impresses you with his utterances in this worldly life. And he cites Allah as witness to what's there in his heart. And he's very skilful in argument!
2|205| And when he turns away, he endeavours on the earth, to spread anarchy therein and destroy the field and the race. And Allah doesn't like anarchy!to 
2|206| And when he is asked to fear Allah, pride drives him to sin. Hell, then, is a just retribution for him. And that, surely, is an awful resting place!
2|207| And among mankind are some, such as one who would sell one's own self to seek Allah's pleasure. And Allah is very kind to those who fully obey Him, 
2|208| O those who believe! Get into Islam thoroughly , and follow not Satan's footsteps. He indeed is an open enemy to you. 
2|209| If then you revert to wrong-doing, after what has come to you of signs clear, you for certain that Allah is Omnipotent, Wise!
2|210| Are they waiting for nothing but Allah — and the angels — to come down to them in the shadows of the clouds, and the matter is settled once for all? And to Allah are referred all matters.
2|211| Ask the Children of Israelh how many a clear Sign We gave them. And as for him who changes Allah's favour, after it has come to him, Allah is indeed severe then in punishment.
2|212| The life of this world is made attractive for those who suppress the Truth, and they mock at some of those who believe. And those who fear Allah shall have an upper hand over them on the Day of Resurrection.And Allah provides for whomsoever He wishes, without measure!
2|213| Mankind had once been a single community. Allah then raised the Prophets to herald news of a good future and to warn, and He sent down with them the Book with the Truth to distinguish right from wrong in matters of dispute among mankind.h And, differed in it not but those to whom it had been given — after clear Verses had come to them — because of rivalry amongst themselves.h, Allah then guided those who believed so that what they contended in the dispute in it was based on Truth by His leave. And Allah guides whomsoever He wishes towards Straight Path.
2|214| Do you think that you shall enter Paradise and hasn't come to you as yet the kind of what came to those who passed away before you? Pain and loss afflicted them, and they were severely shaken till the Messenger and those who believed with him, cried out, "Where is Allah's help?" , Allah's help is indeed near, isn't it? 
2|215| They ask you what is it that they should spend. Say, "That which you spend of good ought to be for parents, near onesh, orphans, the poor and the wayfarer . And whatever good you do, Allah is indeed aware of it ."
2|216| Conscription is prescribed for you, although you are averse to it! And it may well be that you dislike a thing, although the thing is good for you. And it may well be that you like a thing, although the thing is bad for you. Allah knows, and you don't.to 
2|217| They ask you about fighting during the sacred/prohibited month. Say, "Fighting therein is a grave matter. And, to Allah, obstructing from Allah's Path and from the Sacred Place of Worship, suppressing the truth about Him and driving its residents out from the Sacred Place are matters that are more grave! And, such mischievous behaviour is a more serious matter than killing.h to They won't let up in their fighting with you till they, if they could, turn you away from your religion (way of life). And as for the one amongst you who turns back from his religion and dies whilst suppressing the truth, the deeds of such people are of no use to them — both here, and in the Hereafter. And those will be the inhabitants of the Fire. They shall be there forever."
2|218| Indeed, those who believed and those who migrated and struggled in Allah's Path — it is for those to expect Allah's Mercy. And Allah is Forgiving, Merciful. 
2|219| They ask you about intoxicants and lottery. Say, "In them both, there is a great sin, and benefits, for mankind; and the sin therein is greater than the benefits thereof. And they ask you what is it that they should spend. Say that which is in excess of your needs. Thus does Allah explain to you the Verses/signs, so that you ponder
2|220| — (Ponder) over this world and the Hereafter. And they ask you about the orphans. Say, "Treat and train them well. And if you mix/interact/inhabit with them, they are your brethren. And Allah does well distinguish the transgressor from the reformer. ad Allah so willed, He could have made things difficult for you. Indeed, Allah is Omnipotent, Wise!"
2|221| And marry not female polytheists until they believe. And a believing slave girl is definitely better than a female polytheist, even if you like the latter. And get not married to male polytheists until they believe. And, certainly, a believing slave is better than a male polytheist even if you like the latter. They call you to the Fire, and Allah beckons you to Paradise, and to forgiveness with His permission, by His call. to And He explains His Verses/signs for mankind so that they remember and reflect. 
2|222| And they ask you about menstruation. Tell them, "It is harmful.h, So keep away from women in menstruation, and approach them not till they're cleansed. And when they are cleansed, go to them in the manner decreed for you by Allah.hIndeed, Allah loves those who repent and seek forgiveness, and He loves those who keep themselves clean." 
2|223| Your women are sexual partnersfor you. Come to your partners then how you please,
2|224| And make not Allah but a front for your oaths, just to create a false impression among mankind that you're good, pious and a reformer. Allah listens, knows.
2|225| Allah does not hold you responsible for any casual oath that you may take, but He holds you responsible for that which is consciously taken. And Allah is Forgiving, Kind. 
2|226| For those who vow to keep themselves away from their wives, there is a waiting period of months. But if they go back on their oaths meanwhile, surely Allah is forgiving, merciful. 
2|227| And if you are firmly resolved upon divorce, then indeed Allah listens, knows. 
2|228| And the divorced women should wait for three menstruaions. And it is not proper for them to hide what Allah has created in their wombs if they do believe in Allah and in the Last Day. And their husbands have the authority to take them back during that period, if they desire reconciliation. And the women have rights just as they have obligations upon them, in fair measure. And for men, a rank above them.to And Allah is Omnipotent, Wise. 
2|229| After each of the first two declarations of divorce, you may either still retain them properly as your wives or set them free in a kind and charitable manner. , And it is not permissible to you to take back from them anything that you've given them, unless both of you fear that you won't be able to stick to norms set by Allah. And if you really so fear, there is no sin upon them two in her giving up anything of what she had received from her husband. These are norms set by Allah, so do not violate them.h to And those who violate norms set by Allah, those are the ones who oppress.
2|230| If you then divorce her, you shall thereafter have no right to conjugal relationship with her until she marries another man. Then if that other man divorces her, there is no sin upon the two to return to each other if both think that they should be able to remain within parameters laid down by Allah. And He does explain in details those parameters laid down by Allah, for knowledgeable people.
2|231| And when you divorce women and their waiting period gets over, then retain them in honour or relieve them in honour.hAnd retain them not for harassing them wickedly; whosoever does that, does indeed wrong one's own self. And treat not Allah's Verses/signs as just jokes,hand remember Allah's favours upon you and remember that which He sent down upon you, from the Book and the Wisdom, to admonish you with. Fear Allah and know that Allah is aware of each and everything.
2|232| And when you divorce women and their waiting period gets over, come not in their way when other men marry them with proper mutual consent. Thus is admonished he who believes in Allah and in the Last Day. That is cleaner for you and purer. And Allah knows; you don't.
2|233| And the mothers, wishing to complete the course of breast-feeding, shall suckle their children for full two years. And upon the man who has fathered the child lies the responsibility of providing adequate food and clothing for the mother. No one is burdened, but only to the extent of one's capacity. No mother shall be put to any undue difficulty because of her child, and no father, because of his child. And responsibility likewise devolves upon the heir. If then one intends weaning the child from breast-feeding with mutual consent and consultation, no sin on them both. And if you intend a foster mother to suckle your children, no sin upon you when you make the payment as agreed upon equitably. And fear Allah, and know that Allah does indeed watch what you do!
2|234| And as regards those amongst you who die and leave wives behind, their wives have to restrain themselves for a period of four months and ten days. And when they complete their waiting period, no sin lies on you for anything lawful they do for themselves. And Allah is aware of what you do. 
2|235| And no sin upon you in that, you give hints of marriage proposals to women, or you just harbour such intentions. Allah knows you have them in your minds; but make no secret promises to them other than speaking to them in an appropriate manner. And finalise no marriage until after the prescribed period is over. And know that Allah knows what's there in your minds, so have fear of Him. And know that Allah is indeed Forgiving, Kind.h 
2|236| No blame of committing a sin will be on you if you divorce women at the stage that you have yet not touched them or agreed upon the mandatory nuptial presents, to be given to wives (Mahr), for themh; but do give them something reasonable, proportionate to your respectiive means. This is a duty upon good people.
2|237| And if you divorce them before you have touched them — but had already agreed upon a Mahr — then give half the Mahr unless they (women) forgo their rights, or he, in whose hand is the marriage-tie , forgoes his (and agrees to give the full Mahr). And it would be nearer to being pious that you (men) forgo. And do not forget to be good to one another, amongst yourselves. Allah does indeed see what you do.
2|238| Guard the prayers and the middle prayer and stand for Allah in total devotion. 
2|239| If you are in an insecure situation, then while walking or while riding, but if you are in a secure situation, then remember Allah in the manner He taught you, which you did not know. 
2|240| And those of you who die, and leave wives behind, should make a will in favour of their wives providing for a year's worldly necessities for them, without them being turned out from their homes. But if the wives leave of their own accord, no sin upon you in what they do for themselves, in a lawful and proper manner. And Allah is Omnipotent, Wise.
2|241| And the divorced women have a right to proper and reasonable maintenance. Providing such maintenance is an obligation upon those who fear Allah.
2|242| Thus does Allah clearly explain to you His Verses so that you understand. 
2|243| Haven't you observed those who left their homes, in their thousands, fearing death? Allah then told them, "Die". He then brought them back to life. Indeed, Allah showers favours after favours on mankind, but most mankind fail to be grateful.
2|244| And fight, in Allah's way, and rest assured that Allah hears, knows.
2|245| Who is there to lend a good loan to Allah, which He will repay in multiples thereof? And it is Allah Who takes possession of things and amplifies them, and to Him you shall be returned. 
2|246| Wouldn't you like to know and deliberateh about the Chiefs of the Children of Israel, after Moses' time, when they spoke to their Prophet, "Appoint for us a king and we shall fight in Allah's way." The Prophet said, "What if you wouldn't fight when fighting is made obligatory upon you?" They said, "Why shouldn't we fight, when we've been driven away from our homes and from our children?" But when fighting was made obligatory upon them, they turned back on their promise, except for a few of them.
2|247| And their Prophet informed them, "Allah has decreed Tuaaloot to be king for you!" They said, "How could he get precedence over us in getting the kingdom, when we were the ones more deserving? And neither is he endowed with abundance in wealth!" The Prophet said, "Allah has chosen him over you; and has given him much more knowledge and physical strength. And Allah grants dominion over his land to anyone He wishes. And Allah is All-encompassing, Wise!"
2|248| And their Prophet told them, "Indeed, the sign of his getting the kingdom would be that a box shall come to you containing reassuring things from your Lord and the remnants of what was left behind by the families of Moses and Aaron. The box will be borne by the angels. There is indeed a sign in this for you, if you do believe."
2|249| So then, when Tuaaloot set forth with his army, he said, "Allah is certainly going to test you with a river. Whosoever quenches his thirst therefrom, he is not with us. And whosoever doesn't do so, but just drinks a palmful of water therefrom, he is indeed with us." And they did quench their thirst therefrom, except for a few of them. So then, as they — he and those who believed with him — crossed over, the others said, "We do not have the strength this day to confront Jaaloot and his army." Said those who were certain they would be meeting Allah, "How often, by Allah's Will, has a small party got the better of a big one! And Allah is with those who exercise patience."
2|250| And when they advanced against Jaaloot and his army, they said, "Our Lord! Bestow patience on us, steady our steps and help us against the people who suppress the Truth."
2|251| They then defeated them (Jaaloot and his army) by Allah's Will. And David slew Jaaloot and Allah gave him the dominion and the acumen to rule and taught him what He wished to teach him. And had Allah not subjugated some people through others, the earth would certainly have been corrupted.hBut Allah is beneficent to the worlds.
2|252| These are Allah's Verses. We recite them to you in truth. And you have indeed been of those sent down as Allah's Messengers. 
2|253| Of these Messengers, We have favoured some over others. Of them is one whom Allah talked to directly . And He exalted some in rank.hAnd We gave clear signs to Jesus, son of Mary, and We fortified him with the Holy Spirit. Had Allah so willed, after clear signs had come to them, people of succeeding generations wouldn't have fought among themselves. But they differed. Some of them believed, and some suppressed the truth by wanton disbelief. Had Allah so willed, they wouldn't have fought. But Allah does what He wants.
2|254| O you believers! Spendof what We have given you before the advent of the Day during which shall there be no trade, no friendship and no intercession. And suppressors of the Truth — those are the wrong-doers.
2|255| Allah! None besides Him is worthy of worship. HE is for ever living, abiding. Neither slumber nor sleep overtakes Him ever. To Him belongs whatever there is in the heavens and in/on the earth. Who could intercede with Him, except by His leave?h, E knows what is in their hands and what is behind them. And none can take anything of His knowledge except for what He wills. His seat of authority encompasses the heavens and the earth, and their upkeep tires Him not. And He is the One High above anything, the One Immensely Great. 
2|256| No compulsion in religion. Surely, the right has become distinct from the wrong. So whoever has rejected false gods and believed in Allah, he/she has taken a firm hold of a strong link that shall never break. And Allah sees, He knows.
2|257| Allah is wali of those who believe. HE takes them out of darknesses into light. And those who suppress the Truth — false gods are their awliya, who take them out of light into darknesses. Those shall be inhabitants of the Fire and shall remain therein forever. 
2|258| Wouldn't you like to know and deliberate about him whom Allah had given political control over a country and who quarrelled with Abraham over his Lord? When Abraham said "My Lord is One Who gives life and causes death", he retorted, "I too can give life and cause death." Abraham then said, "Allah does indeed bring the Sun from the East. You bring it from the West!" The suppressor of Truth became nonplussed then. And Allah guides not the wicked people.
2|259| Orh, about a situation as the one when a man passed by a settlement which had turned upside down! He said, "How could Allah give life to it after its death?" Allah then caused him to die and to remain dead for a hundred years, and thereafter raised him alive. Asked, "How long did you remain in that condition?", he said, "I remained so for a day, or part of a day." "No! You remained so for a hundred years — look at your food and at your drink, and look at your donkey, haven't these decayed with age; and look at the bones, how We erect these together and clothe these with fles — so that We make you a sign for mankind." Then as the matter became clear to him, he said, "I realise Allah indeed has the power to do anything."
2|260| And when Abraham said, "O my Lord! Show me how You raise the dead to life", Allah asked, "Don't you believe?" Abraham said, "I do! But this I ask for, just in order that my mind may rest assured." Allah said, "Get hold then of of the birds and make them familiarised with you. And place their parts on every mountain. Then call out to them: they will come post-haste to you. And know that Allah is indeed Omnipotent, Wise.
2|261| Simile of those who spend their wealth in Allah's path is like a grain that sprouts into seven ears, each ear bearing one hundred grains. And Allah gives manifold increase unto whom He wills. And Allah has boundless reach, knowledge. , 
2|262| Those who spend their worldly possessions in Allah's path and follow not what they spend with boastfulness and insult — for them is their reward with their Lord; they shall have no fear, nor shall they grieve. 
2|263| Kind words and forgiveness are better than giving of poor-due that is followed by hurtful conduct. And Allah is Self-sufficient, Gentle and Kind. 
2|264| O you believers! Make not your offerings of obligatory charity null and void with boastfulness/bragging and insulth, like he who spends his wealth only to show off to people and who believes neither in Allah nor in the Last Day. His simile is like a barren rock covered with soil; then a heavy shower of rain lashes it and leaves it bare. Such people can do nothing with what they have earned.hAnd Allah does not guide the people who suppress the Truth!
2|265| And simile of those who spend their worldly possessions seeking Allah's pleasure, and out of their own inner conviction, is like a garden situated on a high ground: when heavy rain falls on it, it doubles its produce; if not a heavy rain, even a drizzle would do. And Allah is watching what you do.
2|266| Would any of you wish to be like one in a situation as follows? He has a garden of palm trees and grape vines, underneath which run streams of water, and he gets all kinds of fruits therefrom. He has reached old age and his children are weak. And in these circumstances a fiery hurricane hitsis garden and burns ith down.ThusAlladoes make signs/Verses/messages clear to you so that you may ponder over them.
2|267| O you believers! Spendh from the good things you have lawfully earned and from that which We have taken out for you from the eart , and seek not for spending, things of little worth therefrom, which you yourselves would not accept but scornfully. Bear in mind that Allah has everything in abundance and is Praiseworthy.
2|268| The Satan warns you of poverty and makes you commit indecent acts. And Allah promises you forgiveness from Him and favour. And Allah is Pervasive, Knowledgeable. 
2|269| He grants wisdom to whom He pleases; and whoever is granted wisdom, is indeed given a great wealth. And none remember it except those endowed with insight. 
2|270| And whatever spending you do or whatever vow you make, surely Allah knows it then and there. And not for the wrongdoers shall there be any helpers.
2|271| If you give suadaquaat openly it is good. And if you do it in secrecy, and give it to the poor, then it is better for you. And it will atone for some of your misdeeds. And Allah is aware of what you do.
2|272| Guiding them is not your responsibility, but Allah guides whom He pleases. And whatever wealth you spend, it is for your own benefit. And you spend not, but to seek Allah's pleasure. And the wealth, you spend, shall be recompensed to you, and you will not be wronged.
2|273| For those needy people, confined to Allah's Path, unable to move about in the land, and whom the ignorant do not consider to be poor because of the abstinence. You recognize them by their looks. They do not ask for things from people persistently. And Allah indeed becomes instantly aware of anything you spend.
2|274| For those who spend their wealth, by night and by day, secretly and openly, their reward is with their Lord. And there shall be no fear on them, nor shall they grieve. , 
2|275| Those who consume Ar-Riba live not but like those whom Satan makes to stumble on in life, under his spell. That is because they assert, "Business is just like Ar-Riba.h" And Allah has made business lawful and Ar-riba unlawful. He, then, to whom admonition has come from his Lord and has since abstained from Ar-Riba — to him belongs what happened in the past. And to Allah returns his deed.And those who rebel — they shall be inhabitants of the Hell-fire, therein to remain forever.
2|276| Allah withdraws His blessings from Ar-Riba and causes prosperity in Suadaquaat. And Allah loves not any sinful suppressor of Truth.
2|277| Indeed those who believe and do good deeds, establish regular prayers, and give charity — for them, their reward is with their Lord. And they shall have no fear, nor shall they grieve.
2|278| O you who believe! Fear Allah and give up what has remained of Ar-Riba, if you are indeed believers. 
2|279| And if you do it not, take notice of war from Allah and His Messenger.h, And if you return penitently to Allah, you are entitled to all that comes under heads of account of your property and/or dues, so that you do no wrong, nor are you wronged. 
2|280| And if it is a case of a person in straitened circumstances, let there be a deferment to a convenient time. And to forgo, as charity, is better for you, if you do understand. 
2|281| Fear the Day in which you shall be taken back to Allah. Then, every one shall be repaid in full what one earned. And they shall not be wronged.
2|282| O you who believe! When you contract a loan among yourselves for a certain period, put it down in writing. And a scribe ought to record it faithfully between you. And the scribe should not refuse to write; as Allah has taught him, so he should write.And the one, upon whom lies the liability, should dictate. And he should fear Allah, his Lord, and omit nothing. Then if the one, upon whom lies the liability, is mentally unsound or weak or is himself unable to dictate, let his guardian dictate for him fairly. And two of you men should bear witness. If two men are not available, then one man and two women, you choose from among those present, should bear witness, so that if one of the women retracts, the other stands by her evidence. And the witnesses must not refuse when they are called to witness. Be not weary of writing a term contract, small or big. With Allah, that's a proper thing to do for better establishment of evidence and for removal of your doubts, unless it be a hand-to-hand commercial transaction commonly done among yourselves, in which case there is no blame on you if you do not put it in writing. And keep witnesses when you do any business. And cause no harm to the scribe, or to the witnesses. And if you do so, it would indeed be wickedness on your part. And fear Allah. And Allah teaches you.And Allah knows everything.
2|283| And if you are on a journey and cannot find a scribe, then let a security deposit be taken over. Then if some of you entrust some others with some things, the trustee should take care of the trust, and should fear Allah, his Lord. And do not suppress evidence. And whoever suppresses it, he is sinful at heart.Allah is aware of what you do.
2|284| To Allah belong all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth. And whether you reveal that which is in your minds or conceal it, Allah calls you to account for it. Then He pardons whom He pleases and punishes whom He pleases. And Allah has complete power over everything.
2|285| The Messenger believes in what is revealed to him from his Lord and so do the Believers. They all believe in Allah, His angels, His books and His Messengers. "We make no distinction between any of His Messengers with any other." And they say: "We hear and we obey. We seek Your forgiveness, our Lord! And to You is the final destination."
2|286| Allah burdens not any being except with what it can bear. To it what it earns and on it befall conseqences of its earnings. "Our Lord! Call us not to account if we forget or make a mistake. Our Lord! And put us not to such burden as You had put on those before us. Our Lord! And burden us not with what we have no strength to bear. And pardon us. And forgive us. And have mercy on us. You are our Protector, so help us against the people who suppress the Truth." 
3|1| Alif-lam-meem
3|2| Allah — none worthy of worship but He, the Living, the Eternal!
3|3| He has bestowed upon you the Book with the Truth, confirming what came before it. And He had bestowed the Torah and the Gospel
3|4| Earlier, as guidance for mankind. And He bestowed the Criterion. Indeed for those who reject Allah's Verses, there shall be stern punishment. And Allah is Omnipotent and has the power to give a fitting retribution.
3|5| Nothing indeed is hidden from Allah in the earth, nor in the heavens.
3|6| It is He Who designs you, in the wombs, as He pleases. There is none worthy of worship besides Him, the Omnipotent, the Wise.
3|7| It is He Who has sent down the Book upon you. Therein are Verses that are unambiguous and authoritative — these form the essence of the Book — and therein are other Verses, the interpretation of which is not clear to mankind. Those then with dishonesty in their minds, zealously pursue what is not clear thereof, seeking mischief and seeking its interpretation; but no one knows its interpretation but Allah. And persons, deeply versed in knowledge, say, "We believe in it; it is all from our Lord." And none but those endowed with insight receive admonition.h 
3|8| They say, "Our Lord, do not let our hearts deviate from the truth after you have guided us, and grant us mercy from You; You are the Grantor of bounties without measure.
3|9| Our Lord, You will surely gather all mankind before You on the Day about which there is no doubt; surely Allah does not break His promise."
3|10| Neither their wealth nor their children shall be of any avail to those who suppress the Truth, against Allah. And those — those suppressors of the Truth — shall be the fuel for the Fire.
3|11| Like what happened to Pharaoh's people and people who lived before their time. They denied Our revelations/signs. Allah then brought them to account for their sins. And Allah is severe in punishment.
3|12| Say to those who suppress the Truth, "Vanquished shall you soon be, and driven all together shall you be to Hell! And it is a horrible place to rest."
3|13| Surely, there was a sign for you in the two armies that faced each other. One army was fighting in Allah's Path, and the other was an army of suppressors of Truth. The former saw the latter, by eye-estimate, to be twice in number as compared to them. And Allah strengthens, whom He pleases, with His help. Indeed there is a lesson in this for people with vision. 
3|14| Attractive for men are the love and desire for women, children, hoarded treasures of gold and silver, branded horses, cattle and plantations. These are possessions of the life of this world. And with Allah is the best resort.
3|15| Say, "Shall I tell you of better things than these ? For those who fear Allah, there shall be gardens beneath which rivers flow. They, and their spouses purified, shall live there forever by Allah's pleasure. And Allah takes due care of those who worship Him."
3|16| Those who say: "Our Lord! We do believe. So forgive our sins and save us from the torment of the Fire;"
3|17| Those who exercise patience, those who are truthful, sincere and honest, those who are obedient and pray to Allah, those who spend in charity, and those who pray in the wee hours before dawn for forgiveness.
3|18| Allah bears witness that there indeed is none worthy of worship but He; and so do the angels and those with right knowledge, based on truth and justice. There is none worthy of worship but He, the Omnipotent, the Wise.
3|19| Islam is indeed the Religion sanctioned/approved by Allah. And those to whom the Book was given did raise no disputes but after knowledge had come to them, thanks to competitiveness among themselves.And as regards the one who suppresses/denies Allah's revelations/signs, Allah is certainly swift in keeping accounts.
3|20| So if they argue with you, tell them, "I have submitted my being to Allah and so have those, who follow me, submitted theirs." And ask those who are given the Book and those who are unenlightened: "Have you submitted?" Then, if they have submitted they are guided, and if they have turned back, your responsibility is only to convey the Message. And Allah is ever watchful over the worshippers.
3|21| Those indeed who suppress/deny Allah's revelations/signs, and unjustly kill the Prophets, and kill from among the people those who enjoin justice — to them forebode a painful punishment.
3|22| Those are the ones whose deeds have become null and void, in this world and in the other. And they have none to help.h 
3|23| Have you not seen those who have been given a share from the Book? They are called upon to refer to the Book of Allah to settle things among themselves. A section of them then back out and turn hostile.
3|24| That is indeed because they say, "The Fire shall touch us not, but for a few days." And what they fabricated in their religion, deluded their own selves. 
3|25| What then when on that Day — in the occurrence of which there is no doubt — We will gather them together, when every soul will be given what it earned and when none of them shall be wronged? 
3|26| Say, "O Allah, Master of all sovereign authority! You grant the authority to whom You please and take away the authority from whom You please. And You honour whom You please and disgrace whom You please. In Your Hand is all that is good. Indeed! You have power over everything."
3|27| "You cause the night to creep into the day and You cause the day to creep into the night.h And You extract the living from the dead and You extract the dead from the living. And You provide, without measure, for anyone You wish.h, 
3|28| The believers take not the unbelievers — instead of the believers — as their awliya. And anyone who does that won't have any share in anything from Allah, except in the case that you fear persecution from them. And Allah asks you to have fear of Him. And to Allah is the final destination.
3|29| Say, "Whether you conceal what is in your heart or reveal it, Allah knows it. And He knows all that is in the heavens, and all that is in the earth. And Allah has power over everything."
3|30| The Day when every soul would find presented whatever good it had done! And as regards whatever evil it had committed, it (the soul) would wish there were a great distance, on that day, between it and that evil. And Allah asks you to have fear of Him. And Allah is kind to His devotees.
3|31| Say, "If you do love Allah, obey me. Allah will then love you and forgive you your sins. to And Allah is Forgiving, Merciful."
3|32| Say, "Obey Allah and His Messenger." Then if they turn away, surely, Allah loves not suppressors of the Truth. 
3|33| Indeed, Allah chose Adam, Noah, family of Abraham and family of Imran above all the worlds. 
3|34| They were offsprings of one another. And Allah is the One Who listened, the One who knew.
3|35| When Imran's wife said, "Indeed my Lord! I do freely consecrate to You that which is in my womb. So accept it from me. You are indeed the One to listen, the One to know. "h 
3|36| And when she delivered a female child, she exclaimed, "It's a female that I have delivered, my Lord!" — And Allah knew what she had delivered and the male is not like the femaleh— "And I do name her Mary and I entrust her protection, and her children's, to You against Satan, the accursed."
3|37| Her Lord accepted her graciously, and gave her a good upbringing. And He made Zachariah her guardian. Whenever Zachariah entered the sanctuary to visit her, he found her with food. He asked, "O Mary! How did you get this?" She replied, "It is from Allah." Allah does indeed provide for whom He wills, in an abnormal way. , 
3|38| Whereupon Zachariah prayed to his Lord. He said, "My Lord! Grant me a righteous child from You. You do, indeed, listen to the prayer!" 
3|39| Then the angels, calling out to him as he stood praying in the sanctuary, said, "Allah gives you the good news of John — in confirmation of a Word from Allah — honourable, chaste and a Prophet from among the righteous."
3|40| He said: "My Lord! How can I have a son? And I have already reached old age and my wife is barren!" One of the angels said, "Thus does Allah do what He wills."
3|41| Zachariah said: "My Lord! Make a sign for me." The angel said: "Your sign is that you shall not speak to people for three days except through gestures. And remember your Lord much and glorify Him in the evening and in the morning." 
3|42| And when the angels said: "O Mary! Allah has indeed chosen you and purified you. And He has chosen you over women of the worlds."
3|43| "O Mary! Be completely devoted to your Lord and prostrate and bow down with those who bow down." 
3|44| These are narrations of events from the unknown past which We reveal to you. You were not there with them when they drew lots to decide which of them to be the guardian of Mary. Nor were you with them when they were arguing.
3|45| When the angels said, "O Mary! Allah does indeed give you the good news of a Wordh from Him. His name is Jesus the Messiah, son of Mary. He is to be illustrious in this world and the Hereafter. And he is to be from among those near to Allah."
3|46| "And he would address the people while in the cradle among the righteous."
3|47| Sheh said, "My Lord! How can I have a son when no man has touched me?" One of the angels replied, "Allah does thus create whatever He wishes! When He decrees a matter, He just tells it, `Be', and it happens!"
3|48| "And Allah will teach him the book, the wisdom, the Torah, and the Gospel."
3|49| And as a Messenger to the Children of Israel, he said, "I have indeed come to you with a sign from your Lord. And the sign is that I will make for you, from clay, the likeness of a bird. I will then blow into it and, with Allah's leave, it will become a living bird. And I will heal the blind and the lepers, and raise the dead to life, by Allah's leave. And, I will tell you what you eat and what you store in your houses. In this indeed is a sign for you, if you are believers."
3|50| "And to reaffirm that which has come before me, of the Torah, and to make lawful to you some of the things that had been forbidden to you. And I have come to you with a sign from your Lord. So fear Allah and obey me."
3|51| "Indeed! Allah is my Lord and your Lord. So, worship Him! That is the Straight Path." 
3|52| Then when Jesus became aware of the faithlessness from them, he asked, "Who will help me in Allah's cause?" The Disciples replied, "We will help you in Allah's cause. We believe in Allah. And bear witness that we indeed are those who surrender to Allah."
3|53| "Our Lord! We have believed in what you have sent down and we have obeyed/followed the Messenger. So mention us with the witnesses."
3|54| And they planned, and Allah planned. And Allah is the best of planners.
3|55| When Allah said: "O Jesus! I am indeed going to make you die and raise you up to Me. And I will cleanse you of what those who suppress the Truth say about you. And I will make those who follow you surpass those who suppress the Truth, towards the Day of Resurrection.And then to Me shall be the return of you all. Then I shall judge between you on matters which you have been disputing."
3|56| "So I punish, with severe punishment in this world and the Hereafter, those who suppress the Truth. And they shall have none to help them."
3|57| "And as for those who believe and do good deeds, He will pay them their full rewards. And Allah does not love the transgressors."
3|58| This We recite to you from the signs of and the things about the Wise One.
3|59| Indeed, for Allah, the case of Jesus is like the case of Adam whom He created out of dust and then said to him "Be" and he was! 
3|60| The Truth from your Lord! Be not among those, then, who doubt.
3|61| So when one argues with you in this matter, after what knowledge has come to you, say, "Come! Let us call together our sons and your sons, our women and your women, ourselves and yourselves. Then let us pray and invoke Allah's curse on those who lie."
3|62| This indeed is the true account. And there is none worthy of worship but Allah. And, indeed, Allah is the One Who is Omnipotent, the One Who is Wise.
3|63| And then if they turn away, Allah indeed knows those who are corrupted.
3|64| Say, "O people of the Book! Let us come together on a common ground, between us and between you, that we shall worship none but Allah, that we shall not associate any partners with Him and that some of us shall not take some others, from among ourselves, as lords besides Allah." Then if they turn away, tell them, "Bear witness that we are those who have surrendered to Allah."
3|65| O people of the Book! Why do you quarrel with us over Abraham? And the Torah and the Gospel were not sent down but only after his time! Have you, then, no sense? 
3|66| You have been, till now, arguing over things of which you had knowledge! Why are you now arguing over things you know nothing about?hAllah knows while you do not.
3|67| Abraham was neither a Jew nor a Christian. But he was one who was single-minded in his devotion and submission to Allah. And he was not a polytheist.
3|68| Those who followed him (Abraham), this Prophet, and those who believe, are indeed the people close to Abraham. And Allah is close to the believers. 
3|69| A section of the People of the Book would love to mislead you. And they mislead not but themselves! And they know not.
3|70| O People of the Book! Why do you suppress Allah's Verses/signs, and you are witnesses thereto?
3|71| O People of the Book! Why do you clothe the truth with falsehood and conceal the truth knowingly? 
3|72| A section of the People of the Book say, "Express belief in what is revealed to the believers early in the day, and express disbelief at the end of it; so that they may turn back." 
3|73| "And believe not that, except to one who follows your religion," — Say, "Indeed, the (true) guidance is guidance of Allah."— "anyone else could be given the like of what was given to you, or, could quarrel with you in the presence of your Lord." Say, "All favour is indeed in the hand of Allah. HE grants it to whom He wills. And Allah is Pervasive, Knowledgeable."
3|74| HE specifies for His Mercy whom He wills. And Allah has immense capacity to grant favours.
3|75| And among the People of the Book is one who, if you entrust him with a treasure, will return it back to you. And among them is one who, if you entrust him with a single dinar, will not return it back to you unless you constantly keep on pressing him for it. That is the position because they say, "We are not bound by any obligations to the illiterates." And theyh knowingly ascribe a lie to Allah!
3|76| Yes, indeed! Allah loves the pious people, such as one who keeps one's word and fears Allah.
3|77| Indeed, those who trade Covenants with Allah and their pledges for a petty price— those shall have nothing good for them in the Hereafter. Allah shall neither speak to them nor look at them on the Day of Resurrection. And He shall cleanse them not; and, for them, a painful punishment.
3|78| And, indeed, there is among them a section who so twist their tongues with the Book that you may think it is from the Book, and it is not from the Book. And they say it is from Allah and it is not from Allah. And they knowingly utter a lie about Allah. 
3|79| A man, whom Allah has given the Book and the Command and the Prophethood, cannot say to the people, "Be worshippers of me besides Allah." But be you all faithful worshippers of your Lord in accordance with what you have been teaching from the Book and in accordance with what you have been studying/learning from it.
3|80| And he does not ask you to take the angels and the prophets as your lords. Would he exhort you to suppression of the Truth after you have submitted to Allah!?
3|81| And when Allah took the covenant of the Prophets, — "Along with what I have given you of Book and Wisdom, you would certainly believe in what a Messenger would bring to you confirming that which is with you, and you would certainly help that Messenger." — He (Allah) asked, "Do you affirm and make a contract with Me in this matter?" They said, "We do affirm." He said, "Bear witness and I am among those who bear witness with you." 
3|82| Then those, such as one who turns away after this, are the transgressors.
3|83| Are they looking for a religion other than that of Allah?h And to Him submits everything that is in the heavens and in the earth, willingly or unwillingly. And to Him they all return.
3|84| Say, "We believe in Allah and in that which is sent down upon us, in that which was sent down upon Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob and the descendent Tribes and in that which was given to Moses, to Jesus and to the Prophets, from their Lord. We do not discriminate between any one and another of them. And to Him we do totally submit."
3|85| And whoever seeks a religion other than Islam, it is not accepted from him. And he, in the Hereafter, will be among the doomed. 
3|86| How would Allah guide people who suppress the Truth after having accepted faith and acknowledged that the Messenger is right, and after clear signs had come to them? And Allah does not guide people who indulge in wrongdoing. 
3|87| Reward for such peopleh is that upon them is the curse of Allah, of the angels and of all mankind.
3|88| Dwellers thereinforever! Neither will their punishment be lightened, nor will they be given respite.
3|89| Except for those who do penitence thereafter and mend their ways. Then indeed Allah is Forgiving, Merciful. 
3|90| Those indeed who suppress the Truth after their acceptance of Faith, and then go on adding to the suppression, their penitence will not be accepted. And those are the ones who go astray.
3|91| Those indeed who suppress the Truth and die while suppressing the Truth — from none of those shall be accepted even earth full of gold if offered as ransom. Those are the ones for whom shall there be a painful punishment, and for whom shall there be no helpers.
3|92| Never shall you attain to righteousness unless you spend from what you love. And Allah is indeed aware of anything you spend.to 
3|93| All food was lawful to the Children of Israel, except what Israel made unlawful for himself, before the Torah was revealed. Say, "Bring the Torah and recite it, if you are truthful." 
3|94| So then, after that, people, such as one who concocts the lie upon Allah, are indeed the wrong-doers. 
3|95| Say, "Allah has told the Truth. Devoutly follow Abraham's creed then! He was not of the polytheists."
3|96| Indeed, the first House built for mankind is at Bakkah, the blessed place that has provided guidance for all the worlds. 
3|97| Among clear Signs therein is Maqam Ibrahimh. And whoever enters it, becomes safe. And for Allah is the annual Pilgrimage to the House ordained upon mankind — upon any who can afford the journey to it. And as for one who suppresses the Truth, Allah is self- sufficient and stands in no need of the worlds. 
3|98| Say, "O People of the Book! Why do you suppress Allah's signs/Verses, when Allah is Himself witness to all you do?"h 
3|99| Say, "O People of the Book! Why do you obstruct a believer from the path of Allah, seeking crookedness in that path, while you are yourselves witnessesh? And Allah is not unaware of all that you do."
3|100| O you who believe! If you follow any faction of those upon whom the divine Book was bestowed earlier, they would turn you back to suppressing the Truth after you have come to believe!
3|101| And how could you suppress the Truth while Allah's Verses are being recited to you, and His Messenger is amongst you? And whoever clings firmly to Allah, he/she is indeed guided to the Straight Path.
3|102| O you who believe! Fear Allah as He should be feared, and die not but as those who have surrendered themselves completely to Allah. 
3|103| And cling together, all of you, to Allah's Ropeh, and stand not divided! And remember Allah's favour on you when you were enemies and He brought your hearts together, so that, by His Grace, you became brethren. And you were on the brink of the pit of Fire, and He rescued you from it.h Thus does Allah make His Signs/Verses clear to you that you may be guided.
3|104| And there ought to come into being a community out of you, calling people to the good, enjoining what is right, and forbidding what is wrong. And they are the ones to attain salvation. 
3|105| And be not like those who differ and dispute after clear signs have come to them. For them, a terrible punishment!
3|106| That Daysome faces will brighten, and some faces will darken. Then those with darkened faces will be told, "Did you suppress the Truth after you had come to know the Truth!? Taste then the punishment since you suppressed the Truth!"
3|107| And those with brightened faces will be under Allah's mercy and grace. They will dwell therein for ever.
3|108| These are Allah's Verses/signs. We recite them over to you in Truth. And Allah means no oppression or injustice to the worldsh.
3|109| And to Allah belongs all that is in the heavens and in the earth. And to Allah, the matters return. 
3|110| You are a better people, picked up for mankind, to enjoin what is right and to forbid what is wrong, and to believe in Allah. And had the People of the Book believed, it would certainly be better for them. Among them are some who believe, but most of them are dissolute. 
3|111| They will cause you no harm, but a trifle. And if they come out to fight you, they will turn their backs to you. Then, no help shall they get.
3|112| Disgraced are they wherever found, except for those who hold on firmly to the Rope from Allah and to the rope from men. They incurred wrath from Allah and are afflicted with poverty. That is because they wantonly ignored Allah's signs/Verses and killed the prophets unjustly. That is because they disobeyed and were transgressors. 
3|113| Not all of them are alike. Of the People of the Book there are some that stand for the right. They recite Allah's Verses during the night time, and they prostrate themselves.
3|114| They believe in Allah and in the Last Day. And they enjoin what is right, and forbid what is wrong. And they hasten to do good work. They are among the righteous.
3|115| And whatever good they do, nothing will be suppressed therefrom. And Allah knows those who fear Him.
3|116| Those indeed who suppress the Truth! Neither their wealth nor their progeny will be of any use to them against Allah. Those would be inhabitants of the Fire, dwelling therein for ever.
3|117| What they spend in the life of this world is like a bitingly cold wind. It strikes the field of those people who wrong their own selves, and destroys it. And Allah does not wrong them, but they wrong themselves.
3|118| O you who believe! Develop no intimacy with those outside your circle who leave no stone unturned to ruin you, loving to see you suffer. Hatred spews from their mouths, and what their hearts conceal is far worse. We have certainly made the Signs/Verses clear to you, if you could but understand. 
3|119| Behold! You are the ones who love them, but they love you not. And you do believe in every Book of His! And when they meet you, they say, "We believe." And when they are alone, they bite their fingers, in their rage against you. Say, "Die in your rage. Allah does indeed know secrets of the minds ."
3|120| If anything good happens to you, it grieves them. And if anything bad befalls you, they rejoice at it. And if you exercise patience and piety, their guile shall cause you no harm. Indeed! Allah has, within His Sight, everything they do.
3|121| And when you left early from your family to set the believers in battle order.And Allah hears all and He knows all.
3|122| When two groups from amongst you were about to lose heart! And Allah was their Guide and Patron. And upon Allah then the believers ought to put their trust.
3|123| And Allah had helped you at Badr, when you were very weak.h Fear Allah then so that you show your gratitude to Him.
3|124| When you told the believers, "Is it not enough for you that Allah would help you with three thousands of the angels sent down?"
3|125| "And yes, if you be patient, and fear Allah, and they mount a sudden attack on you now, your Lord would help you with five thousands of the angels facing them."
3|126| And Allah made it not but a message of good news to reassure your minds therewith. And the help came not but from Allah, the Omnipotent, the Wise. 
3|127| To cut off one side of those who suppressed the Truth or to restrain them, and they should then turn back frustrated.
3|128| It was not for you to decide whether to pardon them, or punish them. But they did indeed do wrong.h 
3|129| And to Allah belongs whatever there is in the heavens and in the earth. He forgives whom He pleases and punishes whom He pleases. And Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.
3|130| O you who believe! Consume not Ar-Ribah, doubled and multiplied. And fear Allah, so that you attain salvation.
3|131| And fear the Fire, prepared for suppressors of the Truth.
3|132| And obey Allah and the Messenger so that Mercy is bestowed upon you. to 
3|133| And strive for forgiveness from your Lord, and for a Garden, as wide as the heavens and the earth, prepared for the pious people.h 
3|134| Those that spend in prosperity and in adversity, those that restrain anger and those that display a forgiving attitude in their relations with people. And Allah loves those who do good deeds.
3|135| And those who, when they do an act of indecency or wrong their own selves, remember Allah and ask for forgiveness for their sins — and who can forgive sins except Allah? — and who do not knowingly persist in doing what they had done.
3|136| Those are the people for whom the reward is forgiveness from their Lord and Gardens, with rivers flowing underneath, to dwell eternally therein. An excellent reward for those who do good work!
3|137| There indeed had been histories of people in the past before you. Travel through the earth, and see what happened to those who rejected the Truth.h 
3|138| This is a plain, well-explained, address for mankind, and a guidance and good advice to those who fear Allah. 
3|139| Be not weak, and grieve not! And you should have an upper hand if you are strong in Faith. 
3|140| If you are hurt, then surely the community is similarly hurt. And We rotate such periods (of hurt) among mankind, and We do so in order that Allah may distinguish those that believe and pick up witnesses from amongst you.And Allah does not love the offenders.
3|141| And in order that Allah may make the believers shine and destroy suppressors of the Truth.
3|142| Did you think that you would enter the Paradise, while Allah is yet to distinguish those of you who would strive and identify those who would exercise patience?h 
3|143| You did indeed wish for death before you were face-to-face with it. Then you did certainly see it and you looked on. 
3|144| And Muhammad is not but a Messenger. There were certainly Messengers before him who had passed away. If he were to die or be slain, will you then turn back? And none who turns back can do any harm to Allah. And Allah shall reward those who turn to Him in gratitude. 
3|145| None can die except by Allah's command at a recorded fixed time. And as for the person who desires a reward in this world, We give it to that person therefrom. And as for the person who desires a reward in the Hereafter, We give it to that person therefrom. And We shall reward those that turn to us in gratitude.
3|146| And there were many of the prophets who had fought, and with them were a large number of godly men. But they never lost heart because of what befell them in Allah's way, nor did they weaken or give in. And Allah loves those who exercise patience.
3|147| And their prayer was none other than saying, "Our Lord! Forgive us our sins and our excesses in what we do. And make us steady and steadfast in the performance of our duties, and help us against suppresssors of the Truth."
3|148| Allah then gave them a reward in this world and the good reward of the Hereafter. And Allah loves those who do good deeds.
3|149| O you who believe! If you obey those who suppress the Truth, they will turn you back. Then you turn back doomed!
3|150| But Allah is your Supreme Patron, and He is the best of those who help.
3|151| Soon shall We put awe into the minds of those who suppress the Truth, because they ascribed partners to Allah, for which He had sent down no evidence. And their abode shall be the Fire. And evil is the dwelling place of the wrong-doers!
3|152| And Allah did certainly fulfill His promise when you were routing them at His Command, until you flagged and you raised a dispute about the order and you disobeyed after He gave you some glimpse of what you love. Among you are some that desire this world and some that desire the Hereafter. Then He turned you away from them in order to test you. And He did forgive you. And Allah has favours to showser upon those who believe. 
3|153| That time when you were fleeing without looking back at any one, and the Messenger in your rear was calling you back! HE (Allah) did then inflict you with one sorrow after another so that you do not grieve for that which you lost and for that which befell you. And Allah is well aware of all that you do.
3|154| Then, after the sorrow, He sent down the peace of slumber covering one section of you, while another section cared about their own selves, entertaining wrong thoughts about Allah — thoughts prevalent during the times of ignorance. They said, "Have we had the authority to take decision in any matter?" Say, "The authority in taking decisions in all matters indeed rests with Allah." They hide within their own selves what they do not reveal to you. They say, "If we had anything to do with taking any decision in this affair, We would not have been slain here." Say, "Even if you had stayed in your houses, those for whom death was decreed would certainly have gone forth to their decreed places of death." And in order thath Allah might test that which is in your conscious minds and purge that which is in your subconscious. For Allah knows well the secrets of your minds.
3|155| Indeed, those of you who turned back on the day the two armies met, it was Satan who made them slip because of something they had done. And Allah did pardon them. Indeed! Allah is Forgiving, Kind.
3|156| O you who believe! Be not like those who suppress the Truth and say of their brothers, travelling through the earth or fighting, "If they had stayed back with us, they would not have died or been slain", so that Allah makes it an anguish in their subconscious.h And Allah it is that gives life and causes death. And Allah sees all that you do.
3|157| And if you are killed in the way of Allah, or you die, forgiveness and mercy from Allah are far better than all they could amass.
3|158| And if you die, or are killed, you are definitely going to be brought together unto Allah.
3|159| It is Mercy from Allah, then, that you are lenient to them. And if you were harsh and hardhearted, they would have dispersed away from around you. So pardon them, and pray for forgiveness for them, and consult them in community matters. Then, when you have taken a decision, put your trust in Allah. Indeed, Allah loves those who put their trust in Him. 
3|160| If Allah helps you, none can get the better of you. And if He forsakes you, who is there to help you thereafter? In Allah, then, believers should put their trust.
3|161| No prophet could deceive. And if anyone deceived, he will come with what he deceived, on the Day of Judgment. Then shall every soul be paid what it earned. And none shall be wronged.
3|162| Is the one seeking Allah's pleasure like the one incurring Allah's wrath and woefully destined for an abode in Hell? And it is the worst destination!
3|163| There are different grades for them with Allah, and Allah does see all that they do. 
3|164| Allah did confer a great favour upon the believers when He sent among them a messenger from among themselves, reciting to them His signs/Verses, purifying them, and instructing them in Scripture and Wisdom. And, before that, they had indeed been in manifest error.
3|165| When an affliction befell you — and you had certainly afflicted twice as much — did you say, "How come, we got this?" Say, "You got it because of you yourselves." Allah indeed has power over all things.
3|166| And so, what befell you, on the day when the two armies met, was with Allah's leave, and in order that He did distinguish the believers.
3|167| And in order that He did distinguish the hypocrites. And they had been told, "Come, fight in Allah's Path, or defend." They said, "Had we been trained in fighting, we would certainly have followed you." Suppression of the Truth was nearer to them, that day, than belief. They spoke with their mouths what was not in their inner minds. And Allah knows what they conceal.
3|168| Those were the ones who had said of their brethren, whilst they themselves sat back home, "Had they listened to us, they would not have been killed." Say, "Avert death, then, from your own selves, if you are truthful!"
3|169| And think not of those who are killed in Allah's Path, as dead. Nay! They are alive, with their Lord, being well cared for. 
3|170| Happy with what Allah has given them, by His grace, and glad for those, who are left behind and have not yet joined them, that they shall have no fear, nor shall they grieve. 
3|171| They enjoy Favour and Grace from Allah. And Allah does indeed not waste the reward of the believers.
3|172| Those believers who responded to Allah and the Messenger, after injuries hit them.hFor those among them who do good and fear Allah, a great reward!
3|173| The people warned them, "Surely, there is a fearsome gathering of people against you!" And the warning only increased their faith, and they said, "Allah is sufficient for us, and the Best Guardian."
3|174| And the believers returned from the battleground with Favour and Grace from Allah. No evil touched them and they followed the pleasure of Allah. And Allah has Immense Grace.
3|175| It is only the Satan, who frightens you of those who are close to him. Fear them not then! And fear Me, if you do believe in Me.
3|176| And let them not grieve you, who are quick in suppressing the Truth. Surely, they can do no harm to Allah. Allah wills that He sets no share for them of the good things in the Hereafter. And a terrible punishment awaits them there!
3|177| Indeed! They, who have indulged in suppression of the Truth at the cost of the Faith, can do no harm to Allah. And for them, a painful punishment.
3|178| And let not the suppressors of the Truth think that the long rein We give them is any good for them. The long rein to them is only for the purpose that they may add to their sins. And for them is a disgraceful punishment.
3|179| Allah will not let the believers remain in the state in which you are now, until He separates the impure from the pure. And Allah will not disclose to you the unseen/unknown, but Allah chooses whom He pleases as His Messengers. Believe then in Allah and His Messengers. And if you believe and be pious, then, for you, a great reward.
3|180| And they, who are miserly in what Allah has granted them by His grace, should not think that it is good for them. Nay! It is bad for them. They shall have that with which they were miserly, hung around their necks on the Resurrection Day. And for Allah is the inheritance of the heavens and the earth. And Allah is aware of what you do.
3|181| Allah has certainly heard the statement of those who said, "Indeed, Allah is poor and we are rich." We shall record what they said, as well as their killing of the prophets unjustly,h and We shall say, "Taste the punishment of burning."
3|182| "That is because of what your own hands have sent before. And, indeed, Allah is never unjust to His devotees!" 
3|183| Those who said, "Indeed, Allah has taken a pledge from us never to believe in any Messenger until he brings us an offering which the fire consumes." Say, "There did come to you Messengers before me, with clear signs and with that which you demand. Why then did you kill them if you are truthful?"
3|184| If they then accuse you of lying, so indeed were Messengers, who came before you with clear signs and the Psalms and the illuminating Book, accused.
3|185| Everyone has to taste the death. And only on the Resurrection Day, shall your earnings be fully paid. So then, whoever is moved away from the Fire and admitted to the Garden, he indeed has achieved success. And the life of this world is nothing but mere deception.
3|186| You shall certainly be put to test in your wealth and your lives, and you shall certainly hear from those who have been given the Book before you, and from the polytheists, much hurtful comments. And if you are patient and observe piety, that indeed is a determining factor in all matters.
3|187| And although Allah took a pledge from those who were given the Book that they would make it public and not hide it, they threw it behind their backs and traded it for a paltry gain. And evil was the trade. 
3|188| Think not of them as safe from punishment who exult in what they have got done and love to be praised for what they have not done.And a painful punishment for them.
3|189| And to Allah belongs the absolute sovereignty over the heavens and the earth. And Allah can do anything.
3|190| Indeed! In the creation of the heavens and the earth and the distinction between the night and the day there are signs for those endowed with insight. 
3|191| Thoseh, who remember Allah while standing, sitting and lying down. And, pondering over creation of the heavens and the earth, they say, "Our Lord! You haven't created this in vain. Glorious are you. Save us from punishment of the Fire."
3|192| "Our Lord! You have indeed disgraced the one, whom You have put into the Fire. And, there is none to help those who do wrong."
3|193| "Our Lord! We have indeed heard a call of one inviting people to Faith, `Believe in your Lord.' And we have believed. Our Lord! Forgive us our sins and rid us of our evil spirits. And make us die among those who attained to salvation."
3|194| "And give us, our Lord, what You promised us through Your Messengers and disgrace us not on the Day of Resurrection. Indeed, You aren't the One to break promises."
3|195| Their Lord then responded to them, "Never shall I let any deed by anyone amongst you, male or female, go waste. You are kith and kin of one another. And those who emigrated and were forced out of their homes and were persecuted in My Path, and who fought and were killed, I shall certainly rid them of their evil spirits. And I shall certainly get them into Gardens with rivers flowing underneath" — a reward from Allah! And with Allah is the best of the rewards.
3|196| The free movement in the lands, of those who suppress the Truth, should not beguile you. 
3|197| Their days of ease and comfort are numbered. The Hell — the worst of the places for rest — shall then be their abode.
3|198| But for those who fear their Lord, there shall be gardens, with rivers flowing underneath, wherein to live for ever — a bestowment from Allah. And that which is with Allah is the best for the righteous.
3|199| And, indeed, among the followers of the Book, there certainly are some who believe in Allah and in that which has been revealed to you and in that which has been revealed to them. Humble before Allah, they sell not Allah's Verses for a little gain. For them are their rewards with their Lord. Allah is indeed swift in keeping accounts.
3|200| O you who believe! Be patient, exhort patience, maintain good relations with one another and fear Allah, in order that you succeed. 
4|1| O mankind! Fear your Lord Who created you out of a single being and created therefrom its mate and, from the two, created many men and women and caused them to spread out. And fear Allah about Whom, and about the wombs, you make inquiries. Allah does indeed keep ah close watch over you all.
4|2| And give the orphans their property, and do not substitute the good with the bad. And do not consume their property into yours. This indeed is a great crime.
4|3| And if you fear that you shall not be equitable in the matter of the orphans, then marry women suitable to you, two, three and four. But if you fear that you shall not be able to do justice between the wives, then be content with only one wife, or with what your right hands possess. That way it is more likely that you may not deviate from what is right.
4|4| And give the women their dues as free gifts. And if they themselves give up a portion of it for you, then accept and use it with a wholesome attitude.
4|5| And do not hand over to the mentally weak the property of which Allah has made you the trustee. And feed them out of that property and clothe them. And speak to them in kind words.
4|6| And test the orphans till they reach marriageable age. If you then find in them maturity of intellect, hand over to them their property. And do not consume it extravagantly and hastily, lest they grow up. And a rich trustee should refrain from taking anything out of the orphans' property. And a poor Trustee may take just what is proper for his own consumption. And when you hand over to them their property, the transactions should be attested by witnesses. And Allah is Self-sufficient in maintaining proper accounts.
4|7| Men and women shall have legal shares in what the parents and the near relatives leave behind, whether little or more.
4|8| And give something out of the property to the relatives, the orphans and the needy, present at the division of the property. And speak to them kind words.
4|9| And let the persons concerned apprehend a situation wherein they themselves might leave weak offspring behind and fear on their account. So let them have fear of Allah, and let them speak in appropriate and straight (unambiguous and to the point) words.
4|10| Indeed, they, who swallow the property of the orphans unjustly, swallow only fire into their bellies. And they shall burn in the flames of Hell-fire.
4|11| Allah commissions you concerning your children: The male shall have the equal of the shares of two females; and if there be only females two or more, they shall have two-thirds of what is left; and if the female is only one, she shall have the half; and one sixth for each of his parents, if the deceased has any child; and if he has no child and his two parents inherit him, then his mother shall have the third; and if the deceased has brothers, his mother shall have the sixth; after making provision for any will, the deceased may have made, or for any outstanding loan. Your parents and your children — you know not which of them are nearer to you in usefulness. This is an ordinance from Allah. Indeed, Allah is Knowledgeable, Wise!
4|12| And, for you, half of what your wives leave behind, if they have no child; and if they have any child, then for you a quarter of what they leave behind, after making a provision for any will that they might have made, or for any outstanding loan. And for them a quarter, if you have no child; and if you have a child, then for them an eighth of what you leave behind, after making a provision for any will that you may make, or for any outstanding loan. And if the deceased man has left neither parents nor children behind, and he has a brother or a sister, then for either of them a sixth; and if there are more than these, they all share a third; after making a provision for any will that the deceased might have made, or for any outstanding loan, causing thereby no harm to anyone. This is a bequest from Allah. And Allah knows, and He cares. to 
4|13| These are Allah's laws. And Allah will admit the one, who obeys Him and His Messenger, into Gardens with rivers flowing underneath, to dwell therein forever. And that will be the highest success.
4|14| And Allah will make the one who disobeys Him and His Messenger and breaks His laws enter the Fire to dwell therein forever. And for him/her will there be a disgraceful punishment.
4|15| And as for those who commit an obscene act from among your women, produce witnesses from amongst you, against them. Then if they bear witness, confine them to the houses until death takes them away, or Allah makes some way for them. 
4|16| And as for the two, who commit the obscene act from among you, give them both a punishment. Then if they repent and mend their ways, leave them alone. Indeed Allah does accept repentance and is Merciful.
4|17| Allah's acceptance of repentance is only for those who do an evil deed in ignorance, and then turn to Allah in repentance soon thereafter. So it is these whose repentance Allah accepts. And Allah is Knowledgeable, Wise.
4|18| And repentance is not for those who go on doing evil deeds, until when death comes to one of them, he says, "I do repent now." Nor is it for those who die while suppressing the Truth. These are the people for whom We have prepared a painful punishment.
4|19| O you who believe! It is not lawful for you to inherit women against their will.h And persecute them not in order to usurp some of the things you have given them, unless they commit something manifestly obscene. And live with them properly. And if you dislike them, it may so be that you dislike a thing while Allah has kept therein immense good.
4|20| And if you intend to change one woman for another as your wife, and you had given one of them a lot of wealth, then take not anything therefrom. Will you take it by resorting to a calumny and a manifest sin?
4|21| And how could you take it when you have had enjoyed conjugal relations with one another, and they had taken a firm pledge from you?h 
4|22| And marry not those women whom your fathers married, past cases excepted. That practice was indeed an obscenity, abhorrence and an evil way of life.
4|23| Forbidden to you are your mothers and your daughters and your sisters and your paternal aunts and your maternal aunts and brother's daughters and sister's daughters and your mothers that have suckled you and your foster milk suckling sisters and mothers of your wives and your step-daughters in your guardianship, born of your wives with whom you have had sexual intercourse — but if you have had no sexual intercourse, there is no sin on you marrying the step-daughters — and the wives of your begotten sons and that you should have two sisters together, past cases excepted. Allah is indeed Forgiving, Merciful. 
4|24| And the married among the women other than those whom your right hands possess.h This is Allah's ordinance for you! And permitted for you are women other than those, provided that you seek marriage — and not extramarital sex — with them with your own means. On consummation of the marriages, then, give them their obligatory wedding gifts. And no blame on you in what you mutually agree upon, after fulfilling the obligation.Indeed, Allah is Knowledgeable, Wise.
4|25| And whoever amongst you has not been in a position to marry free believing women then let him marry those from among slave-girls who have become believers. And Allah does know your faith. You are of one another. Marry those of them then — with the permission of their masters, and giving them their wedding gifts properly — who are chaste and do not seek extramarital sex taking you as just boyfriends for the purpose. And if, after marriage, they commit fornication, their punishment is half that for free women. This is for the one amongst you who fears falling into sin otherwise. And it is better for you to be patient. And Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.
4|26| Allah wishes to recount to you the customs of people, who lived before you, and to guide you and forgive those of you who repent their transgressions. And Allah is Knowledgeable, Wise.
4|27| And Allah wishes that He forgives those of you who repent their transgressions, while those who follow sensual desires wish that you go far astray.
4|28| Allah wishes that He lightens your burdens, and man is created weak.
4|29| O you who believe! Do not consume your property among yourselves wrongfully; except that you do it by way of trading with mutual consent. And commit no suicides, nor kill one another amongst you! Indeed, Allah is Merciful to you.
4|30| And whoever does this through animosity and injustice, We will soon cast him into Fire! And that is easy for Allah.
4|31| If you shun the greater of the evil things you are forbidden, We shall clear you of your evil tendencies and cause you to enter a noble entrance.
4|32| And covet not the things which Allah has favoured some of you with, over others. For men, the lot they earn; and for women, the lot they earn. And do ask Allah for His Favour. Indeed, Allah is conversant with everything.
4|33| And in all cases, We have appointed heirs to what parents and near relatives leave behind. And give to those to whom you have made a pledge, their portion. Indeed, Allah is witness to all things.
4|34| Men are the supports of women, since Allah has favoured some over others in certain respects, and since men are required to bear all family expenses from their (men's) property. The righteous women then are obedient guardians of privacy as Allah has guarded it. And as for those women, on whose part you fear refractoriness, admonish them, leave them alone in beds and turn away from them. Then if they obey you, do not resort to any punitive measure against them. Indeed, Allah is High, Great.
4|35| And if you fear a breach between the two, then appoint an arbiter from his people and an arbiter from hers. If they both desire continuation of and improvement in the relationship, Allah will bring about reconciliation between the two. Indeed, Allah is Knowledgeable, Aware.
4|36| And worship Allah and do not associate anything with Him. And be good to parents, near of kin, orphans, the needy, the neighbour near of kin, the neighbour not of kin, the companion/colleague, the wayfarer and your slaves/servants. Indeed, Allah loves not him/her who is conceited, boastful.
4|37| Those who are miserly and bid people to be miserly and hide what Allah has favoured them with. And We have prepared, for the suppressers of Truth, a disgraceful punishment.
4|38| And those who spend their wealth in order to show off, and believe not in Allah nor in the Hereafter. And as for him, the Satan is an ally of whom, then he has an evil ally!
4|39| And what calamity would befall them, had they believed in Allah and the Hereafter and spent out of what Allah had given them!? And Allah does know them very well.
4|40| Indeed, Allah wrongs not even to the infinitesimal extent of the weight of an atom. And if there is a good deed, He doubles it and bestows, from Him, a great reward.
4|41| How about then, when We bring, from every people, a witness, and bring you as a witness against these?
4|42| That Day, those, who suppress the Truth and disobey the Messenger, would wish that the earth were levelled with them. And they shall not hide any event from Allah.
4|43| O you who believe! Go not to prayer while you are under the influence of intoxication, until you know what you say, nor while you are in an unclean state — unless on the move from one place to another — until you take a bath. And if you are ill, or on a journey, or any of you has come from the toilet or you have been in sexual contact with the women, and you cannot get water, simulate the cleaning act then with pure earth, wiping your faces and your hands therewith. Indeed, Allah is Lenient, Forgiving.
4|44| Have you not seen those who were given an Edition of the Book, trading perversity andh wishing that you should go off the Path?
4|45| And Allah knows your enemies. And Allah suffices as Patron, and Allah suffices as One Who helps.
4|46| Among the Jewish people are those who distort word from its context and say, "We have heard and we disobey." and, "Hear, and don't make us hear! And listen to us!" twisting words with their tongues and taunting the Religion. And had they just said, "We have heard and we obey." and "Hear, and look at us!" it would have been better and more upright for them. But Allah has cursed them on account of their suppression of the Truth. So they believe not, except for a few.
4|47| O you who have been given the Book! Believe in what We have sent down, confirming that which is with you, before We efface faces and then turn them on their backs, or curse them as We cursed the Sabbath companions. And Allah's command does get executed!
4|48| Indeed, Allah forgives not that anything should be associated with Him, and He forgives whomsoever, He pleases, committing any sin other than that. And whoever associates anything with Allah, he/she is certainly guilty of concocting and committing a grave sin.
4|49| Have you not seen those who consider themselves as pure? But Allah it is Who purifies whom He wills. And they shall not be wronged even a bit.
4|50| Look, how they forge the lie upon Allah!And this by itself is a sin, manifest.
4|51| Have you not seen how those to whom has been given an Edition of the Book believe in idols and false deities, and say of those who suppress the Truth that the latter are better guided in the path than those who believe?
4|52| Those are the people whom Allah has cursed. And you shall find none to help whomsoever Allah curses.
4|53| Or, do they have a share in the governance?h Then, in that case, they would give to others, not even a little bit.
4|54| Or do they envy the others for what Allah has given them of His Favour? And, surely, We had given to children of Abraham the Book and the Wisdom, and We had given them a great territory to govern!
4|55| Then there were those among them who believed in him, and those among them who turned away from him. And Hell is sufficient Inferno.
4|56| Indeed, We shall burn those who suppress the Truth in regard to Our Verses/Signs, in fire. Whenever their skins get fully burnt, We shall replace them with other skins, so that they may go on tasting the punishment. Allah indeed is Omnipotent, Wise!
4|57| And those who believe and do good deeds, We shall make them enter gardens with rivers flowing underneath, to abide therein for ever. For them shall there be mates pure, and We shall admit them into cool everlasting shade.
4|58| Allah does indeed command you to hand over the trusts to those to whom they are due, and that when you judge between people, you judge with justice. Allah does indeed give you the best of admonition. Allah does indeed hear all, see all!
4|59| O you who believe! Obey Allah, and obey the Messenger and those in authority from amongst you. Then if you believe in Allah and the Hereafter and quarrel on anything, refer it to Allah and the Messenger. That is better, and it is the best solution.h 
4|60| Have you not seen those who assert that they believe in what has been revealed to you and in what was revealed before you? They would like to go to someone who has rebelled against Allah, for judgement, although they were commanded to deny him. And the Satan desires to lead them far astray. 
4|61| And when it is said to them, "Come to what Allah has revealed and to the Messenger", you see the hypocrites turning away from you in aversion.
4|62| Then, how about it, when a calamity befalls them on account of what they did before, and they come to you swearing by Allah, "We did not desire anything but goodwill and amity"?
4|63| Allah knows what is there in their inner minds. So leave them alone, admonish them, and speak to them words that would touch their inner souls.
4|64| And We did not send any Messenger but to be obeyed by Allah's command. And if only they had — when they were unjust to themselves — come to you and asked forgiveness of Allah and the Messenger asked forgiveness for them, they would have found Allah Accepting repentance, Merciful.
4|65| No! By your Lord, no! They believe not, until they make you the arbiter in disputes among them, and then find no reservations in their minds on your decisions and submit to them entirely.
4|66| And if We had passed an order for them to lay down their lives or to leave their homes, they would not have done it, except for a few of them. And had they done what they were advised to, it would have certainly been better for them and it would have very much strengthened their position.
4|67| And in that case, We would certainly have given them from Ourselves a great reward.
4|68| And We would certainly have guided them to the Straight Path.
4|69| And persons like the one who obeys Allah and the Messenger, are in the company of the prophets, the truthful, the martyrs and the righteous, upon whom Allah has bestowed rewards. And how excellent are these companions!
4|70| This is the favour from Allah, and sufficient is Allah, the Embodiment of all knowledge!
4|71| O you who believe! Be on your guard, and then go out in strength or all together.
4|72| And, indeed, among you certainly is he who would drop behind! If then a calamity befalls you, he says, "Surely Allah conferred a benefit on me that I was not present with them."
4|73| And if you do get a favour from Allah, he would certainly say, as if you were not on friendly terms with him, "Oh! I wish I had been with them. I would then achieve a great success."
4|74| Those fight in Allah's Path, then, who are ready to exchange this life for the other (in the Hereafter)! And whoever fights in Allah's Path, and then whether he is killed or he gets victory, We shall grant him a great reward.
4|75| And what's the matter with you that you fight not, in Allah's Path, for the weak among the men, for the women and for the children, who say, "Our Lord! Take us out of this town, whose people are oppressors and raise for us from You a guardian and raise for us from You a helper." 
4|76| Those who believe fight in Allah's Path; and those who suppress the Truth, fight in the path of the false god. Fight then against those who are friends of the Satan. The Satanic strategy is indeed weak.
4|77| Do you see these people who were asked to wit old their hands and to establish the prayer and pay the zakaat (poor due)? Then, when fighting was ordained for them, a section of these very people started fearing men, as they should fear Allah, or even more! And they said, "O Lord! Why have you ordained fighting for us? Had you but given us a little more time!" Say, "Short is the enjoyment of this world. And the other world is better for him who fears Allah. And you shall not be wronged, even a bit."
4|78| Wherever you are, death will overtake you even if you are within fortified fortresses. And if any good comes to them, they say, "This is from Allah." And if anything bad afflicts them, they say, "This is from you ?" Say, "All things are from Allah." And what's the matter with these people that they are unable to understand the statement,
4|79| "Whatever good comes to you, it is from Allah. And whatever bad befalls you, it is from you yourself." And We have sent you as Messenger to mankind. And Allah is sufficient as Witness.
4|80| Whoever obeys the Messenger, does surely obey Allah. And whoever turns away, We have not sent you as guardian of such persons. 
4|81| They declare their obedience. Then, once out of your presence, a section of them pass all night in doing other than what you advise them to do. And Allah records their nocturnal doings. So, leave them alone, and trust Allah! And Allah suffices as Trustee.
4|82| Do they not then ponder over the Qur'aan? And had it been from anybody other than Allah, they would certainly find in it many a contradiction. 
4|83| And when there comes to them any matter of peace or fear, they make it public. And had they referred it to the Messenger and to those in authority among them, it would have been properly scrutinized by the investigators among them. And had it not been for Allah's Favour upon you, and His Mercy, you would certainly have followed Satan, save a few of you.
4|84| Fight, then, in Allah's Path. You will be beld responsible for none but you yourself, and exhort the believers. It may be that Allah will contain the power of those who suppress the Truth. And Allah is the strongest in power and the most severe in giving punishment. 
4|85| Whoever intercedes in a good cause, for him a share thereof; and whoever intercedes in a bad cause, for him a part thereof. And Allah is the Controller over all things.
4|86| And when you are greeted with a greeting, then return the greeting in a better or similar manner. Indeed, Allah is the Comptroller over all things.
4|87| Allah! None has the right to be worshipped but He. He will certainly gather you together on the Day of Resurrection about which there is no doubt. And who can be more truthful in word than Allah?
4|88| What is the matter with you, then, that, on the question of the hypocrites you are divided into two opposing camps? And Allah has turned them back because of what they have earned. Do you wish to guide him whom Allah has sent astray!? And whomsoever Allah sends astray, you shall find no way for him.
4|89| They desire that you should suppress the Truth as they have suppressed it, so that you become all alike. Take not from among them friends, then, until they move out in Allah's Path. Then if they turn back, seize them and kill them wherever you find them.hAnd take not, from among them, anyone, either as a close friend or to help you out in any matter.
4|90| Except those who join a people between whom and you there is a treaty, or who come to you with their minds averse to fighting you or fighting their own people. And had Allah willed, He would have empowered them to fight you. So if they withdraw from you and fight with you not, and offer you peace, then Allah has opened no way for you to act against them.
4|91| You will find others who desire that they should be safe from you and safe from their own people. Whenever they are put to the test, they readily yield to temptations therein. So if they do not withdraw from you, offer you peace and restrain their hands, then seize them and kill them wherever you get hold of them. And against these We have given you a clear authority.
4|92| And it does not behove a believer to kill a believer except by mistake. And whoever kills a believer by mistake, he should free a believing slave, and blood-money should be paid to the deceased's family unless they remit it as charity. If he was from a people hostile to you and was a believer, then the freeing of a believing slave, and if he was from a people, between whom and you there is a convenant, the blood-money should be paid to the deceased's family along with the freeing of a believing slave, and he who cannot find one should fast for two consecutive months in order to seek repentance from Allah. And Allah is Knowledgeable, Wise.
4|93| And whoever kills a believer intentionally, his punishment is to abide forever in Hell. And Allah has sent His wrath and curse on him. And He has prepared for him a severe punishment.
4|94| O you who believe! When you set out in Allah's way, ascertain facts and do not say to any one, who offers you peace, that he is not a believer, seeking benefits of this worldly life. With Allah, on the other hand, there are bounties abundant. You were like this before, when Allah conferred His Grace on you! So ascertain the facts. Allah is indeed aware of what you do.
4|95| Not equal are those among the believers who sit back at home — disabled men excepted — and those who strive in Allah's Path with their wealth and with their persons. Allah has favoured those, who strive with their wealth and with their persons, with higher rank than those who sit back. And Allah has promised the good to both, but Allah has favoured those who strive, over those who sit back, with a great reward.
4|96| Ranks from Him and forgiveness and mercy. And Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.
4|97| While causing those persons to die who were unjust to their own souls, the angels did indeed ask them, "Why were you so in there?" They said, "We were in a weak position on the earth." The angels asked, "Was not Allah's earth spacious enough for you to emigrate therein?" These people then would have their abode in Hell, and it is an evil destination!
4|98| Except the weak from among the men, women and children who neither have the means nor can they find a way.
4|99| Allah may then pardon such people. And Allah is Lenient, Forgiving.
4|100| And whoever emigrates in Allah's Path, he will find on the earth many places of refuge and abundance. And whoever leaves home as an emigrant unto Allah and His Messenger, and then death overtakes him, his reward falls due upon Allah. And Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.
4|101| And when you are on a journey on the earth, no sin upon you if you shorten the prayer out of fear that those who suppress the truth may cause you mischief. Indeed, the suppressors of truth are your open enemy.
4|102| And when you are among them and lead them in prayer, let a group of them stand up with you, taking their arms with them. Then when they have prostrated, let them go to your rear, and let another group who have not prayed come forward and pray with you, being on their guard and taking their arms. Those who suppress the Truth desire that you are off-guard as regards your arms and your property, so that they may then turn upon you in a single decisive swoop. And no blame on you, if you are inconvenienced by rain or if you are ill, that you put off your arms; but be on your guard. Indeed, Allah has prepared a disgraceful punishment for the suppressors of Truth.
4|103| Then when you are due to perform the prayer, remember Allah, standing, sitting and while resting on your sides. Then when the situation for you becomes conducive, offer the prayer properly. Indeed the prayer is ordained for the believers at fixed times. . It is a war-like situation that is envisaged in Verses and above. But, in this Verse , other peace-time situations, like when one is travelling in a public transport, in a non-Islamic country, at the fixed time of the ritual prayer, are also envisaged. Stress is laid here on the performance of the salaah at the time fixed even though one is travelling, say, in a public transport bus. The prayer can be performed on a notional basis, then, just by remembering Allah, without going through the normal procedure for the prayer. This Verse is also the authority for the very ill, bedridden, person to offer his/her salah even while lying down.
4|104| And relent not in pursuing the enemy. If you have suffered, they too have suffered as you have, and you expect from Allah what they do not. And Allah is Knowledgeable, Wise.
4|105| WE have indeed sent down to you (singular) the Book with the Truth so that you decide things among mankind on the basis of what Allah has shown you. And do not side with the treacherous.
4|106| And seek forgiveness of Allah. Indeed, Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.
4|107| And argue not on behalf of those who deceive themselves. Indeed, Allah loves not one who is a sinful deceiver.
4|108| They may conceal things from people and not from Allah; for, He is with them when they draw secret schemes, which please Him not. And Allah is in complete control of what they do.
4|109| Here you are those, who plead for them in this worldly life, but who will plead with Allah for them on the Day of Resurrection? Or, who will then be their advocate?
4|110| And he who commits an evil act or wrongs his own self and then seeks Allah's forgiveness, he will find Allah Forgiving, Merciful.
4|111| And he, who commits a sin, commits it only against his own self. And Allah is Knowledgeable, Wise.
4|112| And he who commits a mistake or a sin and then throws the blame therefor on to an innocent, he has indeed burdened himself with slander and manifest sin.
4|113| And had it not been for Allah's Favour upon you and His mercy, a section of themhad certainly planned to mislead you. And they mislead not but their own selves and they can cause you no harm. And Allah has sent down upon you the Book and the Wisdom, and He has taught you what you did not know. And great is Allah's Favour upon you!
4|114| No good in most of their secret talks except for one that would lead to an act of charity, propriety or reconciliation between people. And whoever does this for Allah's pleasure, We will give him a great reward.
4|115| And whoever opposes the Messenger after what guidance has come clearly to him and follows a way other than that of the believers, We will keep him turned to what he himself has turned to and make him burn in hell. And it is an evil destination.
4|116| Indeed, Allah forgives not that partners are set up for Him, and He forgives, whom He wills, any sin besides. And he, who sets up partners to Allah, has indeed strayed far off.
4|117| They invoke none but women instead of Him. And they invoke none but a rebellious Satan.
4|118| Allah has excommunicated him. And he had said, "I will take (influence) a certain number of Your devotees."
4|119| "And I will certainly lead them astray and arouse in them vain desires, and make them slit the ears of the cattle, and make them disfigure Allah's creation." And he, who takes the Satan instead of Allah as master, shall surely suffer a manifest loss.
4|120| He makes promises to them and arouses vain desires in them. And the Satan promises them nothing but vain and delusive things.
4|121| Abode of these people shall be Hell, and they shall find no escape from it.
4|122| And as for those who believe and do good deeds, We shall admit them to gardens with rivers flowing underneath, and they will abide therein for ever. Allah's promise is the Truth. And whose statement could be truer than Allah's?
4|123| It will not be in accordance with your wishes and it will not be in accordance with the wishes of the people of the Book. He, who does a wrong, shall be punished for it, and he will find for himself neither a guardian nor anyone to help, besides Allah.
4|124| And such people — as the one, male or female, who does good deeds and is a believer — shall enter the Garden, and they shall not be subjected to even a speck of injustice.
4|125| And who can be better in way of life than he who submits himself entirely to Allah, and is a doer of good, and devotedly follows Abraham's Creed ? And Allah did hold Abraham dear.
4|126| And to Allah belongs all that is in the heavens and in the earth. And Allah is encircling each and every thing.
4|127| And they seek decrees from you regarding the women. Tell them that Allah has decreed to you about them. And the decrees are those recited unto you, in the Book, regarding the orphaned/helpless women whom you wish to marry without paying what is ordained for them and regarding the weak and oppressed children,h and that you stand up for justice for the orphans. And whatever good you do, Allah would indeed be aware of it.
4|128| And if a woman fears from her husband cruelty or desertion, no blame accrues on either of them, if they effect reconciliation between themselves. And reconciliation is better. And human beings are subject to greed. And if you do good deeds and fear Allah, then Allah is indeed aware of what you do.
4|129| And you are unable to be fairly just between wives, even though you may ardently wish to, but turn you not altogether away so as to keep her, as it were, in suspense. And if you make amends and fear Allah, then Allah is indeed Forgiving, Merciful.
4|130| And if they separate, Allah will make each of them free from want out of His immense resources. And Allah is Immense in resources, Wise.
4|131| And for Allah it is all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth. And We did direct the People of the Book before you, and now We do direct you, to fear Allah. And if you suppress the Truth, then, indeed, for Allah is all that is in the Heavens and all that is in the Earth. And Allah is Self-sufficient, Praiseworthy.
4|132| And for Allah it is all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth. And Allah suffices as Trustee.
4|133| If He so wills, He can take you away, O people, and bring others. And Allah has the power to do this.
4|134| He, who desires the reward of this world, May know that with Allah is the reward of this world and of the Hereafter. And Allah is listening, observing.
4|135| O you who beljeve! Be witnesses for Allah, standing up firmly on justice, even though it may be against your own selves, parents or relatives. Be they rich or be they poor, Allah is close to them both. So follow not vain desires, lest you deviate. And if you swerve or turn away, then, indeed, Allah is aware of what you do.
4|136| O you who believe! Believe in Allah, His Messenger, the Book He has sent down to His Messenger, and the Book He had previously sent down. He, who denies Allah, His angels, His Books, His Messengers and the Hereafter, has gone far astray.
4|137| Indeed, those who believe and then suppress the Truth, and again believe and then suppress the Truth, and then go on suppressing the Truth! Allah will neither be disposed to forgive them nor to guide them to the Right Path.
4|138| Let the hypocrites know that for them is a painful punishment.
4|139| Do they, who take the suppressors of Truth, rather than the believers, as close friends, seek honour from those suppressors of Truth? But, then, all honour does indeed rest with Allah.
4|140| And it is certainly laid down for you in the Book that when you hear Allah's Verses being denied or ridiculed, you should not sit with those people until they enter another topic of talk; otherwise, you shall be like them. Indeed Allah shall gather the hypocrites and the deniers all together in Hell.
4|141| These are they, who wait and watch to see how things shape for you. If there be a victory for you from Allah, they say: "Were we not with you?" And if the suppressors of Truth gain a share of success, they say, "Did we not guard your interests and protect you from the believers." Then Allah will judge between you and them on the Day of Resurrection. And Allah has not provided a way for the suppressors of Truth to go (triumph) over the believers.
4|142| Indeed, the hypocrites strive to deceive Allah, and it is He, who deceives them! And when they stand up for prayer they stand with laziness. They do it only to show off to men and remember Allah but little. 
4|143| Wavering in between — neither here nor there. And whomsoever Allah sends astray, you shall not find a way for him.
4|144| O you who believe! Do not take the suppressors of Truth, rather than the believers, for close friends. Do you wish that you yourselves should provide for Allah a manifest proof against you?
4|145| Indeed, the hypocrites will be in the lowest depth of the Fire and you shall not find anyone to help them.
4|146| Except for those hypocites, who repent and make amends and hold on fast to Allah and keep their way of life purely for Allah. Then these are with the believers. And Allah will grant the believers a great reward.
4|147| Why should Allah punish you if you are grateful and you do believe!? And Allah is aware as to who is grateful.
4|148| Allah loves not the public utterance of anything evil, except by someone who is wronged. And Allah does hear, know.h 
4|149| If you disclose a good deed or conceal it, or you do pardon an evil, then, surely, Allah is Lenient, Powerful.
4|150| Indeed, those who suppress the Truth about Allah and about His Messengers and would differentiate between Allah and His Messengers and say they believe in some and deny others, and would adopt a way in between, 
4|151| They, in fact, are the ones who suppress the Truth, and We have prepared a disgraceful punishment for the suppressors of Truth.
4|152| And He shall give to those their rewards that believe in Allah and His Messengers and make no distinction between any of them. And Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.
4|153| The people of the Book ask you to bring down to them a book from the heaven. They had demanded, of Moses, a greater thing than that! They had said, "Show Allah to us openly." So then the thunderbolt struck them because of their transgression. They then took to the calf, after clear signs had come to them.We pardoned them even that! And We gave Moses a clear proof of authority.
4|154| And We raised over them the mountain to enforce their covenant, and We asked them to prostrate while entering the gate, and We forbade to them transgression in the matter of the Sabbath, and We took from them a covenant with harsh terms.
4|155| Because of their breaking of their covenant, their suppression of Allah's Verses/signs, their killing of Prophets unjustly and their saying that their minds are closed. Nay! Allah has put a seal on them, on account of their suppression of the Truth. So they believe but little.
4|156| And because of their suppression of the Truth and their having uttered against Mary a grave calumny.
4|157| And their saying that they indeed killed the Messiah Jesus, son of Mary, Messenger of Allah. And they killed him not; nor did they crucify him. But it so appeared to them. And those indeed, who differ therein, are certainly in doubt. They have no knowledge about it, but follow only conjecture. And they killed him not for sure. 
4|158| Nay! Allah took him up to Himself. And Allah is Omnipotent, Wise.
4|159| And if there be any, of the people of the Book, who wouldn't believe in this before his/her death, he (Jesus) shall be a witness against all such persons, on the Day of Resurrection.
4|160| And because of the transgression of the Jews and their hindering of many from Allah's Path, We prohibited to them certain good things which had been made lawful for them.
4|161| And because of their indulgence in Ar-Riba, though indeed they were forbidden from it, and their usurping people's property falsely. And We have prepared, for the suppressors of Truth from among them, a painful punishment.
4|162| But the knowledgeable among them, and the believers, believe in what has been sent down to you and what was sent down before you. And to those who establish prayers, give charity and believe in Allah and the last day, We will give a great reward.
4|163| We indeed have divinely inspired you as We did divinely inspire Noah. And We did divinely inspire the Prophets who came after him: Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob and the Tribes, Jesus, Job, Jonah, Aaron and Solomon. And We gave the Psalms to David.
4|164| And Messengers We did mention to you before and Messengers we have not mentioned to you. And Allah did actually speak to Moses.
4|165| Messengers to give good news and to warn, so that there remains no argumenth for mankind to have against Allah, after them. And Allah is Omnipotent, Wise.
4|166| But Allah bears witness by what He has sent down to you. He has sent it down, with His knowledge. And the angels bear witness. And Allah is sufficient as a witness.
4|167| Those indeed have strayed far away, who suppress the Truth and cause hindrance in Allah's Path.
4|168| Allah won't indeed forgive those who suppress the Truth and do wrong, nor guide them to a way,
4|169| Other than the way to Hell, for them to dwell therein forever. And that is easy for Allah.
4|170| O Mankind! Certainly, the Messenger has come to you with the Truth from your Lord. So believe! It is good for you. And if you suppress the Truth, then, indeed, all that is in the heavens and the earth is Allah's! And Allah is Knowledgeable, Wise.
4|171| O People of the Book! Commit no excesses in your way of life, and speak not but the truth about Allah. The Messiah Jesus, son of Mary, was only a Messenger of Allah and His Word which He communicated to Mary and a soul from Him. Believe then in Allah and His Messengers, and say not, "Trinity"! Desist. It would be better for you [to desist from uttering this abomination.] Allah is the only Entity worthy of worship. HE is too Exalted to have a son! All that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth is His. And Allah is sufficient as Manager of all things.
4|172| The Messiah did feel no aversion to being a worshipper/devotee of Allah, nor do the angels who are near to Him. And He will gather together to Himself all those who have felt aversion to His worship and have been too proud.
4|173| Then as for those who believe and do good deeds, He will pay them their rewards in full and give them more, as Favour from Him. And as for those who feel aversion and are proud, He will give them a painful punishment. And they shall find for themselves, besides Allah, none to take refuge with, or to help.
4|174| O Mankind! There has certainly come to you evidence from your Lord and We have sent to you a clear light.h 
4|175| Then as for those who believed in Allah and held fast to Him, He will admit them to Mercy and Favour from Him and guide them, on the Straight Path, to Himself.
4|176| They ask you for a legal decree. Say, "Allah gives you a decree concerning the person who has neither parents nor offspring. If it is a man that dies with no child, and he has a sister, she shall have half of what he leaves behind. — And he shall inherit her, if she has no child. — And if there are two sisters, they shall have two-thirds of what he leaves behind. And if there are siblings, both male and female, then the share of the male shall be equal to the shares of two females. Allah makes things clear to you, lest you err. And Allah knows all things." 
5|1| O you who believe! Fulfill the obligations. Permitted to you are the quadruped cattle except what is mentioned to you, provided the prohibition against hunting is not violated while you are in the state of Ihram. Indeed, Allah orders what He pleases.
5|2| O you who believe! Treat not irreverently the rites sanctified by Allah; nor the sacred month, nor the offerings, nor the garlands, and nor those going/coming to the Sacred House seeking the Favour and Pleasure of their Lord. And when you are free from the obligations of the pilgrimage, then hunt. And let not hatred of a people, on account of their stopping you from going to the Sacred Place of Worship, lead you to transgression. And co-operate with one another in goodness/righteousness and piety, and do not co-operate with one another in sin and transgression, and fear Allah. Indeed, Allah is severe in giving punishment.
5|3| Forbidden to you are the carrion, and the blood, and the flesh of swine, and that which is consecrated to any one other than Allah, and the strangled and that beaten to death, and that killed by a fall and that killed by being smitten with the horn and eaten by beasts unless you slaughter it properly berore its death, and that which is sacrificed over idols and that you try to know your future by means of arrows. That is a transgression. — This day, those, who have suppressed the Truth, have despaired of your religion; so fear them not, and fear Me. This day I have perfected for you your religion and completed My Favour upon you and approved for you Islam as religion. — But if one is compelled by hunger, and has no intention to sin, then Allah is indeed Forgiving, Merciful.
5|4| They ask you as to what is permitted to them. Say, "Permitted to you are the good, wholesome things. And eat of what the animals trained by you as hounds — you teach them of what Allah has taught you — hunt for you and over which you mention Allah's name. And fear Allah! Indeed, Allah is quick in account-keeping.
5|5| This day all the good wholesome things are permitted to you. And the food of those who have been given the Book is lawful for you and your food is lawful for them. And lawful for you are the chaste women from among the believers and the chaste women from among those who had been given the Book before you, when you have given them their dues as chaste women in marriage ties, and not for indulgence in extramarital sex or as live-in girlfriends. And he, who has suppressed Faith, has surely wasted his deeds; and, in the Hereafter, he shall be one of those doomed!
5|6| O you who believe! When you get up for prayer, wash your faces and your hands up to the elbows, and wipe your heads and your feet up to the ankles. And if you are unclean, then cleanse yourselves. And if you are ill or on a journey, or any of you has come from the privy, or you have had sexual contacts with women, and you find no water, simulate washing then with clean earth, and wipe your faces and your hands therewith. Allah does not want to place you in difficulty, but He wants to keep you clean and to complete His Favour upon you, so that you may be grateful.
5|7| And remember Allah's Favour upon you and His Covenant with which He bound you, when you said, "We hear and we obey." And fear Allah. Indeed, Allah knows the secrets of the minds.
5|8| O you who believe! Be firm as just witnesses for Allah. And let not enmity and hatred for people induce you to commit the crime of being unjust. Be just! It is conducive to piety. And fear Allah! Indeed, Allah is aware of what you do.
5|9| Allah has promised forgiveness and a great reward for those who believe and do good deeds.
5|10| And those who suppress the Truth and deny our Verses/Signs — those shall be the dwellers of the Fire.
5|11| O you who believe! Remember Allah's Favour upon you when people had planned to raise their hands against you, but He stayed their hands from you. And fear Allah! And in Allah let the believers put their trust.
5|12| And Allah did take a covenant from the Children of Israel, and We raised up among them twelve chieftains. And Allah said, "I am indeed with you. If you establish prayer and give charity and believe in My Messengers and assist them and lend a good loan to Allah, I shall certainly condone your shortcomings, and shall certainly admit you to Gardens beneath which rivers flow. But whoever has suppressed the Truth from among you after that, he has surely lost the right way."
5|13| And then, because of their breach of their covenant, We cursed them and made their hearts hard. They pervert the Word from its contextual sense and they have forgotten a part of what they were reminded of. And you will not cease to find treachery in them, except in a few of them. But then leave them alone and overlook. Allah does indeed love those who do good deeds.
5|14| And from those who call themselves Christians, We took their covenant. Then they forgot a part of what they were reminded of. So then We made mutual enmity and hatred stick to them till the Day of Resurrection. And Allah will inform them what work they did.
5|15| O people of the Book! Our Messenger has surely come to you explaining to you much of what you concealed and effaced from the Book. Surely, from Allah has come to you light, and a clear Book.
5|16| With it Allah guides him, who seeks His pleasure, to ways of peace. And He takes them out of darknesses to light by His will. And He guides them to the Straight Path.
5|17| Surely they suppress the Truth who say, "The Messiah, son of Mary, is indeed Allah." Say, "Who then could have power over anything against Allah if He wished to destroy the Messiah, son of Mary, and his mother, and anyone on the entire earth? And to Allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them. He creates what He wills. And Allah can do anything.
5|18| And the Jews and the Christians say, "We are the children of Allah and His loved ones." Say, "Why does He then punish you for your sins? Nay, you are but human beings from among those whom He has created. He forgives whom He wills and punishes whom He wills. And to Allah belongs the absolute authority over the heavens and the earth and over all that is between them. And to Him is the final destination."
5|19| O people of the Book! Surely, Our Messenger has come to you to explain things to you, after a break in sending the Messengers, lest you say, "No one had come to us as a messenger of good news or as a warner." Surely, now, there has come to you a Messenger of good news and a Warner. And Allah can do anything.
5|20| And when Moses said to his people, "O my people! Remember Allah's Favour upon you when He raised Prophets among you and made you kings and gave you what He had not given to any of the worlds."h 
5|21| "O my people! Enter the holy land which Allah has assigned to you, and turn not on your backs; for, then, you will turn back doomed."
5|22| They said, "O Moses! In it indeed live a cruel people. And we shall definitely not enter it until they go out from it. And if they go out from it, then indeed we shall enter.
5|23| Two men of those who feared and upon both of whom Allah had bestowed favour, said, "Enter upon them by the gate, and when you enter it, you shall indeed be victorious. And upon Allah put your trust, if you do believe."
5|24| They said, "O Moses! We shall never enter it so long as they are in it. Go then, you and your Lord, and fight you both with them. We shall indeed sit right here!"
5|25| He [Moses] said, "My Lord! I have indeed no control but on my own self and on my brother. Make a distinction, then, between us and the transgressing people."
5|26| Allah said, "So it is forbidden to them for forty years, during which time they shall suffer, wandering from place to place on the earth. Be not sad then for the transgressing people."
5|27| And relate to them the story of the two sons of Adam with truth. When each offered a sacrifice, the sacrifice from one of them was accepted and the sacrifice from the other was not. The latter said, "I will certainly kill you." The former said, "Allah accepts offerings only from the pious."
5|28| "If you do raise your hand against me to kill me, I am not going to raise my hand against you to kill you. Indeed, I fear Allah, the Lord of the worlds."
5|29| "Indeed do I wish that you bear the burden of my sin, as well as of your sin, and so you be of the inmates of the Fire. And that is the reward of the unjust."
5|30| Then his self incited him to kill his brother, so he killed him. And he became one of those, doomed.h 
5|31| Then Allah sent a crow digging the earth so as to show him how to dispose of the dead body of his brother. He said, "Woe to me! Have I not the competence even to be like this crow to dispose of the dead body of my brother?" And he was ashamed
5|32| on that ground. We ordained for the Children of Israel that if one killed a person — not in retaliation for killing another person or for spreading mischief on earth — it is as if he/she killed the entire mankind. And one who saved a life, it is as if he/she saved the entire mankind. And certainly Our Messengers came to them with clear signs. Then indeed, thereafter, many of them did commit transgression on the earth.
5|33| The reward for those who wage war against Allah and His Messenger and strive to spread mischief on earth is only that they should be killed, or crucified, or their hands and their feet should be cut off on opposite sides, or they should be excommunicated. This is, for them, a disgrace in this world, and, in the Hereafter, they shall suffer a grave punishment.
5|34| Except for those who repent before you overpower them. So be aware that Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.
5|35| O you who believe! Fear Allah and seek means of approach to Him and struggle in His Path, so that you get success. 
5|36| Indeed, if those who suppress the Truth had all that is in the earth, and the like of it besides, to offer as ransom against the punishment on the Day of Resurrection, it shall not be accepted from them. And for them there shall be a painful punishment.
5|37| They will long to go out of the Fire, and they shall find no way out therefrom. And, for them, it is a lasting punishment.
5|38| And cut off the hand each of the man who steals and the woman who steals, as an exemplary punishment from Allah for what they have earned. And Allah is Omnipotent, Wise.
5|39| And he who repents after he has committed his crime and reforms himself, then, indeed, Allah will accept his repentance. And Allah is indeed Forgiving, Merciful.
5|40| Don't you know that to Allah belongs the absolute sovereignty over the heavens and the earth? He punishes whom He wills and forgives whom He wills. And Allah has power over all things.
5|41| O Messenger! Let not those make you sad, who are quick in suppressing the Truth from among those who say, with their mouths, "We believe" and their hearts do not believe, and from among those who are Jews. They listen to falsehood. They listen to others who do not come to you. They transpose the word after it had been placed in its proper context, saying, "If you are given this, take it, and if you are not given this, beware!" And if Allah wills to put anyone to distress and hardship, you can do nothing for him against Allah. Allah does not want to purify the hearts of such people. Disgrace it is for them in this world, and a grave punishment for them in the Hereafter!
5|42| They listen to falsehood. They eat what is forbidden. So if they come to you, judge between them or ignore them. And if you ignore them, they won't do any harm to you. And if you judge, judge between them fairly. Indeed, Allah loves those who are just.
5|43| And how could they make you a judge? And they have the Torah, wherein is Allah's Judgment, and yet they turn away thereafter! And such as these are no believers!
5|44| We did indeed send down the Torah, with guidance and light therein. Therewith, the Prophets, who submitted themselves to Allah, and the Rabbis and the doctors in religious law, required to guard part of the Book of Allah and be witnesses thereto, judged for the Jews. Therefore fear the people not and fear Me, and do not buy a small benefit in exchange for My Verses/signs.h And they, who judge not by what Allah has sent down, are the suppressors of the Truth.
5|45| And We ordained for them therein that life is for life, and eye for eye, and nose for nose, and ear for ear, and tooth for tooth, and a wound is a retaliation for a wound. But if one foregoes the retaliation by way of charity, it shall be expiation for him. And they, who judge not by what Allah has sent down, are the oppressors.
5|46| And We caused Jesus, son of Mary, to follow in their footsteps, confirming what was before him of the Torah. And We gave him the Gospel containing guidance and light, and confirming what was before it of the Torah and guidance and admonition for those who fear Allah.
5|47| And the followers of the Gospel ought to judge by what Allah revealed in it. And they, who judge not by what Allah has sent down, are the transgressors/profligates.
5|48| And We have sent down to you the Book with the truth, to confirm what has come before it of the Book and to act as an authority thereupon. So judge among them by what Allah has sent down, and follow not their vain desires which deviate from the truth that has come to you. For all of you, We have generated social customs and ways of life. And had Allah so willed, He would have made you a single community, but He wanted to test you in what He has given you, so compete with one another in doing good deeds.h To Allah is the return of all of you. He will then explain to you what you differed in.
5|49| And so you do judge among them by what Allah has sent down, and follow not their vain desires, and be cautious of them lest they tempt you away from some part of what Allah has enjoined upon you. If they then turn away, know that it is Allah's Will to afflict them with hardship for some of their sins. And a great number of the people are indeed the transgressors/profligates.
5|50| Is it then that they desire the rule of the times of ignorance? And who is better to rule, for a people who are firm in Faith, than Allah?
5|51| O you who believe! Do not take the Jews and the Christians for close, intimate friends.h They are close to one another. And whoever amongst you is close to them, then, indeed he is one of them. Indeed Allah does not guide the wrong-doers.
5|52| And you will see those, in whose hearts is a disease, to be active in their company. They say, "We fear a turn of fortune afflicting us." And it may well be that Allah will bring about victory or such event, by His Will, that they become ashamed of their secret feelings.
5|53| And those who believe say, "Are these the people who swore intensely by Allah that they were indeed with us? Their deeds have been in vain, and they are doomed."
5|54| O you who believe! If there be any from among you who turns back from his religion, then, in place of such people, Allah will bring a people whom He will love and who will love Him, humble with the believers, stern with those who suppress the Truth. They will strive in Allah's Path and will not fear the criticism of any critic. That is Allah's Favour which He gives to whom He wills. And Allah is Generous, Wise.
5|55| Your only close friends are Allah, His Messenger and those who believe, establish prayers, give charity and bow down in submission to Allah.
5|56| And the one who seeks closeness to Allah, His Messenger and those who believe, may rest assured that it is Allah's group that shall indeed be triumphant.
5|57| O you who believe! Do not consider persons — from among those who were given the Book before you and from among the suppressors of Truth — who take your religion for a mockery and fun, as your close friends. And fear Allah if you do believe.
5|58| And when you make a call for prayer they take it but as a mockery and fun. They do so because they are a people who understand not.
5|59| Say, "O people of the Book! Do you take vengeance on us for no other reason than that we believe in Allah and in what is sent down to us and in what was sent down before, and [is not a fact] that most of you are transgressors/profligates?"
5|60| Say, "Shall I inform you of a worse retribution than this from Allah? Those whom Allah has cursed and upon whom His wrath has fallen, and those of them whom He made apes and pigs, and those who worshipped the false god — those are the people in a worse position, and further astray from the Right Path."
5|61| And when they came to you, they said, "We believe". And they in fact came in suppressing the Truth, and they in fact went out doing the same. And Allah knows what they were hiding.
5|62| And you see many of them vie with one another in sin and hostility, and in their eating of what is unlawful. What they are doing is certainly bad.
5|63| Why did the Rabbis and the Priests not prohibit them from their sinful utterances and from eating unlawful things? What they are bringing about is certainly bad.
5|64| And the Jews say, "Allah's hand is bound!" Their hands are bound and they are cursed for what they said. Nay, both His hands are spread out, He expends as He pleases. And what has been sent down to you from your Lord will certainly make many of them more steeped in insolence and suppression of the Truth. And We have put enmity and hatred amongst them until the Day of Resurrection. Every time they kindled the fire for war, Allah extinguished it. And they strive for mischief on earth. And Allah does not love the mischief mongers.
5|65| And if the people of the Book had indeed believed, and feared Allah, We would certainly have cleared their bad deeds from them and We would certainly have made them enter gardens of bliss.
5|66| And had they only stood by the Torah and the Gospel and that which is sent down to them from their Lord, they would certainly have got provision to eat from above them and from beneath their feet. Among them are people who keep to the right course. And what many of them do is bad.
5|67| O Messenger! Deliver what has been sent down to you from your Lord. And if you do not do so, then you have not delivered His Message. And Allah will guard you against the people. Indeed, Allah guides not people that suppress the Truth.
5|68| Say, "O followers of the Book! You stand on no basis till you stand by the Torah and the Gospel and that which is sent down to you from your Lord." And what has been sent down to youh from your Lord will certainly make many of them more steeped in insolence and suppression of the Truth. Grieve not therefore for the people who suppress the Truth.
5|69| Indeed, those who believe, the Jews, the Saabioon and the Christians — whosoever believed in Allah and in the Last Day, and acted righteously — fear then shall overpower them not; nor shall they grieve!h 
5|70| We did take the Covenant of the Children of Israelhand We sent to them Messengers. Whenever a Messenger came to them with what their hearts did not like, he was either contradicted or killed.
5|71| And they thought that there would be no retribution, so they became blind and deaf. Then Allah forgave them, and thereafter too, many of them became blind and deaf. And Allah is watchful over what they do.
5|72| They did certainly suppress the Truth, who said, "The Messiah, son of Mary, is indeed Allah." And the Messiah said, "O Children of Israel! Worship Allah, my Lord and your Lord. Whoever indeed associates others with Allah in his worship, then Allah has forbidden to him the Garden, and his abode is the Fire. And there shall be none to help the unjust."
5|73| They did certainly suppress the Truth, who said, "The third of the Trinity is indeed Allah." And there is none worthy of worship but the One Allah, and if they desist not from what they say, a painful punishment shall afflict those among them who suppress the Truth.
5|74| Will they not then turn to Allah in repentance and ask for His forgiveness? And Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.
5|75| The Messiah, son of Mary, was but a Messenger. Messengers did come and pass away before him. And his mother was a truthful woman. They both used to eat food. See how We make the Verses/signs clear to them. Then see how they are turned away.
5|76| Say, "Do you worship, besides Allah, that which is incapable of inflicting any harm on you, or conferring any benefit? And Allah — He is the One listening, knowing."
5|77| Say, "O people of the Book! Commit no unjust excesses in your religion (way of life), and follow not the vain desires of people who went astray before, and who led many astray and went astray from the Right Path."h 
5|78| Cursed by the tongue of David and Jesus, son of Mary, were those who suppressed the Truth from among the Children of Israel. That was because they disobeyed and were transgressors.
5|79| They were not forbidding one another from the forbidden things they did. What they did was certainly bad.
5|80| You see many of them being close to those who suppress the Truth. What their sensual selves have sent ahead for them is certainly so bad that Allah is displeased with them. And in punishment shall they abide.
5|81| And had they believed in Allah, in the prophet and in what is sent down to him, they would not have taken them for close friends. But most of them are transgressors/profligates.
5|82| You will certainly find the Jews and the polytheists to be the bitterest people in hostility towards those who believe. And you will certainly find the nearest in friendship to those who believe, to be those who say, "We are Christians." That is because there are priests and monks among them who do not behave proudly.
5|83| And when they listen to what has been sent down upon the Messenger, you see their eyes overflowing with tears because of the truth they recognise. They say, "Our Lord! We believe, so enlist us among those who give witness."
5|84| "And why should we not believe in Allah and in that which has come to us of the truth? And we earnestly desire that our Lord admits us to be with the righteous people."
5|85| Allah then would reward them, on account of what they say, gardens, with rivers flowing underneath, to abide therein. And this is the reward of those who do good deeds.
5|86| And those who suppress the Truth and treat Our Verses/signs as lies — they are the dwellers of the Fire.
5|87| O you who believe! Forbid not the good, wholesome things which Allah has made lawful for you, and transgress not! Indeed, Allah loves not those who transgress.
5|88| And eat of the lawful and good, wholesome things that Allah has provided for you, and fear Allah, Whom you believe.
5|89| Allah does not call you to account for anything trivial in your oaths, but He calls you to account for the binding terms of your oaths. The expiation of it, then, is the feeding of ten poor persons with the average food you feed your families with, or their clothing, or the freeing of a neck. And for the one, who cannot afford, three days of fasting. This is the expiation of your oaths when you take them. And guard your oaths! Thus Allah does make clear to you His Verses, so that you may feel grateful.
5|90| O you who believe! Intoxicants, games of chance, animals sacrificed at the altars of idols and divining by arrows are just aspects of an abomination from among Satan's doings. Shun it then, to attain salvation.
5|91| The Satan only desires to cause enmity and hatred in your midst by means of intoxicants and games of chance, and to keep you off remembrance of Allah, and off prayer. Won't you then desist?
5|92| And obey Allah and obey the Messenger and have fear. If you then turn back, know that the responsibility on Our Messenger is but clear conveyance of the divine Message.
5|93| Upon those who believed and did good deeds, there is no sin in what they had eaten earlier, so long as they feared Allah, and believed, and did good deeds. Then they feared Allah and believed. Then they feared Allah and did good work. And Allah loves those who do good work.
5|94| O you who believe! Allah will certainly test you in respect of game within reach of your hands and your lances, that Allah might know who fears Him unseen. A painful punishment then for the one, who transgresses after this.
5|95| O you who believe! Kill not the game while you are in the state of Ihram. And whoever among you kills it intentionally, the penalty is the like of what he killed, from the cattle, as adjudged by two just persons among you, as an offering to be brought to the Kaabah — Or the expiation therefor is the feeding of the poor or commensurate fasting — so that whoever killed the game, may taste the burden of his deed. Allah has forgiven what is past. And whoever does it again, Allah will take retribution from him. And Allah is Omnipotent, Capable to take retribution.
5|96| Lawful to you is the sea game and its food — a provision for you and for the travellers — and the land game is forbidden to you so long as you are in the state of Ihram. And fear Allah, to Whom you shall be gathered.
5|97| Allah has made the sacred house of the Kaabah a symbol for the people to stand by, so also the sacred month, the offerings and the animals with garlands. It is a symbolic recognition that Allah has knowledge of all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth, and that Allah is aware of all things.
5|98| Know that Allah is severe in punishment, and that Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.
5|99| The Messenger's responsibility is but to deliver. And Allah knows what you reveal, and what you conceal.
5|100| Say, "The impure and the pure are not the same, although many of the the impure things may please you. So, O those endowed with insight, fear Allah to become successful!"
5|101| O you who believe! Do not put questions about things, which, if clarified to you, may cause difficulties for you. And if you put questions about them when the Quran is being revealed, they may be clarified to you. Allah has absolved you of any obligation thereon. And Allah is Forgiving, Kind.
5|102| A people before you did ask such questions, and then became suppressors of the Truth, on that account.h 
5|103| Allah has not made any bahirah, saibah, wasilah or ham, but those who suppress the Truth fabricate the lie against Allah. And most of them understand not.
5|104| And when it is said to them, "Come to what Allah has sent down and to the Messenger", they say, "What we found our fathers with, is sufficient for us". What! Even though their fathers knew nothing and followed not the right guidance!?
5|105| O you who believe! You are responsible for your own selves. He who errs cannot hurt you when you are on the right path.To Allah you all are to return, when He will inform you of what you did.
5|106| O you who believe! When death approaches any of you, call to witness among you, at the time of making the will, two just persons from among you, or two from among others than you if you are travelling in the land and death befalls you. Detain the two after the prayer, then, if you are in doubt, they shall both swear by Allah, "We will not sell it for a price — and even though it is for a relative — and we will not hide the testimony. By Allah, then, certainly, we should be among the sinners."
5|107| Then if it becomes known that they both have been guilty of a sin, two others shall stand up in their place from among those, nearest in kin, who have a rightful claim. Then the two should swear by Allah, "Certainly our testimony is truer than the testimony of those two, and we have not committed any trespass. We should then indeed be of those who oppress."
5|108| That should make the testimony more transparent. Or else, they may fear rejection of other testimonies after theirs. And fear Allah and listen. And Allah does not guide the transgressing people.
5|109| The day when Allah will assemble the Messengers, then ask them, "What response did you get?", they will say, "We have no knowledge. Indeed! You are the Knower of the unseen things."
5|110| When Allah will say,"O Jesus, son of Mary! Remember My Favour on you and on your mother, when I supported you with the holy Spirit, you spoke to the people in the cradle and as an adult, and when I taught you the Book and the wisdom and the Torah and the Gospel, and when you made out of clay a bird-like figure by My permission, then you breathed into it and it became a bird by My permission, and you healed the blind and the leprous by My permission, and when you brought out the dead by My permission, and when I restrained the children of Israel from you as you came to them with clear signs, but those who suppressed the Truth from among them said, 'This is nothing but pure magic'."
5|111| And when I inspired the disciplesto believe in Me and in My Messenger, they said, "We do believe and bear witness that we do submit."
5|112| When the disciples asked, "O Jesus, son of Mary! Can your Lord send down to us a table spread with food from heaven?" He said, "Fear Allah, if you are believers."
5|113| They said, "We wish to eat therefrom, satisfy our minds, know that you have indeed told us the truth and be of the witnesses to it."
5|114| Jesus, son of Mary, said, "O Allah, our Lord! Send down to us from the heaven a table spread with food which should be to us — to the first of us and to the last of us — a festival, and a sign from You. And give us food, and You are the Best of the givers of food."
5|115| Allah said, "I am indeed going to send it down to you, but then if anyone thereafter suppresses the Truth from amongst you, I will indeed give him such punishment as I have not given to anyone in the worlds."
5|116| And when Allah will say, "O Jesus, son of Mary! Did you tell mankind to take you and your mother for two gods besides Allah?" He (Jesus) will say, "Glory be to You, I couldn't say anything that I had no right to. If I had said it, You would indeed have known it. You know what is in my mind, and I do not know what is in Your mind. You are indeed the Knower of the things unseen."
5|117| "I did not tell them anything except what You enjoined me with: 'Worship Allah, my Lord and your Lord.' And I was a witness over them so long as I remained among them, but when You caused me to die, You were the Guard over them.hAnd You are Witness over all things."
5|118| "If You punish them, then indeed they are Your worshippers; and if You forgive them, then indeed You are the Omnipotent, the Wise."
5|119| Allah will say, "This day, their truthfulness shall benefit the truthful ones. For them are gardens beneath which rivers flow, to abide in them for ever." Allah is well pleased with them and they are well pleased with Allah. That is the highest success.
5|120| The absolute sovereignty over the heavens and the earth and over what is in them belongs to Allah; and He has power over all things!
6|1| The praise is for Allah, Who created the heavens and the earth and made the darknesses and the light. Yet, those who suppress the Truth sit in judgement over the attributes of their Lord!
6|2| He it is Who created you from clay, and then decreed a term. And it is a term denominated with Him. But, then, you are in doubt.
6|3| And it is Allah Who pervades the heavens and the earth. He knows what you conceal and what you reveal, and He knows what you earn.
6|4| And no sign/Verse has ever come to them, of the signs/Verses of their Lord, from which they have not turned aside.
6|5| They did reject the truth when it came to them. And the details of what they mocked at will soon come to them.
6|6| Do they not see how many a generation We destroyed before them? We have not established you as firmly as We had established them on the earth. And We made the sky pour rain on them in abundance, and We made the rivers flow beneath them. Then We destroyed them on account of their sins and raised up, after them, other generations.
6|7| And even if We had sent to you a book on paper so that they could touch it with their hands, those who suppress the Truth would certainly have said, "This is nothing but pure magic."
6|8| And they say, "Why has not an angel been sent down to him?" And had We sent down an angel, the matter would have certainly been decided then and there, and they would have been given no respite.
6|9| And if We had made him an angel, We would certainly have made him a man, and We would certainly have made their confusion worse confounded.
6|10| And, certainly, Messengers before you were mocked at, but the very thing they mocked at surrounded those who, among them, scoffed.
6|11| Say, "Travel on earth and then see what end the rejecters met with."
6|12| Ask, "To whom does all that is in the heavens and the earth belong?" Say, "To Allah. He has made mercy an obligatory attribute of Him Himself. He will certainly gather you on the Resurrection Day, wherein there is no doubt. Those, who have lost their souls, believe not."
6|13| "And to Him belongs what lives by the night and the day. And He is the One Who hears, the One Who knows."
6|14| Say, "Shall I take for a wali anyone instead of Allah, Creator of the heavens and the earth, and Who feeds and is not fed?" Say, "I am indeed commanded to be the first among those who submit." And be not you, of the polytheists!
6|15| Say, "I do indeed fear punishment on a dreadful Day, if I disobey my Lord."
6|16| He/she from whom it is averted on that day, Allah surely has shown mercy to him/her. And this is the most manifest success.
6|17| And if Allah afflicts you with some harm, there is none to take it off but He. And if He gives you something good, then He it is Who is able to do anything.
6|18| And He it is Who has Supreme Power over His creatures. And He is the Most Wise, the One Who knows about all things.
6|19| Ask them what thing is the weightiest in testimony? Say, "Allah! HE is witness between you and me. And this Qur'aan has been revealed to me so that I may, therewith, warn you and warn whomsoever it reaches. Do you really bear witness that there are other gods with Allah?" Say, "I do not bear witness." Say, "HE is the One and Only Being worthy of worship, and, indeed, I am free of the belief in those whom you set up as partners to Allah."
6|20| Those whom We have given the Book recognize him as they recognize their sons. Those who have lost their souls — they will not believe!
6|21| And who is more unjust than he who forges a lie about Allah or rejects His Verses/signs? Indeed, the unjust will not be successful!
6|22| And, one day, We shall gather them all together, then ask those who associated others with Allah, "Where are your associates you surmised?"
6|23| They will then be left with no excuse but to say, "By Allah, our Lord, we were not polytheists."
6|24| See how they would lie against their own selves, and how that which they forged would desert them.
6|25| And of them there are some who come to hear you, and We have put veils over their minds and deafness in their ears, so they do not understand what you tell them. And even if they see every Sign, they will not believe in it. So much so, that when they come to you to argue with you, those, who suppress the Truth, say, "These are nothing but tales of the ealier people."
6|26| And they prevent others from it and they keep themselves away from it, and they destroy not but their own selves and they perceive not.
6|27| And if you could but see the scene when they would be held over the fire! They would then say, "Would that we were sent back! We would not then reject the Verses/signs of our Lord and we would be of the believers."
6|28| Nay! What they concealed before would just become manifest to them. And were they to be sent back, they would certainly commit that which they are forbidden, and certainly indeed they are liars.
6|29| And they say, "There is nothing but our life of this world, and we shall not be resurrected."
6|30| And if you could but see the scene when they would be standing before their Lord! HE will ask, "Is not this the Truth?" They will say, "Yes, and by our Lord!" HE will say, "Taste then the punishment for being suppresors of the Truth."
6|31| They surely are doomed, who deny their appointment with Allah. Until, when, all of a sudden, the Hour dawns on them, they say, "Alas for us that we gave no thought to it!" And they bear their burdens on their backs. It is evil, what they bear; isn't it?
6|32| And the life of this world is nothing but play and pastime. And, certainly, the abode of the Hereafter is better for those who fear Allah. Don't you then understand?
6|33| We do know indeed that what they say certainly grieves you. Still, surely, it is not you that they reject, but it is Allah's Verses/signs that the wicked people deny!
6|34| And surely Messengers before you were rejected, but they bore their rejection and persecution with patience, until Our help reached them. And none can change Allah's Words. And, surely, some of the tales of the Messengers have come to you.
6|35| And if their aversion is hard on you, then, if you can, seek an opening deep into the earth or a ladder [link] up into the heavens, and then bring them a sign. And if Allah had so willed, He would certainly have gathered them all on guidance. Be not then of those who are ignorant. 
6|36| Only those respond, who hear! And as for the dead, Allah will resurrect them, then to Him they shall be returned. 
6|37| And they say, "Why is a sign not sent down upon him from his Lord?" Say, "Allah can indeed send down a sign." But most of them would not know it as a sign!
6|38| And there is no creature crawling on earth or bird flying with its two wings, but lives in communities like yours. — We have neglected nothing in the Book. — Then unto their Lord shall they be gathered.
6|39| And they who reject Our Verses/signs are deaf and dumb in darknesses. Allah sends astray whom He wills. And He puts on the Straight Path whom He wills.
6|40| Say, "You see, if Allah's punishment comes upon you or the Hour comes upon you, would you then, honestly, pray to any one other than Allah?"
6|41| Nay, to Him only you would pray! He would then, if He wills, remove the distress, the removal of which you prayed for, and you would then forget the others you worshipped besides Him.
6|42| And certainly We did send down Messengers and Messages to peoples before you. We then seized them with distress and affliction in order that they might humble themselves.
6|43| Then why did they not, when Our punishment came to them, humble themselves? But their hearts hardened and the Satan made what they did, look fair to them.
6|44| Then when they forgot what they had been reminded of, We opened for them the doors of all things. Until, when they were engrossed in rejoicing what they were given, We seized them suddenly. Then it was when they were driven to desperation and despair.
6|45| And the roots of the wicked people were cut off. And all praise to Allah, the Lord of the worlds!
6|46| Say, "You see, if Allah took away your hearing and your sight, and put seals on your hearts, which god, other than Allah, can restore it to you?" Look, how We explain the Verses/signs, yet they turn away!
6|47| Say, "You see, if Allah's punishment were to come to you, suddenly or with due notice, would any but the wicked people be destroyed?"
6|48| And We did not send the Messengers but as harbingers of good news and warners. Then those who believe and mend their ways, they shall have no fear, nor shall they grieve.
6|49| And those who reject Our Verses/signs, punishment shall afflict them because they are committing transgression.
6|50| Say, "I do not say to you, I have Allah's treasures with me, nor do I know the unseen, nor do I say to you that I am an angel. I do not but follow what is revealed to me." Say, "Are the blind and the seeing alike? Won't you then ponder?"
6|51| And warn with it those who fear that they shall be gathered to their Lord — there is no wali for them, nor any intercessor besides Him — that they may be pious.
6|52| And turn not away those who pray to their Lord, morning and evening, desiring His pleasure. Neither are you responsible for anything in their account, nor are they responsible for anything in your account. If you still turn them away, you should be among the wicked people.
6|53| And thus have We tried some of them through others, so that they say, "Are these the peoplehupon whom Allah has conferred benefits from amongst us?" Does not Allah know who the grateful are!?
6|54| And when those who believe in Our Verses/signs come to you, say, "Peace on you! Your Lord has made mandatory upon Himself the attribute of mercifulness. So if any of you does a bad thing in ignorance, and thereafter repents and mends his/her ways, then He is indeed Forgiving, Merciful."
6|55| And thus do We explain the Verses/signs in detail to make the way of the guilty manifest.
6|56| Say, "I am indeed forbidden to worship those, other than Allah, whom you pray to." Say, "I follow not your desires. I should be gone astray otherwise, and I should not be of those who are guided."
6|57| Say, "I stand on manifest authority from my Lord, and you deny it! I have no power over what you hasten for. The decision is for none but Allah to take. HE tells the truth and He is the Best of the judges."
6|58| Say, "Had I the power over what you hasten for, the matter between you and me would have certainly been decided. And Allah knows the wicked people."
6|59| And with Him are the keys of the unseen — none knows them but He. And He knows what is there in the land and the sea. And not a leaf falls, but He knows it. And no grain in the darknesses of the earth, or anything green or dry, but it is all recorded in a book manifest.
6|60| And He it is Who takes your souls at night. And He knows what you strive for in the day, then raises you up therein to fulfill an appointed term. Then to Him is your return, when He will inform you of what you had been doing.
6|61| And He is the One Supreme above His subjects, and He sends guardians over you. Until when death comes to one of you, Our Messengers take his/her soul up, and they make no mistake.
6|62| They are then returned to their True Master. Isn't His the Command and isn't He quick in taking account?
6|63| Say, "Who is it that delivers you from darknesses of the land and the sea when you pray to Him in humility and secrecy, 'If He delivers us from this, we should certainly be of the grateful ones'?"
6|64| Say, "Allah delivers you from those and from every distress, but, then, you go and worship others besides Allah!
6|65| Say, "He has the power to send punishment upon you from above you or from beneath your feet, or to clothe you in sectarian garbs and make some of you taste the hostility of others." See how variously do We explain the Verses/signs so that they may understand.
6|66| And your people have declared it to be a lie, and it is the Truth. Say, "I am not given the responsibility of managing your affairs."
6|67| And you will in time come to know that every information given is based on Truth. 
6|68| And when you see people denying and ridiculing Our Verses/signs, withdraw from them until they enter another topic of talk. And if the Satan causes you to forget, then, after remembering the divine directive, sit not in the company of the wicked people.
6|69| And those who fear Allah shall not be responsible for anything in those wicked people's account, but their responsibility it is to remind the wicked people, so that the latter may also fear Allah.
6|70| And leave alone those who have taken their religion (way of life) as just play and pastime, and whom this world's life has deceived. But do remind them with itlest an individual self is given up to destruction for what it has earned. It shall not have, other than Allah, any wali nor an intercessor, and even if it offers all possible ransom, it shall not be accepted from it. These are they who shall be given up to destruction for what they earned. For them will be a drink of boiling water and a painful punishment, because they had been suppressing the Truth.
6|71| Say, "Shall we pray to someone — other than Allah — who can do us neither good nor harm, and shall we turn back on our heels, after Allah has guided us, like him whom the devils have made to move about perplexed in the earth and who has companions calling him to their guidance?" Say, "Indeed, Allah's guidance is the guidance. And we are commanded to submit to the Lord of the worlds."
6|72| "And that we should establish prayer and fear Him." And He it is to Whom you shall be gathered.
6|73| And He it is, as a matter of fact, Who has created the heavens and the earth. And the time He says, 'Be', it is! His word is the truth. And His is the Sovereignty, the day the Trumpet is blown. HE is the Knower of the unseen and the seen. And He is the Wise, the Aware.
6|74| And when Abraham told his father, Azar, "Do you take idols as gods? I do indeed see you and your people in manifest error."
6|75| And thus did We show to Abraham the Reality of sovereignty over the heavens and the earth so that he was of those, strong in Faith.
6|76| So when the night fell on him, he saw a star. He said, "This is my Lord." But when it set, he said, "I do not love things that set."
6|77| Then when he saw the moon rising, he said, "This is my Lord." But when it set, he said, "If my Lord does not guide me, I shall certainly be of the people gone astray."
6|78| Then when he saw the sun rising up, he said, "This is my Lord. This is the greatest. But when it set, he said, "O my people! I am indeed absolved of worshipping those, other than Allah, whom you worship."
6|79| "I have indeed turned my face wholeheartedly to Him Who has created the heavens and the earth, and I am not of those who worship others besides Allah."
6|80| And his people quarrelled with him. He said, "Do you quarrel with me about Allah, Who certainly has guided me? And I do not fear those you worship besides Him in anything except what my Lord wills. My Lord comprehends all things in His knowledge. Don't you remember?"
6|81| "And why should I fear those whom you worship besides Allah, when you do not fear that you worship that, besides Allah, for which He has not sent down to you any authority. Then tell me if you do know which of the two parties has a greater claim to security?"
6|82| "Those who believe, and do not obscure their belief with wickedness, those are they who shall have the security and those are they who are guided."
6|83| And that was Our argument which we gave to Abraham against his people. We raise whom We will in rank. Indeed, your Lord is Wise, Knowledgeable!
6|84| And We gave him Isaac and Jacob. We guided everyone. And, before that, We guided Noah, and of his progeny, David and Solomon and Job and Joseph and Moses and Aaron. And thus do We reward those who do good.
6|85| And Zachariya and John and Jesus and Elias, all of them righteous men!
6|86| And Ishmael and Elisha and Jonah and Lot, and to all of them We gave favours over the worlds.
6|87| And from among their fathers and their progeny and their brethren, We chose some and guided to the Straight Path.
6|88| This is Allah's guidance. He guides thereby whom He wills of His subjects. And if they worship other gods, certainly, what they did would become useless for them.
6|89| They are those whom We gave the Book and the authority and the prophecy. As their peoples suppressed and denied the Truth thereof, We then entrusted it to a people who do not suppress and deny the Truth in it.
6|90| They are those whom Allah had guided. Follow their guidance then! Say, "I do not ask you for any reward for it. It is the Book of Guidance, to be referred to often, not just for you but for all the worlds." 
6|91| And they do not appreciate Allah's unique Majesty and Power as it should be appreciated, when they say, "Allah has not sent down any revelation upon man." Say, "Who revealed the Book that Moses brought, a light and guidance to men, which you made into sheets you show — while you conceal much — and you were taught what you or your fathers did not know?" Say, "Allah!" Then leave them to play with their vain talk in which the Truth is suppressed and ridiculed.
6|92| And We have sent down this blessed Book, confirming that which is before it, so that you may warn the Mother City and settlements around it. And those who believe in the Hereafter believe in it, and they guard their prayers.
6|93| And who can be more wicked than he who forges a lie against Allah, or says, 'It has been revealed to me' while nothing has been revealed to him, and who says, "I shall reveal the like of what Allah has revealed"? And if you could but see the wicked people when they are in the throes of death and the angels stretch out their hands saying, "Take out your lives! It's time you are recompensed with a contemptible punishment for speaking false things about Allah and for being too proud to accept His Verses/signs."
6|94| And certainly you have come to Us alone just as We had created you the first time. And you have left behind your backs the things which We had given you. And We do not see with you your intercessors about whom you had asserted that they were gods besides Allah for you. Certainly, the ties between you are cut off and what you had been asserting has deserted you.
6|95| Indeed, Allah causes the grain and the date stone to split. He brings forth the living from the dead and He is the One Who brings forth the dead from the living. That One is Allah! How are you then turned away from the Truth?
6|96| He causes the daybreaks. And He has made the night for rest, and the sun and the moon for timekeeping. This is the setting arranged by the Omnipotent, the Knowledgeable.
6|97| And He it is Who has made the stars for you that you may find your way thereby in the darkness of the land and the sea. We have certainly made the Verses/signs plain for people who know.
6|98| And He it is Who has brought you into being from a single human being, then there is for you a domicile and a depository.hWe have certainly made the Verses/signs plain for people who understand.
6|99| And He it is Who sends down water from the sky. Then We bring forth with it every kind of growth. Then We bring forth from it greenery from which We produce grain clustered in ears. And of the palm-tree — of its sheaths — come forth clusters of dates within reach. And gardens of grapes and olives and pomegranates, alike and unlike — look at its fruit when it bears fruit and when it ripens. Indeed, there are signs in these things for people who believe.
6|100| And they worship the jinn as associates of Allah, and He created them! And, without knowledge, they falsely attribute sons and daughters to Him. Glorified is He! He is far too high and exalted above what they ascribe to Him.
6|101| The One to bring into being the heavens and the earth! How could He have a son when He has no consort? And He Himself created everything, and He is the One Who knows all things!
6|102| That One is Allah, your Lord! There is no god but He. HE is the Creator of all things, so worship Him! And He is the One Who looks after all things.
6|103| No vision can grasp Him, and He grasps all visions. And He is Aware of the minutest detail.
6|104| "Evidences have certainly come to you from your Lord. Whoever then sees the evidences, it is for his own good; and whoever is blind to them, it is to his own detriment! And I am not a guardian over you."
6|105| And thus do We variously explain the Verses/signs so that they say, "You have repeated [what you had already said before]" and that We may make it clear to people who know. 
6|106| Follow what is revealed to you from your Lord! There is no god but He. And turn away from those who worship others besides Allah.
6|107| Had Allah so willed, they would not have worshipped others besides Him. And We have not appointed you as a caretaker over them. And you are not there to look after all their affairs.
6|108| And do not abuse those whom they pray to, besides Allah, lest they should abuse Allah out of enmity and ignorance. To every people thush We have made their own deeds look fair. Then to their Lord shall be their return when He will inform them of what they used to do.
6|109| And they swear by Allah, with the strongest of their oaths, that if a sign comes to them they would certainly believe therein. Say, "Signs are only with Allah." And what should make you perceive that, when it comes, they will not believe 
6|110| and that We will turn their hearts and their sights away, as they failed to believe in it, first thing after its occurrence, and that We will leave them to wander blindly in their transgression?h 
6|111| And even if We had sent down to them the angels and the dead had spoken to them and We had brought together all things before them, they would not have believed unless Allah willed, but most of them are ignorant.
6|112| And thus did We make shayateen, from among mankind and jinn, hostile to every prophet — they deceive one another with sweet talk. And had your Lord so willed they would not have done it. Leave them then alone with what they fabricate.
6|113| So that the hearts of those who do not believe in the Hereafter may get inclined to what they fabricate and that they may be well pleased with it and that they may earn what they earn of evil.
6|114| Shall I then seek a judge other than Allah? And He it is Who has revealed to you the Book explained in details. And those whom We have given the Book know that it is, in fact, revealed by your Lord. So be not of those who doubt.
6|115| And the word of your Lord is complete in truth and justice. None can change His words. And He is the One Who listens, the One Who knows!
6|116| And if you (singular in number) obey most of those on the earth, they will lead you astray from Allah's Path. They follow nothing but conjecture and they do nothing but guess.
6|117| It is your Lord, indeed, Who knows who goes astray from His Path. And He it is Who knows those who follow the Guidance.
6|118| Eat then of that on which Allah's name has been mentioned, if you do believe in His Verses/signs.
6|119| And why should you not eat of that on which Allah's name has been mentioned, and He has already made plain for you what He has forbidden — except under compelling circumstances — to you? And, indeed, many do unknowingly lead people astray by their own personal likes and dislikes. Indeed, your Lord it is Who knows those who transgress.
6|120| And desist from committing a sin openly and from secret approaches to it. Indeed, they who earn sin shall be recompensed for what they earned.
6|121| And eat not of that on which Allah's name has not been mentioned, and doing so would indeed be a rebellion against Allah. And the devils do indeed inspire their friends to contend with you. And if you obey them, you shall certainly be those who worship others besides Allah.
6|122| Is he whom We raised from the dead and for whom we made a light by which he walks among the people, like him who is in darkness from which there is no way out? Thus what the suppressors of Truth do has been made to look fair to them. 
6|123| And thus have We made, in every human settlement, the biggest of the criminals to plot therein. And they plot not but against their own selves, and they perceive this not.
6|124| And when a Verse/sign comes to them they say, "We will not believe till we are given the like of what Allah's Messengers are given. Allah knows with whom to place His Message. The criminals shall get disgrace and severe punishment from Allah because they plotted against the divine scheme of things.
6|125| And whomsoever Allah wills to guide, He opens his mind for Islam, and whomsoever He wills to send astray, He makes his mind narrow and restricted as though he were ascending up into the sky. Thus does Allah lay disgrace on those who do not believe.
6|126| And thisis the Straight Path of your Lord. WE have certainly explained the Verses/signs plainly for a people who ponder.
6|127| For them, there shall be the home of peace with their Lord, and He will be their Wali by virtue of their deeds.
6|128| And on the Day when He shall gather them all together, "O assembly of jinn! You did frequent some among mankind." And their awliya from among mankind shall say, "Our Lord! We did benefit one another, and we have reached our destination You fixed for us." HE shall say, "The Fire shall be your abode. You shall dwell therein forever, except as Allah wills. Indeed, your Lord is Wise, Knowledgeable."
6|129| And thus do We make the wrongdoers awliya of one another because of what they earned.
6|130| "O assembly of jinn and mankind! Did there not come to you Messengers from amongst you, recounting to you My Verses/signs and warning you of your appointment for this Day?" They shall say, "We bear witness against our own selves." And the life of this world deceived them, and they shall bear witness against their own selves that they were suppressing the Truth.
6|131| The Messengers were sent because your Lord would not destroy human settlements oppressively, while their inhabitants were unaware.
6|132| And all have ranks according to what they do. And your Lord is not unaware of what they do.
6|133| And your Lord is the Self-sufficient One, Mercy being (one od His) Attributes. If He so wills, He may destroy you, and make whom He wills successors after you, just as He raised you up from the seed of another people.
6|134| Indeed, that which you are promised must come to pass, and you are in no position to prevent it.
6|135| Say, "O my people! You do your best and I do what I do. You will duly come to know for which of us the final abode will be. Surely, the wicked persons shall not be successful."
6|136| And they assign to Allah a share out of what He has created of tilth and cattle! And they arbitrarily apportion, "This is for Allah, and this for those whom we worship besides Allah." Then what is apportioned for those whom they worship besides Allah, does not reach Allah. And what is apportioned for Allah, reaches those others they worship! Evil is the way they judge!
6|137| And thus those, other than Allah, whom they worship have made killing of their children look fair to most of the polytheists, in order to lead them to their own destruction and cause confusion in their religion. And if Allah had willed, they would not have done it. So leave them and their fabrications alone.
6|138| And they arbitrarily say, "These cattle and tilth are prohibited. None shall eat them except such as we please." And they say there are cattle whose backs are forbidden, and cattle on which they would not mention Allah's name, fabricating a lie against Him. HE shall requite them for what they used to fabricate.
6|139| And they say, "What is in the wombs of these cattle is especially for our males, and forbidden to our females. And if it be stillborn, then they share therein." HE will 'reward' them for their prescriptions. He is indeed Wise, Knowledgeable.
6|140| Doomed surely are they who have killed their children foolishly without knowledge, and have forbidden what Allah has provided for them, fabricating a lie against Allah. They have surely gone astray, and are not those who follow divine Guidance.
6|141| And He it is Who produces gardens, trellised and untrellised, and date palms and seed- produce of which the fruits are of various sorts, and olives and pomegranates, like and unlike. Eat of its fruit when it bears fruit, and pay its dueon the day of harvest, and squander not! Indeed, He loves not the squanderers.
6|142| And of cattle there are those that are beasts of burden and those to be laid down on the ground for slaughter and food. Eat of what Allah has provided for you and follow not the footsteps of Satan. Indeed, he is to you an open enemy.
6|143| Of eight cattle in pairs, consider two of sheep and two of goats. Ask them, "Which ones has He forbidden — the two males or the two females or that which the wombs of the two females contain? Inform me, with knowledge, if you are truthful."
6|144| And consider two of camels and two of cows. Ask, "Which ones has He forbidden — the two males or the two females or that which the wombs of the two females contain? Were you witnesses when Allah enjoined this on you? Who, then, can be more unjust than he who, without knowledge, fabricates a lie against Allah, to lead mankind astray? Indeed, Allah does not guide the people who are unjust!
6|145| Say, "I do not find in that which has been revealed to me anything forbidden for anyone to eat except that which has died of itself, or blood poured forth, or flesh of swine — for that indeed is unclean — or that which is a transgression, on which a name other than Allah has been invoked. But then whoever is driven by necessity, without being disobedient or transgressing, then indeed your Lord is Forgiving, Merciful.
6|146| And to those who were Jews We had forbidden every animal having claws. And of oxen and sheep We had forbidden to them the fat of both, except such as was on their backs or in the entrails or what was mixed with bones. This was a punishment We gave them on account of their rebellion, and We are indeed Truthful.
6|147| Then if they deny you, say, "Your Lord is the Embodiment of vast mercy. And His punishment cannot be averted from the criminals."
6|148| Those, who worship others besides Allah, will say, "If Allah had willed, we and our fathers would not have worshipped others besides Him, nor would we have forbidden anything." Thus did those before them deny until they tasted Our punishment. Say, "Have you any knowledge that you can put forth for us? You follow nothing but conjecture and you do nothing but guess!"
6|149| Say, "With Allah then is the conclusive argument. And had He so willed, He would certainly have guided you all."
6|150| Say, "Produce your witnesses who can testify that Allah has forbidden this." Then if they testify, do not testify with them. And follow not the desires of those who reject Our Verses/signs and who do not believe in the Hereafter and hold others as equals to their Lord!
6|151| Say, "Come, I will recite what your Lord has forbidden to you. He has enjoined that you do not worship anything besides Him, that you be good and kind to your parents, that you do not kill your children because of poverty — We provide sustenance for you, and for them — that you do not come near indecencies, whether done openly or in secrecy, and that you do not kill anyone, which act Allah has forbidden, except for the requirements of justice. This He has enjoined you with, that you may understand ". 
6|152| "And approach not the property of the orphan, but in the morally most appropriate manner, until he/she attains maturity. And give full measure and weight, with justice. We do not burden a person beyond one's capacity. And be just when you speak, even if it be to a near and dear one. And fulfill your obligation to Allah. This He has enjoined you with, that you may remember."
6|153| And this then is My Straight Path, so follow it. And follow not the paths that alienate you from His Path. This He has enjoined you with, that you may be pious.
6|154| Also, We gave Moses the complete Book for those who would do good deeds, with details on every thing, and as a guidance and a mercy, so that they should believe that they were scheduled to meet their Lord.
6|155| And We have sent down this Book as a blessing. Follow it then and fear Allah so that mercy is shown to you.
6|156| Lest you say, "The Book was sent down only to two groups before us, and We were truly unaware of lessons therein."
6|157| Or lest you say, "If only the Book had been sent down to us, we would certainly have been guided better than they." So now, surely, there has come to you a Clarification, Guidance and Mercy from your Lord.Who then is more unjust than he who rejects Allah's Verses/signs, and turns away therefrom? We will repay those who turn away from Our Verses/signs with an evil punishment because of their turning away.
6|158| Are they waiting for nothing but that the angels should come to them or that your Lord should come, or that some of the signs of your Lord should come? The day when some of the signs of your Lord do come, one's belief then shall be of no benefit to anyone who had already not attained faith or earned good points through one's faith before! Say, "Just you wait! We too are waiting."
6|159| You have indeed no concern with those who divide their religion into sects. Their matter goes to Allah, Who will then tell them what they did.
6|160| One who comes up with a good deed, shall have the credit of ten like it, and one who comes up with an evil deed, shall have the recompense of only the like thereof and they shall not be wronged.
6|161| Say, "As for me, my Lord has indeed guided me to the Straight Path of the right religion — the creed of Abraham, the upright man; and he was not of those who worship others besides Allah."
6|162| Say, "Indeed, my prayer, my sacrifice, my life and my death are all for Allah, the Lord of the worlds."
6|163| "He has no associate whom I should worship. And this am I commanded with, and I am the first of those who submit!"
6|164| Say, "Shall I seek a lord other than Allah? And He is the Lord of all things! And none earns anything but for one's own self. And no bearer of burden shall bear the burden of another. Then to your Lord is your return. He will then explain to you the things in which you differed."
6|165| And He it is Who has made you His representatives on earth, and raised some of you above others in ranks so that He may test you in what He has given you. Indeed, your Lord is swift in retribution, and He is indeed Forgiving, Merciful!
7|1| Alif Lam Meem Sad
7|2| A Book sent down upon you — let there be no reservations in your mind on that account — which you may warn thereby. And [it's] a Reference Book, containing things to be remembered, for the believers.h 
7|3| Follow what has been sent down to you from your Lord and follow not any awliya besidesh Him. Little do you remember!
7|4| And in many a human settlement that We have destroyed, Our punishment came to it by night or while its inhabitants were having their midday nap.
7|5| They could say nothing — when Our punishment came to them — but that, "We were indeed in the wrong!"
7|6| Then, surely, We shall question those to whom the divine Message was sent, and, surely, We shall question the Messengers.
7|7| Then, surely, We shall narrate to them with knowledge, and We were never absent.
7|8| And the weight that day shall be the genuine one. Those then whose scale will be heavy, those shall be successful.
7|9| And those whose scale is light, those are they who have caused their own doom because they wronged Our Verses/signs.
7|10| And We did provide for your boarding and lodging on earth, and created in it means of livelihood for you. You give but little thanks.
7|11| And We did create you, then fashioned you, and then We said to the angels, "Prostrate to Adam." They then prostrated, but Iblees did not! He wouldn't be of those who prostrate.
7|12| Allah asked, "What prevented you from prostrating when I commanded you?" Iblees said, "I am better than he. You created me of fire, and You created him of dust."
7|13| Allah said, "Down you go then from here! You cannot behave arrogantly here. Get out! You are indeed of those who have belittled themselves."
7|14| Iblees said, "Grant me respite till the Day they are raised up."
7|15| Allah said, "You are indeed one of those to whom respite is granted."
7|16| Iblees said, "Since You have led me astray, I will certainly lie in wait for them in Your Straight Path."
7|17| "Then I will certainly come to them from the front and from behind them, and from the right and from the left of them. And You shall not find a great number of them grateful."
7|18| Allah said, "Get out of here, as one rebuked and expelled! I will certainly fill Hell with you all — you and whoever of them will follow you."
7|19| "And O Adam! Dwell you and your wife in the Garden. Eat whatever you like, and go not near this tree! Otherwise, you will be of the wicked people."
7|20| And the Satan then tempted them both to lay bare to them what had been hidden from them of their carnal desires. And he said, "Your Lord forbade you from this tree lest you two should become angels or of the immortal beings."
7|21| And he swore to them both, "I am indeed one of your sincere advisers."
7|22| So he misled them both by deceit. And when they tasted of the tree, their carnal desires became manifest to them, and they both began to cover themselves with the leaves of the garden. And their Lord called out to them, "Did I not forbid you both from that tree and tell you that the Satan is an open enemy to you both?"
7|23| They said, "Our Lord! We have wronged ourselves. And if You forgive us not, and have mercy on us not, we shall certainly be of the losers."
7|24| HE said, "Down you go! Some of you would be inimical to some others. And there is for you in the earth provision for lodging and boarding, for a period of time."
7|25| HE said, "Therein shall you live, and therein shall you die, and therefrom shall you be raised."
7|26| O Children of Adam! We have certainly sent down to you clothing to hide and keep in control your carnal desires and as a means to adorn yourself with. And the clothing of piety is the one that is better. This is of Allah's Verses/signs for them to remember.
7|27| O Children of Adam! Let not the Satan tempt you just as he did to your parents, causing their expulsion from the Garden and stripping them both of their clothing to expose to them their carnal desires. Indeed, he and his tribe see you from where you cannot see them. We have indeed made the devils to be the awliya of those who believe not.
7|28| And when they commit an indecency they say, "We found our fathers doing this, and Allah has enjoined it on us." Say, "Allah does indeed not enjoin indecency. Do you say what you know not about Allah?"
7|29| Say, "My Lord has enjoined justice. And you should pray to Him, in complete attention and devotion, at every place of worship, and keep the Religion pure for Him. Just as He brought you into being in the beginning, so shall you return [to life again]!"
7|30| Some He guided and some deserved to go astray. They indeed took the devils, instead of Allah, as their awliya, and thought that they were guided!
7|31| O Children of Adam! Be well-dressed, clean and tidy at every place of worship,h and and eat and drink, but indulge not in extravagance. HE does not indeed like those who indulge in extravagance.
7|32| Say, "Who has prohibited Allah's decorations and the wholesome provisions which He has brought forth for His subjects?" Say, "These are for the believers in the life of this world, and exclusively for them, on the Resurrection Day." Thus do We make the Verses/signs clear for people who know.
7|33| Say, "My Lord has prohibited only indecencies, those of them that are apparent as well as those that are concealed, and sin and unjustified rebellion, and that you worship others besides Allah, for which He has not sent down any authority, and that you say about Allah that which you know not."
7|34| And for every community there is an end. So when their end comes, not a moment can they delay it nor advance it.
7|35| O Children of Adam! As and when Messengers come to you from amongst you relating to you My Verses/signs, then on those who take heed and mend themselves, there shall be no fear, nor shall they grieve.
7|36| And as for those who reject Our Verses/signs and arrogantly turn away from them, they will be the dwellers of the Fire and will abide therein forever.
7|37| Who is then more wicked than he who concocts a lie against Allah or rejects His Verses/signs? Such persons get what is destined for them in this life, until, Our Messengers come to them causing them to die and ask, "Where are those whom you used to invoke and worship besides Allah?" They would say, "They have deserted us." And they shall bear witness against themselves that they were suppressors of the Truth.
7|38| He will say, "Enter the Fire among communities of jinn and humans that have passed away before you." Every time a community enters, it curses its sister community, until when they all will have reached it, the community that followed shall say with regard to the community that preceded it, "Our Lord! These led us astray, so give them a double punishment of the Fire." He will say, "It's double for every one, but you know not."
7|39| And the community that preceded will say to the community that followed, "So you have no preference over us. You taste then the punishment for what you used to earn."
7|40| Indeed, the doors of heaven shall not be opened for those who reject Our Verses/signs and arrogantly turn away from them, nor shall they enter Paradise until the cable [thick rope] passes through the eye of the needle. And thus do We reward the sinners.
7|41| For them shall there be a bed of Hell and over them coverings thereof. And thus do We reward the wicked people.
7|42| And as for those who believe and do good deeds, We burden not anyone beyond one's capacity. They will be the dwellers of Paradise and will abide therein forever.
7|43| And We will remove any ill-feeling they had in their minds, and beneath them the rivers shall flow. And they will say, "All praise is due to Allah Who guided us to this! And had Allah not guided us we would never have found the way. Messengers of our Lord had certainly brought the Truth. And it shall be announced to them, "This is the Paradise for you. You have inherited it on account of what you used to do."
7|44| And the dwellers of Paradise will call out to the dwellers of the Fire, "We have indeed found what our Lord promised us to be true. Have you too found what your Lord promised to be true?" They will say, "Yes!" Then an announcer in between them will announce, "Allah's curse is on the wicked people."
7|45| "On those who hindered people from Allah's Path and sought to distort it. And they believed not in the Hereafter."
7|46| And between the two there shall be a veil. And on the heights there will be men who will recognise all others by their distinguishing features. And they will greet the dwellers of Paradise, "Peace on you." They will not have yet entered it, but will hope to!
7|47| And when their eyes will be turned towards the dwellers of the Fire, they will say, "Our Lord! Place us not with the wicked people."
7|48| And the dwellers of the heights will call out to men whom they will recognise by their distinguishing features, "Of no avail were to you the wealth you amassed and the things you took pride in!"
7|49| "Are these — who were told, 'Enter Paradise! You shall have no fear, nor shall you grieve' — the same about whom you swore that Allah will not bestow mercy on them?"
7|50| And the dwellers of the Fire will call out to the dwellers of Paradise, "Let some water or some of the provisions Allah has given you overflow to us!" They will say, "Allah has indeed prohibited them both upon those who suppressed the Truth."
7|51| "Who took their religion as just sport and pastime and their worldly life deceived them." So today We forget them, as they forgot their appointment for this day and denied Our Verses/signs.
7|52| And certainly We have brought them a Book, which We have explained on the basis of knowledge, and which is a guidance and a mercy for people who believe.
7|53| Are they waiting for it to occur first? On the day it occurs, those who had forgotten about it before, will say, "Messengers of our Lord had indeed come with the Truth! Are there for us then any intercessors to intercede on our behalf? Or could we be sent back so that we do things other than what we used to do?" Indeed they have doomed themselves and that which they concocted has deserted them!
7|54| Surely your Lord is Allah, Who created the heavens and the earth in six periods of time, and Who then ascended the Throne. He brings the night as a cover over the day, the night pursuing the day incessantly. And the sun and the moon and the stars are subservient to His command. Aren't the Creation and the Command His? Blessed is Allah, the Lord of the worlds!
7|55| Invoke your Lord in humility and secrecy. He does not indeed like those who transgress the limits.
7|56| And make no mischief on the earth after its reformation, and invoke Him with fear and hope. Allah's Mercy is ever near those who are good.
7|57| And He it is Who sends the winds heralding the good news of His mercy, until, when it carries a heavily laden cloud, We make it serve as a water-carrier for a dead land. We then send water down on it, and bring out with it all kinds of fruits. Thus shall We raise the dead, may you remember!
7|58| And as for the good land, its vegetation springs forth by the permission of its Lord, and as for the infertile one, its vegetation comes forth but scantily. We thus variously explain the Verses/signs for people who are grateful.
7|59| We did send Noah to his people. He told them, "O my people! Worship Allah, you have no god other than Him! I do indeed fear for you the punishment of a dreadful Day."
7|60| The leaders of his people said, "We do indeed see you to be in clear error."
7|61| He said, "O my people! There is no error in me, but I am a Messenger from the Lord of the worlds."
7|62| "I deliver to you Messages of my Lord, and I advise you, and I know from Allah what you know not."
7|63| "Does it surprise you that a Reminder has come to you from your Lord through a man, from amongst you, so that he may warn you and you may fear Allah, and so that you may be treated with Mercy?"
7|64| And they refused to believe him, and We saved him and those with him in the Ark, and We drowned those who refused to believe in Our Verses/signs. They were indeed a blind people.
7|65| And to AAadWe sent their brother Hood. He said, "O my people! Worship Allah, you have no god other than Him. Will you not then guard yourselves against evil?"
7|66| The leaders of those who suppressed the Truth from among his people said, "We do indeed see you in folly, and we do indeed consider you to be among the liars."
7|67| He said, "O my people! There is no folly in me, but I am a Messenger of the Lord of the worlds."
7|68| "I deliver to you Messages of my Lord and I am a trustworthy adviser to you."
7|69| "Does it surprise you that a Reminder has come to you from your Lord through a man, from amongst you, so that he may warn you? And remember when He made you His vicegerentsh on earth after Noah's people and made you excel in construction activity. So remember Allah's Graces so that you may succeed."
7|70| They said, "Have you come to us to make us worship Allah alone and give up what our fathers used to worship? Then, if you are of the truthful ones, bring to us what you threaten us with."
7|71| He said, "Disgrace and wrath from your Lord have indeed befallen you. Do you argue with me about names which you and your fathers have given, and for which Allah has not sent any authority? Then wait! I am with you, among those who wait."
7|72| We then saved him, and those with him, by Mercy from Us. And We cut off the roots of those who treated Our Verses/signs as lies. And they believed not!
7|73| And to ThamoodhWe sent their brother Salih. He said, "O my people! Worship Allah, you have no god other than Him. Clear proof indeed has come to you from your Lord: this Allah's she-camel is a sign for you. Leave her alone then to graze on Allah's land, and harm her not, lest a painful punishment should seize you."
7|74| And remember when He made you His vicegerents after AAad, and settled you in the land. You build for yourselves palaces on its plains and carve out houses in the mountains. So remember Allah's Graces, and do not go about making mischief on the earth.
7|75| The leaders of those who behaved arrogantly among his people said to those who believed, among the weak, "Do you know that Salih is sent by his Lord?" They said, "We are indeed believers in what he has been sent with."
7|76| The arrogant ones said, "We do indeed reject what you believe in."
7|77| Then they hamstrung the she-camel and behaved insolently towards the Command of their Lord. And they said, "O Salih! If you are one of the Messengers, then bring us what you threatened us with."
7|78| Then the earthquake shook them, and they lay prostrate in their houses.
7|79| Then he turned away from them and said, "O my people! I did certainly deliver to you the Message of my Lord, and I gave you advice, but you do not like those who advise."
7|80| And Lot, when he said to his people, "You commit an obscene offence that none in the worlds committed before you!?"
7|81| You do come to men for sexual pleasure, instead of to women!? Nay! You are a people who transgress.
7|82| And the response of his people was but to say, "Drive them out of your place; they are men who want to cleanse themselves!"
7|83| We then saved him and his family, except for his wife; she was of those who remained behind.
7|84| And We rained upon them a rain. Look! What the sinners end up with.
7|85| And to Midian We sent their brother Shu'aib. He said, "O my people! Worship Allah, you have no god other than Him. Clear sign indeed has come to you from your Lord, so give full measure and weight and do not cheat people in their things, and make no mischief on the earth after its reformation. It is better for you if you do believe.
7|86| And do not lie in wait on every path, cajoling away and hindering one who believes in Allah from His way, seeking to make it crooked, complicated or difficult.And remember when you were but few, He increased you in number. And look! What the mischief-makers end up with.
7|87| And if there is a section of you who believe in that which I am sent with, and another section who do not believe, then wait patiently until Allah judges between us. And He is the Best of judges.h 
7|88| Those of the nobility among his people, who were arrogant, said, "We will certainly drive you, and those who have believed with you, out, O Shu'aib, from our place, unless you return to our way of life." He said, "Even when we dislike it?"
7|89| "We should be forging a lie against Allah if we return to your way of life after Allah has delivered us from it. And it befits us not that we should return to it, unless Allah, our Lord, so wishes. Our Lord comprehends all things in His knowledge. In Allah do we trust. Our Lord! Decide justly between us and our people. And You are the Best of judges."
7|90| And those of the nobility among his people, who suppressed the Truth, said, "If you follow Shu'aib, then surely you are doomed!"
7|91| A violent shaking seized them then, and they lay lifeless in their abode.
7|92| Those who denied Shu'aib, they were as though they had never flourished therein; those who denied Shu'aib, they were the ones who were doomed.
7|93| He then turned away from them and said, "O my people! I have indeed delivered to you the Messages of my Lord and I have given you good advice. How can I then grieve over people who suppressed the Truth?"
7|94| And We sent not a Prophet to a place but We seized its people with adversity and distress so that they became compliant.
7|95| We then changed the bad condition to good until they grew in prosperity and said, "Distress and ease did befall our fathers." Then, all of a sudden, We caught them unawares.
7|96| And if the people of those places had believed and had been pious, We would certainly have opened up for them blessings from the heavens and the earth. But they denied the Truth! So We seized them because of what they had earned.
7|97| Did those people then feel secure from Our punishment coming to them by night while they slept?
7|98| Or, did they feel secure from Our punishment coming to them in the morning while they played ?
7|99| Did they then feel secure from Allah's plan? But none felt secure from Allah's plan except those who were doomed.
7|100| Has it not dawned on those who have inherited the earth from their earlier occupants that if We please, We would punish them for their sins and set a seal on their minds so they wouldn't hear?
7|101| These places of human habitation! We relate to you some of their stories. And their Messengers did come to them with evidences. But they could not believe because, earlier, they had denied ! Allah thus seals the minds of those who suppress the Truth.
7|102| And We found most of them unreliable. And We did indeed find most of them to be dissolute.
7|103| We then, after them, sent Moses with Our Signs to Pharaoh and his chieftains, but they wronged those Signs! See then what end the transgressors met with.
7|104| And Moses said, "O Pharaoh! I am indeed a Messenger from the Lord of the worlds."
7|105| "It is just and proper for me that I say about Allah nothing but the Truth. I have come to you indeed with evidence from your Lord. So send the Children of Israel with me."
7|106| He [Pharaoh] said, "If you have come with a sign, then come out with it, if you are of the truthful ones."
7|107| So he [Moses] threw down his staff, when, lo and behold, it was a veritable serpent!
7|108| And he stretched his hand, when, lo and behold, it was shining white to the onlookers!
7|109| The chieftains among Pharaoh's people said, "This one is indeed an expert magician."
7|110| "He intends to drive you out of your land. What counsel do you then give?"
7|111| They said, "Defer the matter concerning him and his brother, and send callers into the cities and towns,
7|112| to bring to you every expert magician."
7|113| And the magicians came to Pharaoh and said, "We should indeed have a reward if we are the victors."
7|114| He said, "Yes, and you shall indeed be of those who are close." 
7|115| They said, "O Moses! Either you do the throwing down, or we do it."
7|116| He said, "You throw!" So when they did, they hoodwinked the people's eyes and frightened them, and they displayed some great magic.
7|117| And We revealed Our instruction to Moses, "Throw down your staff." And, lo and behold, it swallowed up what they had conjured up!
7|118| So the truth prevailed, and what they did became null and void.
7|119| They were thus defeated there, and they turned back subdued.
7|120| And the magicians fell prostrate.
7|121| They said, "We believe in the Lord of the worlds,
7|122| the Lord of Moses and Aaron."
7|123| Pharaoh said, "Did you believe in Him before I permitted you!? This indeed is a plot which you have devised in the city to drive its people out. But you shall soon know!
7|124| I will certainly cut off your hands and your feet on opposite sides. Then will I crucify you all!"
7|125| They said, "Surely to our Lord shall we go back.
7|126| And you do not take revenge on us except because we have believed in the signs of our Lord when these came to us! Our Lord! Grant us patience and cause us to die as Muslims." 
7|127| And the chieftains among Pharaoh's people said, "Would you leave Moses and his people free to make mischief in the land and to forsake you and your gods?" He said, "We will kill their sons and spare their women. And we do indeed have absolute power over them."
7|128| Moses said to his people, "Ask for help from Allah and be patient. The land is Allah's; He leases it to such of His subjects as He wills. And the good end is reserved for those who are pious.
7|129| They said, "We have been persecuted before you came to us and since you have come to us." He said, "It may be that your Lord will destroy your enemy and make you rulers in the land, and then He will see how you act."
7|130| And We did seize Pharaoh's people with years of drought and loss in agricultural produce that they may take heed.
7|131| But when they got anything good, they said, "We certainly deserve this." And when any bad thing befell them, they attributed its cause to Moses and those with him. Nay! The cause for anything happening to them lay only with Allah, but most of them knew not.
7|132| And they said, "Whatever be the sign you bring to beguile us with, we will not believe in you."
7|133| We then sent upon them the storm, the locusts, the lice, the frogs and the blood as distinct signs ; but they behaved haughtily and they were a sinning people.
7|134| And when the calamity fell upon them, they said, "O Moses! Pray for us to your Lord as He has a covenant with you. If you remove the calamity from us, we will certainly believe in you and we will certainly send the children of Israel with you."
7|135| But when We removed the calamity from them for a term within which to fulfil their promise, they broke the promise!
7|136| We then took our revenge from them and drowned them in the sea because they rejected Our signs and paid no heed to them.
7|137| And We leased the lands to the East and to the West of the earth, in which We have placed Our Blessings, to the people deemed to be weak. And the good word of your Lord was fulfilled upon the Children of Israel because they bore up sufferings patiently. And We annihilated what Pharaoh and his people had wrought and what they had built.
7|138| And We enabled the Children of Israel to cross the sea. Then they came upon a people given to the worship of their idols. They said, "O Moses! Make a god for us like the ones they have." He said, "You are indeed an ignorant people!
7|139| What these people are engrossed in is bound to be destroyed and what they do is all in vain."
7|140| He said, "Shall I seek for you a god other than Allah, while He has favoured you over the worlds!?"
7|141| And when We delivered you from Pharaoh's people! They were inflicting on you a terrible torment: they were killing your sons and sparing the lives of your womenfolk. And therein was a mighty trial from your Lord!
7|142| And We gave an appointment to Moses for thirty nights and extended the appointment by ten to complete the appointed time of his Lord to forty nights. And Moses said to his brother Aaron, "Be my representative among my people, be righteous and follow not the way of the mischief-makers.
7|143| And when Moses came at Our appointed time and his Lord spoke to him, he said, "My Lord! Reveal yourself to me so that I may see You." He said, "You cannot see Me, but look at the mountain. If it remains firm in its place, then will you see Me." But when his Lord manifested His glory to the mountain, He made it crumble and Moses fell down in a swoon. Then when he recovered, he said, "Glory to You! I turn to You in repentence, and I am the first of the believers."
7|144| He said, "O Moses! I have indeed distinguished you above the people with My Messages and with My speaking to you directly. So hold on to what I give you and be of the grateful ones."
7|145| And We wrote down for him in the tablets, every kind of advice/admonition, and everything in detail. "So hold on to them firmly and enjoin your people to hold on to the excellence thereof. I will show you where the dissolute abide."
7|146| I will turn away from My Verses/signs those who are unjustly proud on the earth. And even if they see every sign, they will not believe in it. And if they see the way of rectitude, they do not take it. And if they see the way of error, they take it! This is because they rejected Our Verses/signs and were heedless of them.
7|147| And as for those who reject Our Verses/signs and the meeting of the Hereafter, their deeds have gone in vain. Shall they be rewarded except for what they have done?
7|148| And Moses' people, after he left, made a calf of their ornaments — just a body, which emanated a sound.Could they not see that it did not speak to them nor guide them to any way? They took to it and indulged in wrong-doing.
7|149| And when they repented and saw that they had gone astray, they said, "Should our Lord show no mercy on us and forgive us not, we shall certainly be of those who are doomed."
7|150| And when Moses returned to his people, in anger and grief, he said, "What an evil thing you have done after I left! Were you so hasty for the command of your Lord? " And he threw down the tablets and caught hold of his brother by the head, dragging him towards him. He said, "Son of my mother! Indeed, the people reckoned me weak and had almost killed me. So make not the enemies gloat over me and do not count me among the wicked people."
7|151| He said, "My Lord! Forgive me and my brother and admit us to Your Mercy, and You are the Most Merciful."
7|152| Those indeed who took to the calf, wrath from their Lord and disgrace in this world's life shall overtake them, and thus do We recompense the fabricators of lies.
7|153| And your Lord is indeed Forgiving and Merciful to those who do evil deeds, but then repent thereafter and believe.
7|154| And when Moses calmed down, he took up the tablets. And in the inscription thereof, there was guidance and mercy for those who fear their Lord.
7|155| And Moses chose from his people seventy men for the appointment with Us.hSo when the violent shaking seized them, he said, "My Lord! Had You so willed, You could have destroyed them before — and me too. Will You destroy us for what the fools among us have done? It is indeed nothing but a trial from You. You make whom You will to go astray with it and You guide whom You will. You are our Wali. So forgive us and have mercy on us, and You are the best of the forgivers."
7|156| "And ordain for us good in this world and in the Hereafter, for indeed we turn to You for guidance." HE said, "I inflict My punishment on whom I will. And My mercy covers all things, and I ordain it [Mercy] for those who are pious, give in charity, and believe in Our Verses/signs."
7|157| Those who follow the unlettered Messenger-Prophet, whom they find mentioned with them in the Torah and the Gospel, who enjoins them to do good things and forbids them from bad things, and makes pure, wholesome things lawful to them and impure things unlawful, and removes from them their burden and the fetters which were upon them. So then those who believe in him, honour him and help him, and follow the lightwhich has been sent down with him — those it is that succeed.
7|158| Say, "O people! I am indeed the Messenger, to you all, of Allah, Whose is the absolute suzerainty over the heavens and the earth. There is no god but He. He gives life and causes death." So believe in Allah and His Messenger, the unlettered Prophet, who believes in Allah and His words. And follow him so that you are on the right path.
7|159| And of Moses' people was a group, who guided with the truth, and therewih did they judge.
7|160| And We divided them into twelve tribal groups. And when his people asked Moses for water, We inspired him, "Strike the rock with your staff!" There then gushed forth twelve springs therefrom. Thus did all come to know their respective sources of drinking water. And We made the clouds to provide shelter over them and We sent to them manna and quails. "Eat of the good things We have provided for you." And they did not do Us any harm, but they did harm to their own souls.
7|161| And when it was said to them, "Reside in this place of habitation and eat wherever you wish therefrom, and say, 'hittatun.' And enter the gate prostrating. We will forgive you your wrong-doings. We will give more to those who do good."
7|162| But then those who were wicked among them changed it for a word other than that which they had been told to utter. So We sent down upon them a calamity from the heavens because they were wicked. 
7|163| And ask them about the place of human habitation which stood by the sea, where they crossed the limits of the Sabbath : their fish came to them, up on the surface of the water, on the day of their Sabbath, and not on other days! Thus did We try them because they transgressed.
7|164| And when a section of them said, "Why do you admonish a people whom Allah would destroy or give a severe punishment?" They said, "To be free of blame before your Lord! And, haply, they may fear Allah."
7|165| So when they forgot what they had been reminded of, We saved those who forbade evil and We severely punished those who did wrong, because they transgressed.
7|166| And when they revoltingly persisted in what they had been forbidden, We said to them, "Be apes, despised and hated." 
7|167| And when your Lord declared that He would certainly impose upon them, till the Day of Resurrection, those who would treat them badly, your Lord indeed is quick to requite and indeed He is Forgiving, Merciful!h 
7|168| And We broke them, on the earth, into groups; some of them are righteous and some of them are not. And We tried them with good things and bad, so that they might turn back to the Right Path.
7|169| Then, there came after them a posterity that inherited the Book, taking what this worldly life offers and saying, "We will be forgiven!" And if a like offer came to them again, they would take it too! Was not a promise taken from them in the Book that they would not speak anything about Allah but the truth? And they have read what is there in it! And the abode of the Hereafter is better for those who fear Allah. Don't you understand?
7|170| And as for those who hold fast to the Book and establish proper prayer, We do not indeed cause the reward of the doers of good to go waste.
7|171| And when We made the mountain shake over them like a shadow — and they thought that it was definitely going to fall down upon them — telling them, "Hold firmly what We have given you, and take heed of what there is in it, so that you become pious." 
7|172| And when your Lord brought forth, from Adam and his children, their offspring, and made them bear witness against their own souls, "Am I not your Lord?" they said, "Yes! We bear witness." Lest you should say on the Day of Resurrection, "Indeed, we were unaware of this." 
7|173| Or you should say, "It was our fathers, before us, who worshiped others besides Allah, and we were only their offspring following them! Will You then destroy us for what those followers of falsehood did?"
7|174| And thus do We explain the Verses, in details and so as to facilitate their return to the Right Path.
7|175| And recite to them the story of one to whom We gave Our Verses/signs, but he withdrew himself therefrom! The Satan then followed him, and he became one of those who deviate from the Right Path.
7|176| And if We had so willed, We would certainly have exalted him thereby; but he remained clinging to the earth and followed his base desires. His example then is that of the dog; if you assault him he lolls out his tongue, and if you leave him alone he lolls out his tongue! Similar is the example of those who reject Our Verses/signs. Relate the story then; perhaps they will reflect.
7|177| Evil is the example of people who reject Our Verses/signs, and are unjust to their own souls.
7|178| Whomsoever Allah guides, he is the one who follows the right way; and whomsoever He sends astray, these are the ones who are doomed.
7|179| And certainly We have grown for Hell many of the jinn and the human beings; they have minds with which they do not understand, and they have eyes with which they do not see, and they have ears with which they do not hear. They are like cattle — nay, they are worse in going astray. They are the ones grievously unaware of their destiny.
7|180| And Allah has the best of names, for you to call on Him wherewith. And keep away from those who violate the sanctity of His names. They shall be punished for what they did.
7|181| And of those whom We have created there are people who guide with the truth and judge therewith.
7|182| And as to those who reject Our Verses/signs, We rein them in, by degrees, from whence they know not.
7|183| And I (Allah) give them a long rope. Indeed, My plan is fool-proof.
7|184| Do they not reflect that their companion is not unsound in mind? He is only a plain warner!
7|185| Do they not ponder over the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and whatever things Allah has created, and over the likelihood of their own death being near? What hadeeth would they then believe in after this?
7|186| Whomsoever Allah sends astray, there is no guide for him. And He leaves them alone wandering blindly in their inordinateness.
7|187| They ask you [Prophet] about the Hour (the time when the present world will end and the Hereafter begin), "When is it coming?" Say, "The knowledge of it is only with my Lord. None but He shall manifest it at its time; it will be a hard time in the heavens and the earth; it will not come on you but of a sudden." They ask you as if you were well-informed about it. Say, "Its knowledge is only with Allah, but most people know not."
7|188| Say, "I cannot have any benefit or harm for my own self except as Allah pleases. And had I known the unseen I would have had much of good and no evil would have touched me. I am but a warner and the giver of good news to people who believe.
7|189| He it is Who created you from a single being, and He made therefrom his mate, that he might have the pleasure of living with her. So when he mounts her she bears a light burden, and she moves about with it. And when it grows heavy, they both call upon Allah, their Lord, "If You give us a good child, we shall certainly be of those who are grateful."
7|190| But when He gives them a good child, they set up associates with Him in what He had given them. But high is Allah above what they associate with Him.
7|191| Do they associate with Allah those who do not create anything, but are themselves created!?
7|192| And they can muster no help, nor can they help themselves.
7|193| And if you invite them to guidance, they follow you not. It is immaterial whether you invite them or not.
7|194| All those whom you pray to, besides Allah, are under Allah's absolute control just like you are. Call on them then, and let them answer you if you are right.
7|195| Have they feet with which they walk, or have they hands with which they hold, or have they eyes with which they see, or have they ears with which they hear? Say, "Call those whom you worship besides Allah, then plot against me and give me no concession."
7|196| Allah is indeed my Wali, Who has sent down the Book. And He is close to the good, righteous people.
7|197| And those, whom you pray to, besides Him, are not able to help you, nor can they help themselves!
7|198| And if you invite them to the Guidance, they do not listen. And you see them looking towards you, yet they do not see.
7|199| Show forgiveness and enjoin what is good and be indulgent towards the ignorant people.
7|200| And if a mischief from the Satan affects you, seek refuge in Allah. HE does indeed hear, know.
7|201| Those indeed that fear Allah remember Him much when a visitation from the Satan affects them. Then lo! They see.
7|202| And their brethren relentlessly help them in wrong-doing!
7|203| And when you do not bring them a miracle/sign, they say, "Why have you not brought it?" Say, "I follow only that which is revealed to me from my Lord. These are clear insights from your Lord and guidance and a mercy for a people who believe."
7|204| And when the Qur'aan is recited, then listen to it and remain silent, so that you are showered with mercy.
7|205| And remember your Lord within yourself, humbly and in fear — and in a voice that is not loud — morning and evening, and be not of those who are heedless.
7|206| Indeed, those with your Lord are not too proud to worship Him, and they declare His glory and to Him they prostrate.
8|1| They ask you about the spoils of war. Say, "The spoils are for Allah and the Messenger. So fear Allah and improve mutual relationships among yourselves. And obey Allah and His Messenger if you do believe!"
8|2| The believers are only those whose hearts are moved with fear when Allah is mentioned. And when His Verses/signs are recited to them, it (recitation) strengthens them in faith. And in their Lord do they trust!
8|3| Those who establish proper prayer and spend out of what We have given them.
8|4| These are the real believers. For them are high grades from their Lord, and forgiveness, and good wholesome provisions.
8|5| Likewise, in truth, did your Lord cause you to go forth from your house. And indeed ah section of the believers were against it.
8|6| They disputed with you the truth after what had become clear, as if they were being driven, with their eyes wide open, to death!
8|7| And when Allah promised you that one of the two enemy groups shall be yours, and you preferred that the one not armed should he yours, Allah desired to make manifest the truth of His words and to cut off the root of those who suppress the Truth. 
8|8| That He may establish the truth and destroy the falsehood, the wrong-doers' dislike notwithstanding!
8|9| As you sought aid from your Lord, so He answered you, "I will assist you with waves after waves of a thousand of the angels."
8|10| And Allah did not make it but as a good news, so that your hearts might be at peace thereby. And there is no help except from Allah. Allah is indeed Omnipotent, Wise!
8|11| Whene caused you to be overcome with drowsiness as a means of mental peace from Him and sent down upon you water from the cloud that He might thereby purify you. And He rid you of satanic pollution that He might fortify your hearts, and might steady your footsteps thereby.
8|12| When your Lord revealed to the angels, "I am with you, so make the believers firm and steady. I will cast terror into the hearts of those who suppress the Truth. Then hit on their necks and cut all fingers off them." 
8|13| This is because they opposed Allah and His Messenger. And whoever opposes Allah and His Messenger, then, indeed, Allah is severe in punishment.
8|14| "This it is, so taste it; and punishment for the suppressors of the Truth is the Fire!"
8|15| O you who believe! When you meet the suppressors of the Truth in war, turn not your backs to them.
8|16| And whoever turns his back to them on that day — unless it is only to turn back to fighting or to withdraw to one's own company — then he does indeed incur Allah's wrath, and his abode is Hell. And it is an evil destination!
8|17| Then it was not you who killed them, but it was Allah Who killed them. And it was not you who threw when you threw, but it was Allah Who threw. And He did it to test the believers with a good test from Himself. Indeed, Allah listens, knows.
8|18| Thus it is that Allah undermines the scheme of the suppressors of the Truth.
8|19| If you had sought a decisive judgment, it certainly has then come to you in the form of victory to the believers. And if you desist from waging a war against them henceforth, then that will be good for you. And if you return, We return! And your forces, though numerous, shall avail you nothing. And you should know that Allah is with the believers.
8|20| O you who believe! Obey Allah and His Messenger and turn not away while listening to him.
8|21| And be not like those who said, `We hear', and they did not hear.
8|22| Indeed, the worst moving creatures, in Allah's sight, are the deaf and dumb that understand not. 
8|23| And if Allah had known any good in them He would have made them hear, and if He makes them hear they would turn away and contradict.
8|24| O you who believe! Respond to Allah and His Messenger when he calls you to that for which Allah gives you life. And know that Allah intervenes between man and his mind, and that to Him you shall be gathered.
8|25| And beware of a trial which may not afflict only those of you in particular who do wrong. And know that Allah is severe in punishment.
8|26| And remember when you were few, deemed weak in the land, fearing lest people might carry you off by force. Then He sheltered you, strengthened you with His aid and provided you with good things so that you feel grateful.
8|27| O you who believe! Betray not Allah and the Messenger, nor betray your trusts, knowingly.
8|28| And know that your property and your children are a trial, and that, with Allah, there is a magnificent reward!
8|29| O you who believe! If you fear Allah, He will create in you an ability to distinguish between right and wrong and do away with your evil tendencies, and forgive you. And Allah possesses great Grace.
8|30| And those who suppressed the Truth plotted to confine you, kill you or drive you away. They plotted and Allah plotted. And Allah is the best of plotters.
8|31| And when Our Verses/signs are recited to them, they say, "We have heard. We certainly could, if we pleased, say things like that. These are nothing but fables of the ancients."
8|32| And they said, "O Allah! If this is the Truth from You, then rain upon us stones from the sky or bring on us a painful punishment."
8|33| But Allah was not going to punish them while you dwelt among them, nor was Allah going to punish them while they may yet ask for forgiveness.
8|34| And why should Allah not punish them when they hinder people from the Sacred Place of Worship and when they cannot be its custodians. Its custodians can only be those who fear Allah, but most of them know not.
8|35| And their prayer before the House is nothing but whistling and clapping. Taste then the punishment; for, you have been suppressing the Truth.
8|36| Indeed, those who suppress the Truth spend their wealth to hinder people from the Path of Allah. And they shall continue to spend it so, till they are overcome with intense regret thereupon. And those, who suppress the Truth, shall be driven together to Hell!
8|37| That Allah might separate the bad from the good, and pile up the bad, one upon another, and then cast them together into Hell. These are the ones that are doomed.
8|38| Tell those who suppress the Truth that if they desist, that which is past shall be forgiven to them. And if they persist, what happened to the ancients is already on record. 
8|39| And fight with them until revolt/insurrection stops, and the way of life is restored in its entirety to Allah. Then if they desist, Allah does indeed see what they do. 
8|40| And if they turn back, then know that Allah is your Patron — the best Patron and the best One to help.
8|41| And know that whatever booty you get, a fifth of it is for Allah and for the Messenger and for those near and dear, the orphans, the needy and the wayfarer, if you do believe in Allah and in that which We bestowed upon Our Slave on the day right was distinguished from wrong, the day on which the two armies met. And Allah has power over all things.
8|42| The scenario was that you were on the nearer side, and they on the farther side, and the caravan was in the valley down below you. And even if you had planned to attack the caravan, you would certainly have missed the target, so that Allah might accomplish a matter which was to be accomplished — that he would manifestly perish that He wished to perish, and he would manifestly keep alive that He wished to keep alive. And indeed Allah listens, knows.
8|43| Then Allah showed them to you in your dream as few. And if He had shown them to you as many, you would certainly have lost courage and you would have quarrelled over the matter. But Allah acted to set things right. He is indeed aware of what goes on in your minds.
8|44| And then He showed them to you, when you met, as few in your eyes and He made you to appear few in their eyes, in order that Allah brought a matter, which was to be done, to fruition. And to Allah are all matters returned.
8|45| O you who believe! When you face an enemy in battle, be firm, and remember Allah a great deal, so that you may be successful.
8|46| And obey Allah and His Messenger and do not quarrel; for, then, you will lose courage and your power will go away. And be patient! Indeed, Allah is with those who are patient.
8|47| And be not like those who came out of their homes boasting and showing off, and who turned people away from the Path of Allah. And Allah surrounded all that they did.
8|48| And then the Satan made their deeds fair seeming to them, and said, "No man can overcome you this day, and indeed I am your supporter." But when the two armies confronted each other, he turned his back and said, "I do indeed bear no responsibility for you. I do indeed see what you do not see. I do indeed fear Allah. And Allah is severe in giving punishment!"
8|49| The hypocrites and those in whose hearts was a disease said, "Their religion has deceived them." And when anyone places his trust on Allah, then indeed Allah is Omnipotent, Wise.
8|50| And if you could see the angels causing those who suppress the Truth to die, you would see them (angels) smiting their faces and their backs, and saying, "Taste the torment of the Fire!"
8|51| This is because of what your own hands have sent in before. And Allah is not in the least unjust to those whom He created and who ought therefore to obey Him.
8|52| Like Pharaoh's people and those before them: they suppressed the Truth in Allah's Verses/signs, and then Allah seized them for their sins. Allah is indeed strong, severe in punishment.
8|53| That was because Allah has never changed a favour which He has conferred upon a people until they themselves become responsible for any change in it. And because Allah listens, knows.
8|54| Like Pharaoh's people and those before them: they rejected the Verses/signs of their Lord, so We destroyed them on account of their sins and We drowned Pharaoh's people, and they were all unjust.
8|55| Indeed, the worst of the moving creatures, in Allah's sight, are those who suppress the Truth. And then they would not believe.
8|56| Those with whom you had a covenant, and they broke it every time and they did not fear Allah.
8|57| And if you face them in war, make a deterrent example of them for those who would follow them.
8|58| And if you fear treachery on the part of a people, then throw back the covenant to them in an equitable manner. Indeed, Allah does not like the treacherous people.
8|59| And let not those who suppress the Truth think that they will get away. They will certainly not escape.
8|60| And prepare against them what force and means of transport you can muster, to deter thereby the enemy of Allah and your enemy and others besides them, whom you do not know but Allah knows. And whatever thing you spend in Allah's path, it will be paid back to you in full and you shall not be wronged.
8|61| And if they incline towards peace, then incline towards it and trust in Allah. HE does indeed listen, know.
8|62| And if they intend to deceive you, then Allah is indeed sufficient for you. He it is Who strengthened you with His help and with the believers.
8|63| And He united their hearts. Had you (singular) spent all that is in the earth, you could not have united their hearts, but Allah united them. He is indeed Omnipotent, Wise.
8|64| O Prophet! Allah is sufficient for you and for such of the believers that follow you. 
8|65| O Prophet! Exhort the believers to fight. If there be twenty of you exercising patience, they shall overcome two hundred; and if there be a hundred of you, they shall overcome a thousand of those who suppress the Truth, because they (the latter) are a people who do not understand.
8|66| For now, Allah has made your burden light, and He knows that there is weakness in you. So if there be a hundred of you exercising patience, they shall overcome two hundred; and if there be a thousand, they shall overcome two thousand by Allah's permission. And Allah is with those who are patient.
8|67| It is not fit for a prophet that he should have captives unless he is firmly established on the earth. You desire to avail goods of this world, while Allah desires for you the Hereafter. And Allah is Omnipotent, Wise.
8|68| Had it not been for an ordinance from Allah already gone forth, surely there would have befallen you a great calamity in what you had taken.
8|69| Eat then of the lawful and good things which you get as windfall or spoils of war. And fear Allah. Indeed, Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.
8|70| O Prophet! Say to those of the captives who are in your hands, "If Allah knows there is anything good in your hearts, He will give you better than that which has been taken away from you and He will forgive you. And Allah is Forgiving, Merciful."
8|71| And if they intend to be unfaithful to you, they were indeed unfaithful towards Allah before, so He gave you power over them. And Allah is Aware, Wise.
8|72| Those indeed who believed and migrated and struggled hard in Allah's path with their property and their lives, and those who gave shelter and help — these are awliya of one another. And as for those who believed but did not migrate, you have no responsibility of being their wali until they migrate. And if they seek aid from you in matters of religion, aid is obligatory on you except against a people between whom and you there is a treaty. And Allah sees what you do.
8|73| And as for those who suppress the Truth, they are the awliya of one another. If you do it not, there will be disorder on earth and great discord.
8|74| And as for those who believed and migrated and struggled hard in Allah's path, and those who gave shelter and help, those are the true believers. They shall have forgiveness and honourable provision.
8|75| And as for those who believed afterwards and migrated and struggled hard along with you, they are of you. And blood relatives are nearer to one another in Allah's Record. Allah does indeed know all things.
9|1| Abrogation of any obligation, by Allah and His Messenger, under any treaty you made with any polytheists.h 
9|2| So travel freely on earth for four months and know that you cannot frustrate Allah and that Allah will bring disgrace to those who suppress the Truth.
9|3| And a proclamation from Allah and His Messenger to the people on the day of the great pilgrimage that Allah and His Messenger are free from any contractual obligations to the idolaters. If you then repent, it will be better for you, and if you turn away, then know that you cannot frustrate Allah. And pronounce painful punishment to those who suppress the Truth!
9|4| But as for those of the polytheists with whom you have a treaty, then they have not failed you in anything and have not backed up any one against you, fulfill their treaty to the end of its term. Indeed, Allah loves those who fear Him and do righteous things.
9|5| Then when the prohibited months pass away, kill the idolaters wherever you find them, seize and besiege them and lie in wait for them at every place for ambush. Then if theyh repent, establish proper prayer and give charity, leave their way free to them. Indeed, Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.
9|6| And if any of the idolaters seeks protection from you, grant him protection till he hears Allah's Word, then take him to his place of safety. It is so ordained because they are a people who do not know.
9|7| How can there be a treaty for the polytheists with Allah and with His Messenger except for those with whom you made a treaty at the Sacred Place of Worship? Then, as long as they are true to you, be true to them. Allah does indeed love those who fear Him and do righteous deeds.
9|8| And how can there be a treaty when, if they prevail against you they would not heed ties of relationship with you, or those of a covenant. They please you with their mouths while their hearts are averse. And most of them are corrupt.
9|9| They have traded Allah's Verses/signs for a small price and then they turn people away from His Path. What they do is certainly bad.
9|10| They do not heed ties of relationship with a believer, or those of a covenant. And these are the hostile ones.
9|11| Then if they repent, establish proper prayer and give charity, they are your brethren in faith. And We make the Verses/signs clear for people that are knowledgeable.
9|12| And if they break their terms after their covenant and taunt your religion, then fight the leading lights of the suppression of Truth — the terms are nothing to them, indeed — so that they may desist.
9|13| Will you not fight a people, who broke their terms of agreement and tried hard for expulsion of the Messenger and attacked you first!? Are you afraid of them? But Allah it is Who has the right to be afraid of, if you do believe!
9|14| Fight them! Allah will punish them by your hands, bring them to disgrace and assist you against them. And He will heal the hearts of a believing people.
9|15| And remove the anguish of their hearts. And Allah grants pardon to whom He wills. And Allah is Knowledgeable, Wise.
9|16| Do you think that you will be spared before Allah has known those of you who have struggled hard in Allah's Path and have not taken any sanctuary besides Allah, His Messenger and the believers? And Allah is aware of what you do.
9|17| The idolaters cannot be maintainers of the places for worshipping Allah while bearing witness against themselves to suppression of the Truth. These it is who have nullified their deeds, and in the Fire shall they abide.
9|18| Only he shall visit and maintain the places for worshipping Allah who believes in Allah and the Last Day, establishes proper prayer, gives charity and fears none but Allah. These it is who are among those on right guidance.
9|19| Do you consider serving drinks to the pilgrims and maintaining the Sacred Place of Worship like the deed of one who believes in Allah and the Last Day and strives hard in Allah's Path? They are not equal in Allah's sight. And Allah does not guide the people who do wrong.
9|20| Those that believed and migrated, and strove hard in Allah's Path with their wealth and their lives, are higher in rank in Allah's sight. And those are the achievers.
9|21| Their Lord gives them good news of His mercy and pleasure and of gardens wherein there shall be everlasting blessings for them.
9|22| They shall live therein for ever. Indeed, Allah has a great reward with Him.
9|23| O you who believe! Do not take your fathers and your brothers as awliya if they love suppression of the Truth more than faith in the Truth. And those of you who take them as awliya, those it is that do wrong.
9|24| Say, "If your fathers and your sons and your brethren and your mates and your kinsfolk and property which you have acquired, and the trade — slackness of which you fear — and dwellings which you like, are dearer to you than Allah and His Messenger and striving in His Path, then wait till Allah manifests His command. And Allah does not guide the corrupt people."
9|25| Certainly Allah helped you in many battlefields and on the day of Hunain, when your being in great numbers pleased you, but they availed you nothing and the earth, vast as it is, narrowed upon you. Then you turned back retreating.
9|26| Then Allah caused His Messenger and the believers to be calm and He sent down forces you did not see and He punished those who suppressed the Truth. And that is the recompense for the suppressors of the Truth!
9|27| Then, after that, Allah pardons whom He wills. And Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.
9|28| O you who believe! The polytheists are nothing but pollution. So they shall not approach the Sacred Place of Worship after this year. And if you fear poverty then Allah will enrich you out of His grace if He wills. Indeed, Allah is Knowledgeable, Wise.
9|29| Fight those who do not believe in Allah, nor in the Last Day, nor prohibit what Allah and His Messenger have prohibited, and fight those people of the Book, who do not follow the Religion of the Truth, until they willingly pay tax as subjects.
9|30| And the Jews say, "Uzayr is the son of Allah." And the Christians say, "The Messiah is the son of Allah." These are their oral sayings. They imitate the saying of those who suppressed the Truth before. May Allah destroy them; how deluded are they!
9|31| They have taken their rabbis and their priests and the Messiah, son of Mary, for lords besides Allah. And they were not enjoined but that they have none but One Allah to worship. There is no god but He. HE is too high in glory, above what they worship besides Him.
9|32| They wish to put out Allah's light with their mouths, and Allah refuses to consent to anything but to perfect His light, even though the suppressors of the Truth are averse.
9|33| HE it is Who sent His Messenger with guidance and the Religion (Way of Life) of the Truth, that He might cause it to prevail over all religions, even though the polytheists are averse.
9|34| O you who believe! Indeed, many of the rabbis and the priests eat away people's property falsely, and turn them away from Allah's Path.h And to those, who hoard up gold and silver and do not spend it in Allah's Path, announce a painful punishment,
9|35| On the day when ithshall be heated hot in the fire of hell, then their foreheads and their sides and their backs shall be branded with it. This is what you hoarded up for yourselves, therefore taste what you hoarded.
9|36| Indeed, since the day when Allah created the heavens and the earth, the number of months recorded with Allah is twelve, of which four are sacred.That is the established way. So, commit no wrong in this regard and fight the polytheists in the same total way as they fight you. And know that Allah is with those who fear Him and do righteous things.
9|37| The intercalation in a calendar is only an addition to the suppression of the Truth, wherewith the suppressors are led astray. They treat a month as non-sacred during one year and make it sacred in another to make up the number of months that Allah has made sacred. Thus do they then violate the sanctity of what Allah has made sacred! The evil of their deeds is made to seem fair to them. And Allah does not guide the people who suppress the Truth.
9|38| O you who believe! What is the matter with you that when you are asked to set out in Allah's Path, you cling heavily to the earth? Do you prefer this life to the Hereafter when the provisions of this life count for nothing but little in the Hereafter?
9|39| If set you out not, He will punish you with a painful punishment and replace you with another people, and you can do Him no harm! And Allah has power over all things.
9|40| If you help him not, Allah did certainly help him when those who suppressed the Truth expelled him. He was one of the two in the cave when he said to his companion, "Grieve not, Allah is indeed with us." Then Allah caused him to be calm and peaceful and strengthened him with armies you couldn't see. And He lowered the word of those who suppressed the Truth and raised the word of Allah high. And Allah is Omnipotent, Wise.
9|41| Set out light and heavy, and strive hard in Allah's Path with your property and your persons! This is better for you, if you would know.
9|42| Had it been a near expedition and a short journey, they would certainly have followed you, but the long journey was too much for them. And they swear by Allah, "If only we could, we would certainly have set out with you." They are killing their own souls, and Allah knows for certain that they are lying!
9|43| May Allah pardon you (the Prophet)! Why did you exempt them before it became clear to you as to who were speaking the truth and you knew who the liars were?
9|44| Those who believe in Allah and the Last Day do not ask you to exempt them from exerting themselves in Allah's Path with their wealth and their persons. And Allah knows those who guard against evil.
9|45| Only those, who do not believe in Allah and the Last Day, ask you for exemption and their hearts are in doubt. And they waver in their doubts.
9|46| And if they had really intended to set out, they would certainly have prepared for it. But Allah did not like them proceeding, so He held them back. And they were told to sit back with those who sit back.
9|47| Had they been out in your midst, they would have added nothing but corruption in your ranks, and they would certainly have been active seeking dissension amongst you. And among you there are those who would listen to them. And Allah is aware of the wrong-doers.
9|48| They certainly sought dissension before, and upset matters for you, until the truth came and Allah's commandment prevailed, despite their dislike.
9|49| And among them, there is one who says, "Allow me and try me not." Have they not already failed in the trial? And Hell does indeed encompass those who suppress the Truth!
9|50| If anything good comes your way, it grieves them. And if hardship afflicts you, they say, "Certainly, it was to our good that we had taken our affairs into our own hands beforehand." And they turn back happy!
9|51| Say, "Nothing afflicts us save what Allah has ordained for us. He is our Patron." And on Allah then let the believers put their trust.
9|52| Say, "Do you expect anything but either of two good thingsappening to us? And for you we expect punishment from Allah Himself or by our hands. So wait; we too will wait with you!"
9|53| Say, "Whether you make the contribution willingly or unwillingly, it shall not be accepted from you. Indeed, you are a people working against Allah's commandments." 
9|54| And nothing prevents their contributions being accepted from them, except that they disbelieve in Allah and in His Messenger. And they do not come to prayer but sluggishly, and they do not contribute but unwillingly.
9|55| Let not their wealth and their children then impress you. Allah wishes only to punish them with these, in this life, and to cause their souls to depart while they suppress the Truth.
9|56| And they swear by Allah that they are indeed with you. And they are not with you, but they are a people who are scared. 
9|57| If they could find a refuge or caves or a place to go to, they would certainly have rushed thereto.
9|58| And among them are those who blame you for misuse of the welfare funds. If they are given anything from it they are pleased. And if they are not given anything from it, they are indignant.
9|59| And if only they were content with what Allah and His Messenger gave them! And had they only said, "Allah is sufficient for us. Allah and His Messenger will give us out of His grace. To Allah indeed we do turn in hope and humility!"
9|60| The Sadaqaatare to be spent only for the poor, the needy, the administrators over them, for those whose hearts are to be reconciled, the captives, those in debts, in the way of Allah and for the wayfarer. It's a mandatory ordinance from Allah. And Allah is Knowledgeable, Wise.
9|61| And among them are those who hurt the Prophet and say, "He is all ear." Say, "His ear ish for what is good for you. He believes in Allah and believes those who believe and is a mercy for those of you who believe." And for those who hurt the Messenger of Allah, a painful punishment.
9|62| They swear to you by Allah, so that they might thereby please you! Allah — and His Messenger — has a greater right that they should please Him, if they do believe.
9|63| Do they not know that he, who opposes Allah and His Messenger, shall surely have the fire of Hell to abide in? That is the great disgrace!
9|64| The hypocrites fear lest a chapter of the Qur'aan should be sent down to them telling them plainly of what is in their hearts. Say, "Mock you may ! Allah will indeed bring out what you fear."
9|65| And if you should question them, they would certainly say, "We were just passing our time with idle talk." Say, "Was it at Allah and His Verses and His Messenger that you mocked!?"
9|66| Make no excuses. You have resorted to suppression of the Truth indeed after you had registered your belief. If We do pardon a section of you, We do punish another because they are sinners.
9|67| The hypocritical men and the hypocritical women are all alike. They enjoin evil and forbid good and wit old their hands from doing good. They have forgotten Allah, so He has forgotten them. Indeed these — the hypocrites — are the rebels.
9|68| Allah has promised to the hypocritical men, the hypocritical women and the suppressors of the Truth, the fire of Hell to abide therein. It is enough for them. And Allah has cursed them. And they shall have lasting punishment.
9|69| Like those before you; they were stronger than you in power and more abundant in wealth and children, and they enjoyed their lot. And you have enjoyed your lot as those before you enjoyed their lot. And you indulged in vain talk like they did. Those it is that lost their deeds in this world and in the other. And those are the ones that are doomed!
9|70| Has not the information about those before them come to them — of the people of Noah, AAad and Thamood, the people of Abraham, the dwellers of Madian and the overturned cities [of the people of Lot]? Their Messengers came to them with clear Messages. And it was not Allah Who wronged them, but they wronged themselves.
9|71| And the believing men and the believing women have close friendly relations with one another. They enjoin good and forbid evil, establish proper prayers, give charity and obey Allah and His Messenger. Allah will be merciful to them. Allah is indeed Omnipotent, Wise.
9|72| Allah has promised to the believing men and the believing women gardens, beneath which rivers flow. They will live therein in well-furnished houses built within gardens of perpetual abode. And the best thing there will be Allah being well-pleased with them. That then is the highest success.
9|73| O Prophet! Wage a struggle against the suppressors of the Truth and the hypocrites and be severe on them. And their abode is Hell, and it is the worst destination.
9|74| They swear by Allah that they did not utter, and certainly they did utter, the word signifying suppression of the Truth. And they suppressed the Truth after they had declared their faith in Islam. And they intended to do what they could not. And they avenged not except for this that Allah and His Messenger enriched them out of His grace.Now if they repent, it will be good for them. And if they turn back to their evil ways, Allah will punish them with a painful punishment in this world and in the Hereafter. And they shall have none to be close to or to help them on earth.
9|75| And there are those of them who sought a covenant with Allah, "If He gives us out of His grace, we will certainly subscribe to the Welfare Fund, and we will certainly be of those who do good deeds."
9|76| But when He gave them out of His grace, they became miserly with it and they turned back and withdrew.
9|77| So He made hypocrisy to follow them in their hearts till the Day when they shall meet Him because they broke their covenant with Allah and because they lied.
9|78| Do they not know that Allah knows their hidden thoughts and their secret counsels, and that Allah is the great Knower of the unseen things?
9|79| As for those who criticise and scoff at the believers who obediently contribute to the Welfare Fund, and at the believers who find nothing to give but their earnings, Allah scoffs at such scoffers, and they shall have a painful punishment.
9|80| Whether you ask forgiveness for them or not — and even if you ask forgiveness seventy times for them — Allah will forgive them not! That is because they suppress the Reality of Allah and His Messenger. And Allah does not guide the people who rebel against Allah's commandments.
9|81| Those that remained back were pleased with their sitting back against Allah's Messenger and they were averse to striving in Allah's Path with their wealth and their lives. And they said, "Do not travel in the heat." Say, "The Hell fire is the most severe in heat, if only they could understand."
9|82| They shall laugh little then and weep more as a consequence of what they earned.
9|83| Then if Allah brings you back to any section of them and they ask your permission to go out on an expedition, say, "Never shall you go out with me and never shall you fight an enemy with me. You were indeed content to stay put the first time, stay put now too with those who stay behind."
9|84| And never offer prayer for any one of them who dies, and never stand by his grave. They did indeed suppress the Reality of Allah and His Messenger. And they shall die in a state of rebellion against Allah's commandments.
9|85| And let not their wealth and their children impress you. Allah only wishes to punish them with these in this world and to cause their souls to depart while they indulge in suppression of the Truth.
9|86| And when a Qur'aanic Chapter is revealed, exhorting people to believe in Allah and engage themselves in righteous struggle along with His Messenger, those with means plead with you and say, "Grant us leave to be with those who stay back."
9|87| They chose to be with those back home, and a seal is set on their hearts so they do not understand.
9|88| But the Messenger and those who believe with him engage themselves in righteous struggle with their wealth and their lives. And for those certainly, are the good things. And those it is that succeed.
9|89| Allah has prepared for them gardens, beneath which rivers flow, wherein to live. That is the highest success.
9|90| And there came to you those from among the Bedouins who had excuses to offer for exempting them from joining the expedition. And those who denied Allah and His Messenger, sat at home. A painful punishment shall afflict those of them who suppressed the Truth.
9|91| There is no blame on the weak, the sick, or on those who do not find the means to spend for the expedition, so long as they are sincere to Allah and His Messenger. No ground to blame the righteous people. And Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.
9|92| And there is no blame on those who when they came to you to equip them for the expedition, you said, "I find no means to equip you." They went back and their eyes welled up with tears for grief at not finding the means to bear the expenses for the expedition.
9|93| The blame lies only on those who ask you to grant them leave despite being rich. They chose to be with those staying back home. And Allah has set a seal upon their hearts so they do not know.
9|94| They will come up to you with excuses when you go back to them. Say, "Give no excuses, we won't believe you! Allah has already informed us about you. And Allah and His Messenger will watch your deeds. Then you shall be returned to the Knower of the unseen and the seen. Then He will inform you of what you had been doing."
9|95| They will swear to you by Allah when you return to them, in order that you take no action against them. Do leave them alone! They are indeed pollution. And their abode is Hell — a retribution for what they earned.
9|96| They will swear to you in order that you may be pleased with them. And even if you are pleased with them, Allah is indeed not pleased with the people who rebel against Allah's commandments.
9|97| The Bedouin Arabs are more involved in suppression of the Truth and in hypocrisy, and more disposed not to know the laws that Allah has revealed to His Messenger. And Allah is Knowledgeable, Wise.
9|98| And among the Bedouin Arabs there are those who take what they spend [in Allah's way] as an imposition, and they wait for turns in fortune for you. But it is upon them that the evil turn shall befall. And Allah listens, knows.
9|99| And among the Bedouin Arabs there are those who believe in Allah and the Hereafter and take what they spend as means of nearness with Allah and blessings of the Messenger. Surely it shall be the means of nearness for them. Allah will admit them to His Mercy. Indeed, Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.
9|100| And Allah is pleased with the first and the foremost of those who migrated and with those who gave shelter, and with those who followed them in goodness. And they are pleased with Him. And He has prepared for them gardens beneath which rivers flow, wherein to live for ever. That is the highest success.
9|101| And some of the Bedouins around you are hypocrites, and so are some residents of Medina. They are insolent in hypocrisy. You do not know them; We know them. Twice shall We punish them. And then will they be brought back for the highest punishment. 
9|102| And there are others who have confessed that they were at fault. They have mingled a good deed with a bad one. Allah may pardon them. Indeed, Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.
9|103| Take a fine as sadaqa from them to cleanse and purify them thereby, and pray for them! Your prayer does indeed give them peace of mind. And Allah listens, knows.
9|104| Do they not know that it is Allah Who accepts repentance from His subjectsh and takes the sadaqaat, and that Allah is the Acceptor of repentance, the Merciful?
9|105| And say, "Go on, do your deeds! Allah, His Messenger and the believers will watch your deeds. And you shall be brought back to the Knower of the unseen and the seen. Then He will inform you of what you did."
9|106| And there are others whose cases are deferred for Allah's decree. He may punish them or He may pardon them. And Allah is Knowledgeable, Wise.
9|107| And those who established a masjid to cause harm and for suppression of Truth and to cause disunion among the believers and to serve as a base for him who made war against Allah and His Messenger before. And they will certainly swear, "Our intentions were nothing but good." And Allah bears witness that they are most surely liars.
9|108| Never should you stand in it! Certainly the masjid founded on piety from the very first day is more deserving that you stand therein. In it are men who love to be pure and clean. And Allah loves those who get themselves purified and cleaned.
9|109| Who is better then: the one who lays his foundation on fear of Allah and His good pleasure, or the one who lays his foundation on the brink of a crumbling hollowed bank, and which crumbles down with him into the fire of Hell ? And Allah does not guide the people who deliberately do wrong, unjust things.
9|110| This structure which they have built will not diminish the doubt in their hearts, unless their hearts get cut into pieces. And Allah is Knowledgeable, Wise.
9|111| Indeed, Allah has bought from the believers their lives and their property for this, that they shall have the Paradise. They fight in Allah's Path, so they kill and get killed. It is a promise which He has bound Himself to, in the Torah, the Gospel and the Qur'aan. And who can be more faithful to one's promise than Allah? So rejoice at the bargain you have struck; for, that is the highest success.
9|112| And give this good news to those who repent, obey, praise Allah, fast, bow down and prostrate to Him, enjoin what is good and forbid what is evil, and, abide by Allah's laws.
9|113| It does not behove the Prophet and those who believe that they should ask forgiveness for the polytheists, even if they are near relatives, after it has become clear to them that they would be inmates of the flaming Fire.
9|114| And Abraham asking forgiveness for his father was only because of to a promise which the former had made to the latter. But when it became clear to him (Abraham) that he (father) was an enemy of Allah, he disassociated from his father. Abraham was indeed very tender- hearted, kind.
9|115| Allah would never lead a people astray after guiding them to His Straight Path until He makes clear to them what they should guard against. Allah does indeed know all things.
9|116| Allah does indeed hold the absolute sovereignty over the heavens and the earth. He gives life and causes death. And there is none, other than Allah, to patronise and help you.
9|117| Certainly has Allah pardoned the Prophet, the refugees and the helpers — those who followed him in the hour of need, after the hearts of a section of them were about to deviate and He pardoned them. He is indeed Kind, Merciful to them.
9|118| And He pardoned the threewho were left behind, whose cases were deferred until the earth, vast though it is, became straitened unto them and their own selves became straitened to them. And they knew it for certain that there was no refuge from Allah but unto Him. Then He pardoned them that they might repent. Indeed, Allah is the One Who forgives, the One Who is Merciful.
9|119| O you who believe! Fear Allah and be on the side of the righteous ones.
9|120| It did not behove the inhabitants of Medina, and those around them of the Bedouins, to lag behind Allah's Messenger, nor to prefer their own selves over his. Because, no thirst, fatigue or hunger in Allah's way afflicts them, nor do they tread a path that enrages the suppressors of the Truth, nor do they attain from the enemy an attainment, but a good work is credited to their account therefor. Allah does indeed not allow the reward of good people to go waste.
9|121| And they spend not a spending, small or big, and they traverse not a valley, but it is credited to their account for Allah to reward them with the best of what they have done.
9|122| And the believers cannot move out, all of them, at one time. Then why should not a group from among every section move out to get deeper understanding of the Religion, so that they may warn their people when they come back to them to be pious? 
9|123| O you who believe! Fight those of the suppressors of Truth who are near to you and they should find you stern and firm. And know that Allah is with those who fear Him.
9|124| And whenever a Chapter is revealed, there are some of them who say, "Has it strengthened the faith of anyone amongst you?" It has indeed strengthened the faith of those who believe, and they rejoice.
9|125| And as for those in whose hearts is a disease, it adds dirt to their dirt. And they die as suppressors of the Truth.
9|126| Do they not see that they are tried once or twice every year? Yet they repent not, nor do they take heed.
9|127| And whenever a Chapter is revealed, they cast glances at one another, "Does any one see you?" Then they leave. It is Allah Who has left their hearts because they are a people who do not understand.
9|128| Certainly, a Messenger has come to you from among yourselves. Solicitous of you, your distress is disturbing to him. To the believers he is compassionate, merciful.
9|129| Yet, if they turn away, say, "Allah is enough for me; there is no god but He. On Him I do place my trust. And He is Lord of the Mighty Throne.
10|1| Alif Lam Ra. These are Verses of the Book of Wisdom.
10|2| Is it a matter to wonder at for the people that We revealed to a man from among themselves that he should warn the people and give good news to those who believe that there shall be a truly secure position for them with their Lord? The suppressors of the Truth say, "This man is clearly indeed a magician!"
10|3| Indeed, Allah, your Lord, is He Who created the heavens and the earth in six periods in time, then ascended to the Throne, assuming absolute command. No intercessor can dare intercede except after His permission. That is Allah, your Lord; so worship Him! Would you not then take heed?
10|4| To Him is your return all together — a promise of Allah in truth. He originates creation, and then He recreates it so that He may justly recompense those who believe and do good deeds. And as for those who suppress the Truth, they shall have boiling water to drink and shall suffer a painful punishment for their suppression of the Truth.
10|5| He it is Who made the sun a source of light and the moon a light, and ordained for it phases that you might count years and keep accounts. Allah did not create all that but on purpose. He explains the Verses/signs for people who know. 
10|6| Indeed, in the variation of the night and the day, and in what Allah has created in the heavens and the earth, there are signs for people who fear Him.h 
10|7| Indeed, those who do not expect to meet Us and are pleased with this world's life and are content with it, and those who are heedless of Our Verses/signs,
10|8| Their abode is the Fire because of what they earned.
10|9| Indeed, those who believe and do good deeds, their Lord shall guide them by their faith. There shall flow from beneath them rivers in gardens of bliss.
10|10| Their call in it shall be, `Glory to You, O Allah!' and their greeting in it shall be, `Peace.' And their call shall end with, `Praise is to Allah, the Lord of the worlds.'
10|11| And if Allah should hasten bad things to happen to men as they desire the good things to hasten to them, their doom should certainly have been decreed for them. But We leave them to wander blindly in their inordinateness — those who expect not to meet Us.
10|12| And when any bad thing afflicts man, he calls Us, lying on his side, sitting or standing. But when We remove his affliction from him, he goes on as if he had never called to Us regarding the bad thing that afflicted him. Their deeds are thus made to look good to the transgressors.
10|13| And certainly We did destroy generations before you when they became unjust. And their Messengers had come to them with clear signs, but they would not believe. We did thus give the sinning people their dues.
10|14| Then We made you their successors on the earth to see how you act.
10|15| And when Our clear Verses are recited to them, those who expect not to meet Us, say, "Bring a Qur'aan other than this, or change it." Say, "I cannot change it on my own initiative. I follow naught but what is revealed to me. I do indeed fear the punishment of a great Day, if I disobey my Lord."
10|16| Say, "If Allah had so willed, I would not have recited it to you, nor would you have known anything about it. I did live a lifetime among you before it. Don't you then understand?"
10|17| Who is then more unjust than he who forges a lie against Allah or denies His Verses/signs? Never shall the sinners succeed.
10|18| And they worship, besides Allah, what can neither harm them nor benefit them, and they say, "These are our intercessors with Allah." Say, "Do you inform Allah of what He knows not in the heavens and the earth!?" Glorified and supremely exalted is He above what they worship besides Him.
10|19| And mankind is naught but a single community, and yet they differ. Had it not been for a word already gone forth from your Lord, the issues, on which they differ, would have certainly been decided among them.
10|20| And they say, "Why is no sign sent to him from his Lord?" Say, "The knowledge of the unseen is only with Allah. Well, wait! I am indeed with you among those who wait."h 
10|21| And when We make people taste mercy after a bad thing afflicts them, then it is that they plan to subvert Our Verses/signs. Say, "Allah is quicker in planning. Our messengers do indeed write down what you plan."
10|22| He it is Who facilitates your movement by land and sea and you get into the ship. And the ship sails on with a pleasant breeze blowing and with people rejoicing the ride, until a violent wind overtakes them and the billows surge in on them from all sides, and they become certain that they are engulfed therein. They then pray to Allah in all sincerity and obedience to Him, "If You do deliver us from this, we will most certainly be grateful."
10|23| But when He delivers them, behold! They become unduly rebellious on earth. "O mankind! Your rebellion will affect you yourselves. These here are the provisions only of this temporal life. To Us is your return thereafter. Then We will relate to you what you did."
10|24| This life is but like water which We send down from the sky. Spring forth therewith all kinds of vegetation on the earth, of which men and cattle eat. Until, when the earth puts on its golden raiment and it becomes adorned, and its people think that they have mastery over it, Our command comes to it, by night or by day, and We make it barren, as though it had not flourished anytime in the recent past. Thus do We explain the Verses/signs for a people who reflect.
10|25| And Allah invites to the abode of peace and guides, whom He pleases, to the Straight Path.
10|26| There is good — and more besides — for those who do good. And no gloom and no ignominy shall cover their faces. Those shall be the inmates of the Garden. Therein they shall abide.
10|27| And as for those who have earned evil, the punishment for an evil is the like thereof, and ignominy shall cover them — they shall have none to protect them from Allah — as if their faces were covered with slices of the dense darkness of night. Those shall be the inmates of the Fire. Therein they shall abide.
10|28| And on the day We gather them all together, We will say to those who worshipped others besides Allah, "Be there where you are — you and your gods other than Allah!" We shall then separate them, one from another. And their gods would say, "It was not us that you worshipped."
10|29| "And Allah is sufficient as a witness, between us and you, that we were quite unaware of your worship."
10|30| There, everyone will be tried for what it did before, and they shall be brought back to Allah, their true Patron. And what they concocted shall desert them.
10|31| Ask them, "Who provides for you means of sustenance from the heavens and the earth? Or Who controls the hearing and the sights? And Who brings out the living from the dead, and the dead from the living? And Who plans the affairs prudently and executes them well?" They will reply, "Allah." Then ask, "Won't you then fear Him!?"
10|32| This then is Allah, your true Lord! And what remains there after the truth but error? How could you then be turned away from this Absolute Truth?
10|33| Thus is your Lord's word, that they will not believe, proved true with regard to such as defiantly disobey Allah.
10|34| Say, "Is there any one among those whom you worship besides Allah, who can pioneer the creation and then reproduce it?" Say, "Allah pioneers the creation and then He reproduces it. How then are you fooled by falsehood?"
10|35| Say, "Is there anyone, among those whom you worship besides Allah, who guides to the truth?" Say, "Allah it is Who guides to the truth. Is He then Who guides to the truth more worthy to be followed, or he who himself does not go aright unless he is guided? What's the matter with you? How wrongly do you make your decisions?"
10|36| And most of them do not follow anything but conjecture. Conjecture will avail nothing indeed against the Truth. Allah is indeed aware of what they do.
10|37| And this Qur'aan is not such as could be forged by those besides Allah. But it is a confirmation of what came before it. And it is, no doubt, the book, explained in details, from the Lord of the worlds. 
10|38| Or do they say that he (the Prophet) has forged it? Say, "Then bring a chapter like this and invite whom you can, besides Allah, if you are truthful."
10|39| Nay, they reject all that is beyond their knowledge and comprehension, as false. So did those before them. And see what happened to those wicked people !
10|40| And among them is he who believes in it and among them is he who does not believe in it, and your Lord knows the troublemakers.
10|41| And if they belie you, say, "I am responsible for what I do and you, for what you do. You are free of any responsibility for what I do and I am free of any responsibility for what you do.
10|42| And there are those of them who appear to be listening to you. But can you make the deaf to listen even when they cannot understand?
10|43| And there are those of them who appear to be looking at you. But can you give guidance to the blind even when they cannot see?
10|44| Indeed, Allah does not wrong mankind in anything, but they wrong themselves.
10|45| And the day He will resurrect them and gather them all together, they will introduce one another as if they had halted but for a little while of daytime. Those who belied their meeting with Allah are indeed doomed, and they were not on right guidance.
10|46| And if We show you some of the things We promised to them, or if We cause you to die, yet to Us is their return, and Allah is witness to what they do.
10|47| And for every Ummaa Messenger. And when their Messenger came, they were judged equitably and they were not wronged. 
10|48| And they ask, "When will this prophecy come about, if what you say is true?"
10|49| Say, "I have no control over any harm, or any benefit, coming to me, except what Allah pleases. Every Ummah has its term. When their term comes, they shall not then remain here a moment more, nor can they go before their time."
10|50| Say, "Have you ever considered that if His punishment overtakes you by night or by day, what then would there be for the sinners to ask for hastening of?" 
10|51| And will you believe in it only when it comes to pass? What then!? And you did want it hastened?
10|52| Then those who did wrong shall be told, "Taste the everlasting punishment! Was it not but what you deserved?"
10|53| And they ask you, "Is that true?" Say, "Yes, by my Lord! It is indeed the truth. And you cannot elude it."
10|54| And had every unjust Person all that is in the earth, he would certainly offer it to ransom himself. And they will feel regret in their hearts the moment they see the punishment they would be made to suffer. And they shall be judged equitably and they shall not be wronged!
10|55| Beware! To Allah does certainly belong all that is in the heavens and the earth. Beware! Allah's promise is indeed true, but most of them know not.
10|56| He it is Who gives life and causes death, and to Him you shall be returned!
10|57| O mankind! Admonition from your Lord and remedy for what the hearts harbour has surely come to you, and guidance and mercy for the believers.
10|58| Say, "In the grace of Allah and in His mercy — in that they should rejoice. That is better than what they gather."
10|59| Say, "Do you see that you make a part of what Allah has sent down for you as sustenance unlawful, and a part, lawful." Say, "Has Allah commanded you to do so? Or do you forge a lie against Allah?"
10|60| And what will be the thought of those who forge lies against Allah on the day of Resurrection? Allah is indeed full of grace for mankind, but most of them are ungrateful.
10|61| And you are engaged not in anything, and you read not concerning it in any portion of the Qur'aan, and you do not do any deed, but We are witnesses over you when you get involved therein. And not an atom-weight of anything, in the earth or in the heavens, lies concealed from your Lord. Nor is there anything less than that or greater, but recorded in a book manifest.
10|62| Verily, those that are close to Allah shall indeed have no fear. Nor shall they grieve.
10|63| Those that believe and fear Allah.
10|64| For them there is good news in this world's life and in the Hereafter. - Allah's words never change! - That is the highest success.
10|65| And let not what they say grieve you. To Allah indeed belongs all the honour. He is theh One Who hears and knows all things.
10|66| Verily, indeed, to Allah belongs whatever there is in the heavens and whatever there is in the earth. And they, who call on others besides Allah, follow not any associates of His! They follow not but conjectures and they do not but guess.
10|67| He it is Who made for you the night that you might rest in it, and the day wherein one can see things clearly. Indeed, there are signs therein for people who would hear.
10|68| They say, "Allah has got a son!" Glorified is He — the Self-sufficient. His is what is in the heavens and what is in the earth. You have no authority over any of this. How can you say about Allah what you do not know?
10|69| Say, "They, who forge a lie about Allah, shall not succeed!"
10|70| After this temporary provision in this world, to Us shall be their return. Then We shall make them taste severe punishment because they suppressed the Truth.
10|71| And recite to them the story of Noah when he said to his people, "O my people! If my stay and my reminding (you) of the signs/Verses of Allah is hard on you — and on Allah yet do I rely — then combine your efforts and of those whom you worship besides Allah, then let not your effort remain dubious to you, then have it executed against me and give me no respite."
10|72| "And if you turn away, I did not ask for any reward from you; my reward is only with Allah. And I am commanded that I should be of those who submit."
10|73| Then they rejected him, so We saved him, and those with him, in the Ark, and We made them vicegerents and drowned those who rejected Our Verses/signs. See then what happened in the end to those who were warned.
10|74| Then did We raise up after him Messengers to their people, and they came to them with clear evidences. But they could not believe in what they had rejected before. Thus it is that We set seals upon the hearts of those who exceed the limits.
10|75| Then did We raise up after them Moses and Aaron and send them to Pharaoh and his nobles with Our signs. But they were too proud and they were a sinning people.
10|76| So when the truth came to them from Us they said, "This indeed is magic manifest!"
10|77| Moses said, "Do you say this of the truth when it comes to you? Is this magic? And the magicians prevail not!"
10|78| They said, "Have you come to us to turn us away from what we found our fathers upon, and is greatness bestowed just on you two on earth? And we are not going to believe in you."
10|79| And Pharaoh ordered, "Bring to me every expert magician."
10|80| And when the magicians came, Moses said to them, "Cast down what you have to cast."
10|81| So when they cast down their contraptions, Moses said to them, "What you have brought is deception. Allah will indeed bring it to naught. Allah does indeed not promote the work of those who spread discord."
10|82| And Allah will show the truth to be the truth by His commands, even though the criminals may not like it. 
10|83| So then none believed in Moses — except for the progeny of his own people — out of fear of Pharaoh and their nobles, lest he should persecute them. And indeed did Pharaoh have some power on the earth and indeed he was of those who committed excesses.
10|84| And Moses said, "O my people! If you do believe in Allah and if you are of those who do submit to Him, then do trust Him."
10|85| So they said, "On Allah do we trust. O our Lord! Subject us not to the persecution of the unjust people."
10|86| "And do deliver us, by Your mercy, from the people who suppress the Truth."
10|87| And We told Moses and his brother, "Prepare some houses in Egypt as spiritual centres for your people and establish prayer. And give good tidings to the believers."
10|88| And Moses said, "Our Lord! You have indeed given Pharaoh and his nobles glamour and riches in the life this world. Our Lord! You have given them this so that they go astray from Your Path. Our Lord! Spread destruction over their riches and harden their hearts so that they believe not until they see the painful punishment."
10|89| Allah said, "The prayer of you two has indeed been accepted, be steadfast and follow not the path of those who do not know."
10|90| And We made the Children of Israel cross the sea. Then Pharaoh and his armies followed them with aggressive and inimical intentions. Until, when about to be drowned, he (Pharaoh) said, "I believe that there is no god but He in Whom the Children of Israel believe and I am of those who submit."
10|91| "Now! And you did disobey before and you were of those who spread corruption and discord."
10|92| "But then We do, this day, save you in your body so that you become a sign for generations that would come after you. And, indeed, most people are oblivious to Our signs." @ @ This revelation about the saving of the Pharaoh's body was made in the seventh century A.D. Although the Bible recounts the exodus and the drowning of the Pharaoh, it makes no mention of his body having been saved — nor does the Torah do it. And there is no evidence at all that anyone knew about it when the Qur'aan made this revelation. And except for the believers, no one knew about it as a fact till the nineteenth century when the body was discovered [Watch the YouTube Video]. This is one of the many signs giving clear indication of the Qur'aan being divine. But man in his self-destuctive obstinacy believes not!
10|93| And certainly did We settle the Children of Israel in a true settlement and We provided them with good things. And they differed not until the knowledge had come to them! Your Lord will indeed settle among them, on the Resurrection Day, the matters in which they differed.
10|94| But if you are in doubt about what We have revealed to you, ask those who read the Book revealed before you. Certainly, the truth has come to you from your Lord. Be not then of those who doubt.
10|95| And you should not be of those who deny the Verses/signs of Allah; for, then, you should be of those who are doomed.
10|96| Indeed, those, upon whom the word of condemnation from your Lord has in truth been decreed, shall not believe,
10|97| Though every sign comes to them, until they witness the painful punishment.
10|98| Why then was there no human settlement, other than the people of Jonah, which would believe and then their belief would prove profitable to them? When they (the people of Jonah) believed, We removed from them the punishment of disgrace in this world's life and, for an appointed time, We made their lives comfortable and easy.
10|99| And if your Lord had so willed, certainly, all on earth would have believed. Could you then make mankind unwillingly to believe?
10|100| And it is not possible for anyone to believe except by Allah's leave. And He causes ignominy to befall those who would not use their intelligence.
10|101| Say, "Observe what there is in the heavens and the earth." And signs and warnings do not benefit a people who believe not.
10|102| What do they wait for then but the like of the times of those who passed away before them?hSay, "Wait then! I too am indeed with you among those who wait."
10|103| We then saved Our Messengers and those who believe. Likewise, it is binding on Us that We save the believers.
10|104| Say, "O mankind! If you are in doubt as to my way of life, then know that I do not worship those whom you worship besides Allah; but I do worship Allah, Who causes you to die. And I am commanded that I should be of those who believe."
10|105| And that "you should keep yourself steadfastly and uprightly on that way of life. And you should not be of those who worship others besides Allah."
10|106| "And pray not, besides Allah, to others who can neither benefit nor harm you. And if you do so, then, indeed, you will in that case be of those who do wrong."
10|107| And if Allah should afflict you with harm, then there is none to remove it but He. And if He intends doing something good to you, then there is none to cancel His Grace, which He bestows upon whom He wills of His subjects. And He is the One Who forgives, the One Who bestows mercy.
10|108| Say, "O mankind! Indeed, there has come to you the Truth from your Lord. So whoever is guided, he is guided only for the good of his own self. And whoever goes astray, he goes astray only to the detriment of his own self. And I am not a guardian over you."
10|109| And follow what is revealed to you and be patient till Allah gives His ruling. And He is the best of the rulers. 
11|1| Alif Lam Ra. This is a Book, Verses in which are ordained and then explained from the One Who is Wise and Well-aware.
11|2| [And the Messenger proclaims to mankind,] "You shall worship none but Allah. I am indeed from Him a warner for you and a herald of good news."
11|3| "And that you ask forgiveness of your Lord, and then turn to Him in repentance. He will provide you with a good provision for an appointed term and give everyone one's dues. And if you turn away, then indeed I fear for you the punishment of a very hard day.
11|4| To Allah is your return, and He has power over all things.
11|5| Do they indeed not shut their minds to conceal their thoughts from Him? Does He not know what they conceal and what they reveal, when they put on their garments? He does indeed know what is in the minds.
11|6| And no moving creature on earth but on Allah is its sustenance. And He knows where it lives and where its remains are. Everything is in a manifest Record.
11|7| And He it is Who created the heavens and the earth in six periods of time — and His Throne was on ether — that He might test you as to which of you are better in deeds. And if you say, `You shall indeed be raised up after death', those who suppress the Truth would certainly counter, `This is nothing but sheer delusion.'
11|8| And if We put off the punishment from them for a certain period of time, they will certainly say, "What holds it back?" Verily on the day when it will come to them, nothing can turn it away from them. And that which they scoffed at shall besiege them.
11|9| And, certainly, if We make man taste mercy from Us and then take it off from him, he is indeed sure to despair and be ungrateful.
11|10| And if We make him taste a favour after distress has afflicted him, he will certainly say, "Bad days have gone away from me." He certainly indeed exults, boasts.
11|11| But not those who are patient and do good deeds. For them shall there be forgiveness and a great reward.
11|12| Then, in order that you abandon part of what is revealed to you and your mind becomes dustressed by it that they say, "Why has not a treasure been sent down upon him or an angel come with him?" You are only a warner; and Allah is the One to take care of all things.
11|13| Or, they say, "He has forged it." Say, "Then bring ten chapters similarly forged and call for aid from whom you can besides Allah, if what you say is the truth.
11|14| If they do not respond to you, then know that it (the Qur'aan) is revealed with Allah's knowledge and that there is no god but He. Will you then be the ones who submit?
11|15| Whoever desires the life of this world and its charm, We will repay them in full their deeds therein, and therein they shall not be wronged.
11|16| These are they for whom there is nothing but the Fire in the Hereafter. And what they do here, in this world, shall be of no use there. And what they do here is false and futile.
11|17| What then about the one who stands on clear evidence from his Lord and a witness from Him recites it — and before it, was there the Book of Moses, a precedent and mercy? Such are the ones that believe in it. And whoever, of the tribes, that suppresses the truth in it, the promise to him shall be the Fire. Be not then in doubt about it. It is indeed the Truth from your Lord, but most people believe not.
11|18| And who is more unjust than he who forges a lie against Allah? These shall be brought before their Lord, and the witnesses shall say, "These are they who lied against their Lord." Verily Allah's curse is on the unjust —
11|19| On those that turn people away from Allah's Path and seek to distort it — and those are the ones that believe not in the Hereafter.
11|20| They are in no position to frustrate Allah's Will on the earth, nor can they have any awliya besides Allah. The punishment shall be doubled for them. They could not hear nor see the Truth.
11|21| Those are the ones that have doomed themselves. And what they concocted has deserted them.
11|22| No doubt, they are the ones that shall in the Hereafter be doomed.
11|23| Indeed, as for those who believe and do good deeds and are humble towards their Lord, they are the dwellers of the Garden. They shall reside therein forever.
11|24| Are the examples of two persons — one blind and deaf, and the other who sees and hears — the same? Don't you then reflect?
11|25| And We did send Noah to his people. He told them, "I have indeed come to give you a plain warning."
11|26| "That you shall not worship anyone but Allah. I do indeed fear for you the punishment of a painful day."
11|27| And the chiefs of those who suppressed the Truth from among his people said, "We do not consider you but a man like us, and we do not see any have followed you but those meanest amongst us who have just followed you without conviction. And we do not see in you any excellence over us; nay, we deem you liars."
11|28| He said, "O my people! Do you see that if I have been on clear evidence from my Lord and He has bestowed upon me mercy from Himself, and it is obscure to you, can we force it on you while you are averse to it?"
11|29| "And, O my people! I ask you not for any material compensation for it; my reward is upon none but Allah. And I am not going to drive away those who believe. They shall certainly meet their Lord. And, on the other hand, I see you as an ignorant people.
11|30| "And, O my people! Who is there to help me against Allah if I drive them away? Won't you reflect on this?"
11|31| "And I do not say to you that I have the treasures of Allah. And I do not know the unseen, and I do not say I am an angel, nor do I say that Allah will never grant any good things to those who are mean in your eyes. Allah knows well what is there in them. I would indeed be of the unjust, otherwise."
11|32| They said, "O Noah! You did argue with us a great deal. Now bring us what you threaten us with, if what you say is the truth."
11|33| He said, "Only Allah will bring it to you if He wills, and you won't be able to do anything to prevent it."
11|34| "And if I intend to give you advice, my advice will not profit you if Allah intended that He should leave you go astray. He is your Lord, and to Him shall you be returned."
11|35| They do say, "He has concocted it." Say, "If I have concocted it, then it is my sin and I shall be punished for it. But the responsibility for the sin you commit shall not be on me."h 
11|36| And it was revealed to Noah, "None of your people will believe except those who have already believed. So grieve not at what they do."
11|37| "And construct the ark under Our supervision and guidance, and do not address Me for those who are unjust. They shall indeed be drowned."
11|38| And he began constructing the ark. And whenever the chiefs from among his people passed by him, they laughed at him. He said, "If you laugh at us, we too indeed laugh at you as you laugh at us."
11|39| "So you shall soon come to know on whom will a punishment come that will disgrace him, and on whom will the lasting punishment be imposed."
11|40| Until when Our command came to be executed and the oven boiled over, We said, "Carryh in it two of every pair, your own family — except those against whom the divine decree has already come — and those who believe." And only a few had believed with him.
11|41| And he said, "Get on board! In the name of Allah are its sailing and its anchoring. My Lord is indeed Forgiving, Merciful."
11|42| And it moved on with them amid waves like mountains, and Noah called out to his son, and he was isolated from others, "O my son! Get on board with us and be not with those who suppress the Truth."
11|43| He said, "I will take shelter on a mountain that shall protect me from the water." Noah said, "There is no protection today from Allah's command but for him on whom He shows mercy." And a wave intervened between them, and he (the son) was drowned.
11|44| And it was decreed, "O earth, swallow down your water, and O sky, stop!" And the water was made to abate and the divine Will, accomplished. And the Ark came to rest on the Judi, and it was proclaimed, "Away with the unjust people."
11|45| And Noah called upon his Lord and said, "My Lord! My son indeed is a member of my family, and Your promise is indeed true, and You are the best Judge."
11|46| He said, "O Noah! He is indeed not of your family. His deeds indeed are not good. Put Me no questions then about things of which you are given no knowledge. I do indeed admonish you lest you be of those who do things ignorantly."
11|47| He said, "My Lord! I seek refuge in You lest I again put questions to You about things of which I am given no knowledge. And should You forgive me not and have no mercy on me, I should then be of those who are doomed."
11|48| It was said, "O Noah! Disembark, with peace from Us and blessings on you and on those of the communities, who are with you. And there will be communities whom We shall provide for, and then a painful punishment from Us shall afflict them.
11|49| These are narratives relating to the unseen which We reveal to you. You did not know them — neither you nor your people — before this. Do have patience then! The end shall indeed be in favour of those who fear Allah.
11|50| And to the people of AAad We sent their brother Hood. He said, "O my people! Worship Allah. You have no god other than Him. You do not but fabricate lies." 
11|51| "O my people! I do not ask of you any reward for it. My reward is only with Him Who created me. Don't you understand?"
11|52| "And, O my people! Ask forgiveness of your Lord and then turn to Him in repentance. He will send down on you abundant rain and add strength to your strength. And do not turn back to sin.
11|53| They said, "O Hood! You have not brought to us any clear sign and we are not going to desert our gods on your word, and we do not believe in you."
11|54| "We do not but say that some of our gods have worked evil on you." He said, "I do indeed call Allah to witness — and you do bear witness — that I am absolutely free of the sin you commit of worshipping anyone..."
11|55| "... other than Him. All of you do together scheme against me then, and give me no respite."
11|56| "I do indeed have trust in Allah, my Lord and your Lord. There is no living creature but He holds it by its forelock. My Lord is indeed on the Straight Path."
11|57| "And if you turn away, then indeed I have delivered to you what I have been sent to you with. And my Lord will bring another people in your place, and you can do Him no harm. My Lord is indeed the Guardian over all things."
11|58| And when Our decree came to pass, We saved Hood, and those who believed with him, as a mercy from Us. And We saved them from a hard punishment.
11|59| And these were the people of AAad! They disputed the Verses/signs of their Lord, disobeyed His Messengers and followed the bidding of anyone obstinately strong and powerful.
11|60| And they were pursued by curse in this world and so will they be, on the Resurrection Day. Verily, AAad suppressed the Truth about their Lord! Verily, indeed, AAad, the people of Hood perished!
11|61| And to the people of ThamoodWe sent their brother Salih. He said, "O my people! Worship Allah, you have no god other than He. He brought you into being from the earth, and made you dwell on it. Ask forgiveness of Him then, and turn to Him in repentance. My Lord is indeed close and He does respond!
11|62| They said, "O Salih! Before this, we did have great expectations in you. Do you now forbid us from worshipping what our fathers worshipped? And we are indeed in great doubt in that which you call us to.
11|63| He said, "O my people! Do you see that if I have been on clear evidence from my Lord and He has bestowed upon me mercy from Himself, who will then help me against Allah if I disobey Him? You would then cause no increase in anything for me, other than in loss."
11|64| "And, O my people, this is Allah's she-camel for you — a sign. So leave her free to pasture on Allah's earth. And do her no harm, for then, soon, a punishment will seize you."
11|65| But they crippled her. Then he said, "Enjoy in your abode just for three days. That is a promise that shall not prove to be false."
11|66| So when Our decree came to pass, We saved Salih, and those who believed with him, by mercy from Us and from the disgrace of that day. Your Lord indeed is the One Strong and Omnipotent.
11|67| And the terribly rumbling sound struck those who were unjust, and they lay prostrate in their houses.
11|68| As though they had never flourished in them. Verily, Thamood suppressed the Truth about their Lord! Verily, Thamood perished.
11|69| And certainly Our messengers came to Abraham with good news. They said, "Peace." "Peace." said he, and he made no delay in bringing a roasted calf.
11|70| But when he saw that their hands were not extended towards it, he had misgivings about them and became fearful of them. They said, "Fear not, we are sent but for people of Lot."
11|71| And his wife, standing by, laughed. Then We gave her the good news of Isaac, and of Jacob after Isaac.
11|72| She said, "Alas! Shall I bear a son when I am an old woman and this my husband an old man? This is indeed a strange thing!
11|73| They said, "Do you consider it strange that Allah does what He wills? Allah's mercy and His blessings are on you, O members of this household! He is indeed Praiseworthy, Glorious."
11|74| And when the fear was gone from Abraham and the good news came to him, he began pleading with Us for the people of Lot!
11|75| Abraham was indeed considerate and tender-hearted, often turning to Allah in repentance.
11|76| "O Abraham! Forget it. The decree of your Lord on this has indeed come to pass. And a punishment, that cannot be undone, is indeed coming to them."
11|77| And when Our Messengers came to Lot, he was worried about them, and he felt powerless to protect them. And he said, "This is a dreadful day!"
11|78| And his people came rushing towards him, and they had indulged in evil deeds before. He said, "O my people! These, my daughters, are purer for you. So fear Allah and do not disgrace me with regard to my guests. Is there no rightly-guided man amongst you?"
11|79| They said, "You do certainly know that we have nothing to do with your daughters. And you do indeed know what we want."
11|80| He said, "I wish I had power to resist you, or had recourse to a strong support."
11|81| They said, "O Lot! We are the Messengers of your Lord. They won't reach you. So leave this place, with your family, sometime in the night. And let none of you tarry, except for your wife. What happens to them shall indeed happen to her. The appointed time for them is the morning indeed. Is not the morning nigh?"
11|82| And when Our decree came to pass, We turned them upside down and rained down upon them layer over layer of stones of dry and hardened mud.
11|83| These stand targeted with your Lord and never far from the unjust.
11|84| And to the people of Midian, We sent their brother Shu'aib. He said, "O my people! Worship Allah. You have no god other than Him. And cheat not in measure and weight. I do indeed see you that you are in prosperity, and I do indeed fear for you the punishment of a Day that will not leave out anything."
11|85| "And, O my people! Give full and fair measure and weight, and defraud not people of their things. And make no mischief on earth, spreading corruption."
11|86| "What lawful gain Allah keeps back for you is better, if you but believe! And I am not a guardian over you."
11|87| They said, "O Shu'aib! Does the code of your worship enjoin you that we should forsake what our fathers worshipped, or that we should not do what we please with our property? You have indeed been the considerate and right-thinking person."
11|88| He said, "O my people! Do you see that, if I have been on clear evidence from my Lord and He has given me a good providence from Him Himself, and I do not wish to do, behind your backs, the very thing that I forbid you from, I desire nothing but reform so far as I am able to? And I get inspiration from none but Allah. On Him do I place my trust and to Him do I turn:"
11|89| "And, O my people, let not hostility to me make you commit sin so that there may befall on you the like of what befell the peoples of Noah, Hood or Salih. And the people of Lot were not very far in the past from you."
11|90| "And ask forgiveness of your Lord, and turn to Him in repentance. My Lord is indeed Merciful, Loving."
11|91| They said, "O Shu'aib! We do not understand much of what you say and we do indeed consider you weak amongst us. And were it not for your family we would surely have stoned you to death. And you have no power over us."
11|92| He said, "O my people! Is my family more powerful for you than Allah? And you put Him behind your backs? What you do is indeed under the ever vigilant purview of my Lord."h 
11|93| "And, O my people! Do what you can. I do what I do. You will soon come to know upon whom the disgracing punishment shall come and who the liar is. And you do wait! Indeed! I too am waiting with you."
11|94| And when did Our decree come to pass, We saved, by mercy from Us, Shu'aib and those who believed with him. And the terribly rumbling sound struck those who were unjust, and they lay prostrate in their homes.
11|95| As though they had never dwelt in them! Verily, the people of Midian perished just as the people of Thamood had perished.
11|96| And certainly We did send Moses with Our signs/Verses and clear authority.
11|97| To Pharoah and his chieftains who followed his rule. And Pharaoh's rule was not good.
11|98| He (Pharaoh) shall lead his people, on the Resurrection Day, to the Fire. And bad is the place which they shall be led to.
11|99| And curse followed them in this world and shall follow them on the Resurrection Day. Bad would be the gift they shall be given!
11|100| This is an account, We relate to you, of the peoples that inhabited this earth. Of them are some that still exist and others, destroyed.
11|101| And We wronged them not, but they wronged themselves. And their gods, whom they invoked besides Allah, did avail them nothing when the decree of your Lord came to pass. And they but added to their ruin.
11|102| And such was the seizure of your Lord when He seized the inhabitants of the earth while they did wrong. His seizure is indeed painful, severe!
11|103| There is indeed in this a sign for him who fears the punishment in the Hereafter. This is the day for the gathering together of mankind and this is the day for production of evidence. 
11|104| And We won't convene the Hereafter till an appointed time.
11|105| The day when it is convened, no one shall speak except with His permission. Some of them then shall be miserable, and some happy.
11|106| The miserable ones, then, shall be in the Fire. For them there shall be sighing and groaning in it.
11|107| They shall abide therein so long as the heavens and the earth last, unless your Lord wills otherwise. Your Lord does indeed do what He wills. 
11|108| And the happy ones, then, shall be in the Paradise. They shall abide therein as long as the heavens and the earth last, unless your Lord wills otherwise. It's a gift that shall never be terminated.
11|109| Be not then in doubt as to what these people worship: they do not worship but as their fathers did before. And indeed We will pay them back in full their due, undiminished.
11|110| And certainly did We give the Book to Moses, and disputes were raised therein. And had not a Word already gone forth from your Lord, the matter would surely have been decided between them. And the sceptics are indeed in doubt over it.
11|111| And your Lord will indeed pay back to them all for their deeds in full. He is indeed aware of what they do.
11|112| Stand firm then, you and those who have turned to Allah with you, on what you are commanded with, and transgress not. HE does indeed see what you do.
11|113| And do not incline towards those who are unjust, lest the Fire catches you. And you have no awliya other than Allah, and you shall not be helped.
11|114| And establish prayer at the two ends of the day and proximities of the night. Good deedsh do indeed eradicate the evil. This is a reminder to those who remember Allah much.
11|115| And be patient; for, Allah does indeed not let the good people do, go unrewarded! 
11|116| If only there were, among the generations before you, more men of understanding forbidding mischief on earth! There were but a few men of understanding of those whom We saved from among them. And those who were unjust were preoccupied with the luxuries they were given. And they sinned.
11|117| And your Lord could not have unjustly destroyed habitations, while the people living there were good.
11|118| And if your Lord had so willed, He would certainly have made mankind a single community. And they shall not cease to differ.
11|119| Except for those to whom your Lord turns with mercy. And for this did He create them.h And the statement of your Lord is bound to be fulfilled, "I will certainly fill Hell with the jinn and the human beings, together." 
11|120| All that we relate to you of the accounts of the Messengers is to strengthen your mind therewith. And in this have come to you the Truth, Admonition and a Book, for being frequently referred to, for the believers.
11|121| And tell those who do not believe "You act your way; we act ours."
11|122| "And you wait. We too indeed wait."
11|123| And Allah's are the secrets of the heavens and the earth and to Him are all matters returned. Do worship Him then and do put thy trust in Him! And thy Lord is not unaware of what you do. 
12|1| Alif Lam Ra. These are the Verses of the open, clear and self-explanatory Book.
12|2| We have indeed sent it down as an Arabic Quran in order that you understand it.
12|3| We narrate to you the best of narratives by Our revealing to you this Quran. And, before this, you were indeed among those who did not know.
12|4| When Joseph said to his father, "O my father! I did indeed see eleven stars and the sun and the moon. I saw them prostrating to me."
12|5| He said, "O my son! Do not relate your dream to your brothers, lest they devise a plan against you. The Satan is indeed an open enemy to man."
12|6| "And accordingly [according to interpretation of the dream, that is,] your Lord will choose you and teach you the interpretation of events and complete His favour upon you and upon the children of Jacob, as He did complete it, before, upon your fathers, Abraham and Isaac. Your Lord is indeed Knowledgeable, Wise."
12|7| Certainly in Joseph and his brothers there are signs for the seekers.
12|8| When they said, "Certainly Joseph and his brother are dearer to our father than we. And we are more in number and strength. Our father is indeed making a manifest mistake."
12|9| "Kill Joseph or abandon him into a distant land, so that your father dotes on you exclusively. And thereafter you can become righteous people."
12|10| One of them said, "Do not kill Joseph, but, if you must do something about him, put him down into the bottom of a well so that some travellers may pick him up."
12|11| They said, "O our father! Why do you not trust us with regard to Joseph? And we are indeed his sincere well-wishers!"
12|12| "Send him with us tomorrow that he may eat, drink and play. And we will indeed guard him well."
12|13| Their father said, "It does indeed grieve me that you should take him away. And I fear lest the wolf devour him while your attention is diverted from him."
12|14| They said, "Surely if the wolf should devour him even when we are a strong group, we should then indeed be the doomed ones!"
12|15| So then they went off with him and mutually agreed that they should put him down at the bottom of a well. And We revealed to him, "They know it not, but you shall one day certainly tell them of this act of theirs."
12|16| And they came to their father in the evening, weeping.
12|17| They said, "O our father! We did indeed get ourselves engaged in the racing game and left Joseph behind with our goods. Then, the wolf ate him. And you will not believe us though we do tell you the truth."
12|18| And they brought his shirt with fake blood thereon. He said, "Nay, you yourselves have contrived this tale. All I can do is resort to graceful patience. And it is Allah's help that is sought, against what you tell me."
12|19| And a caravan of travellers did come there and they sent their man to draw water from the well and he let down his bucket. He exclaimed, "O goodness! There is a boy there." And they took him along as an article of merchandise. And Allah knew what they did.
12|20| And they sold him for a paltry price — a few dirhams — and they had been eager to get rid of him.
12|21| And the man from the city who bought him said to his wife, "Make his stay comfortable. Maybe he will be useful to us, or we may adopt him as a son." And thus did We establish Joseph in the land and taught him the interpretation of events. And Allah is in complete control of what He does, but most people know not.
12|22| And when he attained his maturity, We gave him authority and knowledge. And thus do We reward those who are good.
12|23| And she, in whose house he lived, solicited him, closed the doors and said, "Come on!" He said, "I seek Allah's protection. My master has indeed given me good shelter. Those who do wrong shall indeed not prosper."
12|24| And she did desire him. And he would have desired her too, had he not seen a clear sign from his Lord. Thus did We turn evil and indecency away from him. He was indeed one of Our sincere worshippers.
12|25| And they both hastened to the door, and she tore off his shirt from behind and they met her husband at the door. She said, "What is to be done to him who wanted to molest your wife except to imprison him or give him some other painful punishment?"
12|26| He [Joseph] said, "It was she who tried to seduce me." And a witness from her own family said, "If his shirt is torn off from the front, she speaks the truth and he is the liar."
12|27| "And if his shirt is torn off from behind, she is telling a lie and he is telling the truth."
12|28| So when he (husband of the woman) saw his (Joseph's) shirt torn off from behind, he (the husband) said, "It is indeed an instance of female cunningness. You women are indeed great at being cunning."
12|29| "Joseph! You stay away from this; and (to his wife) You ask forgiveness for your sin, You are indeed the one at fault."
12|30| And the city women gossiped, "The nobleman's wife has tried to seduce her young slave. She is surely overcome with love for him. We do indeed see her going manifestly astray."
12|31| So when she heard of their malicious talk, she sent for them and arranged comfortable seats for them. And she gave everyone of them a knife, and asked Joseph to come out before them. So when they saw him, they were so much stunned by his personality that they cut their hands, and said, "Glory to Allah! This is not a man; this is none but a noble angel."
12|32| She said, "This is the man whom you blamed me about. And I did certainly seek to seduce him, but he resisted. And if he does not do my bidding, he shall certainly be imprisoned, and he shall certainly suffer the ignominy."
12|33| He said, "My Lord! I would prefer to go to jail rather than do what they invite me to. And unless You make their scheme against me ineffective, I will be tempted towards them and behave as one ignorant."
12|34| His Lord then accepted his prayer and made their scheme against him ineffective. He (Allah) does indeed hear, know!
12|35| Then, after weighing the pros and cons of the matter, they thought it advisable to keep him in the prison for the time being.
12|36| And two youngsters entered the prison with him. One of them said, "I saw myself making wine." And the other said, "I saw myself carrying bread on my head, birds eating wherefrom. Tell us what it means. We do indeed see you as a good man."
12|37| He said, "I shall tell you both what the dreams mean before the food you eat is brought to you. This is one of the things my Lord has taught me. I have indeed forsaken the lifestyle of people who do not believe in Allah, and who deny the Hereafter."
12|38| "And I follow the lifestyle of my forefathers, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. We do not have to worship anything other than Allah. This is by Allah's grace upon us and on mankind, but most people are ungrateful."
12|39| "O my two prison mates! Are sundry lords better or Allah the One, the Almighty?"
12|40| "What you worship besides Him are but fictitious things to which you and your fathers have given names. Allah has not sent down any authority for them. The absolute authority is with Allah alone. He has commanded that you shall not worship anything or anybody but Him. This is the established way of life, but most people know not."
12|41| "O my two prison mates! As for the first one of you, he shall serve wine to his lord. And as for the other, he shall be crucified, and the birds shall peck from his head. The matter you inquired about is so decreed."
12|42| And he (Joseph) said to the one of the two, whom he thought was definitely going to be saved, "Mention me to your lord." But the Satan caused him to forget mentioning him to his lord, so he remained in the prison for a few years.
12|43| And the king said, "I saw seven fat cows, but seven lean cows ate them up! And I saw seven ears of corn that were green and other ears that were withered and dry. O chieftains! Explain to me my dream, if you do know how to interpret dreams."
12|44| They said, "Dreams are jumbled, and we do not know the interpretation of dreams."
12|45| And of the two prisoners, the one, who survived, recollected after a long time Joseph's request to him and said, "I will give you its interpretation, and let me go out now to get it."
12|46| "Joseph! O truthful one! Explain to us the dream in which there were seven fat cows, but seven lean cows ate them up! Besides, there were seven ears of corn that were green and other ears that were withered and dry. Explain, so that I may go back to those people and let them know."
12|47| Joseph explained, "You shall sow for seven years continuously, then leave what you reap in ears, except the little that you need for immediate consumption."
12|48| "Then there shall come thereafter seven years of hardship which shall eat away all that you would have preserved for those years, except for a little thereof."
12|49| "Then there will come after that a year in which people shall have rain and in which they shall produce wine/oil."
12|50| And the king said, "Bring him (Joseph) to me." So when the messenger came to him, he said, "Go back to your lord and ask him about the case of the women who cut their hands. My Lord does indeed know their guile."
12|51| The king called for the women and asked them, "What have you to say on the affair when you sought to seduce Joseph?" They said, "Glory to Allah! We knew of no evil on his part." And the chieftain's wife said, "Now that the truth has come out, it was I who tried to seduce him, and he is indeed the truthful one."
12|52| "This is to let him (Joseph) know that I have not betrayed him behind his back and that Allah guides not the scheme of the betrayers."
12|53| The Chieftain's wife continued, "And I do not claim to be innocent. The self is indeed prone to evil, except for such as my Lord has had mercy on. Indeed! My Lord is Forgiving, Merciful."
12|54| And the king said, "Bring him to me. I will make him my personal aide." So when Joseph was brought to him, the king said, "You are indeed from today a trusted person in an honourable position with us."
12|55| Joseph said, "Place me in authority over the treasures of the land. I know how to keep them well preserved."
12|56| And thus did We give Yusuf an honourable position in the land. He could settle therein in whatever way he liked. We bestow Our mercy upon whom We please. And We do not let good people go unrewarded.
12|57| And certainly the reward of the Hereafter is much better for those who believe and fear Allah.
12|58| And Joseph's brothers came and went in to him, when he recognised them and they did not recognise him.
12|59| And when he furnished them their provision, Joseph said, "Bring to me the other brother you have from your father! Do you not see that I give you your full ration and offer you hospitality at its best?"
12|60| "But if you do not bring him to me, you shall have no ration from me, nor shall you come near me."
12|61| They said, "We will plead for him with his father, and we will most certainly do that."
12|62| And Joseph told his men, "Put back their payments secretly in their bags so that they come to know about it only when they go back to their family. It may induce them to come back here."
12|63| So when they returned to their father, they said, "O our father, our ration would be denied to us. Therefore send our brother with us. We may then get our ration, and we will most certainly take care of him."
12|64| He said, "Shall I entrust him to you just as I entrusted to you his brother before? But Allah is the best Protector, and He is the most Merciful."
12|65| And when they opened their goods, they found returned to them what they had paid therefor! They said, "O our father, what more can we desire? Here is our capital returned to us! Now we can feed our family, take care of our brother, and have a surplus of a camel load of grains. This would make our problem of getting sufficient ration easy."
12|66| He said, "I will not send him with you until you give me a pledge, in Allah's name, that you will most certainly bring him back to me unless in the circumstance that you are besieged. And when they gave him their pledge, he said, "Allah is Witness and Trustee to what we say."
12|67| And he said, "O my sons! Do not enter by one gate and enter by different gates. And I can avail you nothing against Allah. The absolute authority is with none but Allah. On Him I do trust. And on Him then let those who trust, put their trust." 
12|68| And when they entered as their father had bidden them, it availed them nothing against Allah. It was an act deemed prudent by Jacob and he expressed it. And indeed he had the knowledge We taught him, but most people know not.
12|69| And when they went in to Joseph, he took his brotherhto stay with himself, and told him, "I am your brother, therefore grieve not at what they do."
12|70| So when he gave them their provisions, he placed a cup in his brother's bag. Then someone cried out, "O people of the caravan! You are most surely thieves."
12|71| Joseph's brothers in the caravan came forward and asked, "What is it that you find missing?"
12|72| Joseph's men replied, "We find the king's cup missing, and he, who comes up with it, shall get a camel-load of extra grains." And Joseph added, "I am guarantor of this."
12|73| Joseph's brothers said, "By Allah! You know for certain that we have not come to make mischief in the land, and we are not thieves."
12|74| The men asked, "But what should be the punishment for this, if you happen to be lying?"
12|75| The brothers said, "The punishment for this is that the person in whose bag it is found shall himself suffer it. Thus we do punish the wrongdoers."
12|76| So he (Joseph) began the search with their (his step-brothers') packs before searching the pack of his brother, and then he brought it (the king's cup) out from his brother's pack. Thus did We plan a stratagem for the sake of Joseph. He could not legally take and keep his brother with him under the king's laws, unless Allah pleased.We raise the ranks of whomsoever We please. And over every person of knowledge, there is one having better knowledge.
12|77| They said, "If he has stolen, a brother of his did indeed steal before." And Joseph kept his secret with himself and did not disclose it to them. He said, "You have been in a wicked state of mind and Allah knows the truth about the clarification you have given."
12|78| They said, "Sir! He has a very old father; so, retain one of us in his place. We do indeed see you as a good man."
12|79| He said, "Allah forbid that we seize a man other than him with whom we found our property. We would indeed then be doing a very wrong thing."
12|80| Then when they got despaired of him, they conferred among themselves. The eldest of them said, "Do you not know that your father took from you a pledge in Allah's name, and that you committed excesses in respect of Joseph, before? Therefore I will not leave this place until my father permits me or Allah otherwise decrees for me. And He is the best Ruler."
12|81| "Go back to your father." They went back and said, "O our father! Your son did indeed commit theft, and we do not bear witness except to what we have known. And we could not keep watch over the unseen."
12|82| "And make enquiries at the place in which we had been to and with the caravan with which we had proceeded. And what we say is most certainly true."
12|83| He (Jacob) said, "Nay, you have made up a convenient story for yourselves! So it is better for me to be patient. Maybe, Allah will bring them all together to me. He is indeed Knowledgeable, Wise."
12|84| And, turning away from them, he silently cried, "Alas for Joseph!" And his eyes turned white with grief, and he did control his emotions.
12|85| They (Joseph's brothers) said to him, "By Allah! You will cease not remembering Joseph until you get severely ill or get perished."
12|86| He said, "I complain of my distress and grief only to Allah. And I know from Allah what you do not know."
12|87| "O my sons! Go and make enquiries about Joseph and his brother, and despair not of getting relief from Allah. Indeed, none but the people who suppress the Truth despair of getting relief from Allah."
12|88| So when the brothers came back to Joseph, they said, "Sir! Distress has afflicted us and our family and we have brought but little capital to pay for the rations. Give us the full ration and be charitable to us. Allah does indeed reward those that are charitable."
12|89| He said, "Do you know how you treated Joseph and his brother in your ignorance?"
12|90| They said, "Are you indeed Joseph?" He said, "I am Joseph and this is my brother. Allah has certainly been gracious to us. Indeed, such is the reward for him who fears Allah and exercises patience. And, indeed, Allah does not let the reward, of those who do good, go waste."
12|91| They said, "By Allah! HE has certainly chosen you over us, and we were indeed the sinners."
12|92| He said, "No reproof against you this day. Allah may forgive you, and He is the most Merciful."
12|93| "Take this shirt of mine and put it on my father's face. He will be able to see. And then come back to me with your entire family."
12|94| And when the caravan had set out, their father said, "I do indeed get the smell of Joseph, unless you consider me delirious."
12|95| Those who were there with him said, "By Allah, you are indeed in your old error." 
12|96| And when the bearer of good news (Joseph's brother with Joseph's shirt) did arrive, he put the shirt on the face of Jacob, who then got back his sight. Jacob said, "Did I not tell you that I know from Allah what you know not?"
12|97| They said, "O our father! Pray for forgiveness of our sins. We indeed did wrong."
12|98| The father said, "I will pray to my Lord to forgive you. He is indeed Forgiving, Merciful.
12|99| When they then came to Joseph, he got his parents to stay with him and said, "Welcome to Egypt. You will, Allah willing, be safe here."
12|100| And Joseph raised his parents upon the throne; and they fell down in prostration before him. And he said, "O my father! This is the interpretation of the dream I had seen before. My Lord has indeed made it come true. And He was indeed kind to me when He brought me out from the prison and brought you from the desert after the Satan had fomented discord between me and my brothers. My Lord is indeed benevolent to whom He pleases. He is indeed Knowledgeable, Wise."
12|101| "My Lord! You have given me some political power and taught me some knowledge on interpretation of events. Originator of the heavens and the earth! You are my waliin this world and the Hereafter. Make me die as one who willingly submits to You and make me join the ranks of the righteous people."
12|102| This is from annals of the unseen past which We reveal to you. And you were not with them when they got together to act, and they conspired.
12|103| And most men will not believe, though you desire eagerly that they believe.
12|104| And you ask them not for any reward for this. It is nothing but that which all human beings need to constantly refer to for rightful decisions and actions in their respective worlds. 
12|105| And how many a sign, in the heavens and the earth, do they pass by? And yet they turn aside from it!
12|106| And most of them do not believe in Allah without worshipping others besides Him.
12|107| Do they then feel secure that some punishment from Allah will not envelope them or that the Hour may not come to them suddenly and unknowingly?
12|108| Say, "This is my path: I call to Allah. I and my followers are on right guidance. And glory is to Allah! I am not one of those who worship others besides Allah."
12|109| And We did not send before you any but men, from among the same communities, to whom We sent revelations. Have they not then travelled on land and seen for themselves what end those before them met with? And the abode of the Hereafter is certainly better for those who fear Allah. Do you not understand this?
12|110| The Messengers continued propagating the divine Message to the people until the Messengers despaired and reckoned that the people would not believe them. Then did Our help come to them and every person, whom We pleased, was saved. And Our punishment was not dispensed with for the sinners.
12|111| In their annals there is certainly a lesson for those endowed with insight. This is not a fabricated hadeeth, but a confirmation of what has preceded it and a detailed explanation of all things and a guide and a mercy to people who believe.
13|1| Alif Lam Meem Ra. These are Verses of the Book. And that which is revealed to you from your Lord is the truth, but most people believe not.
13|2| Allah is the One Who raised the heavens without any visible support. He then established Himself on the Throne. And He made the sun and the moon subservient. Each pursues its course till an appointed time. He is the Commander and the Governor. He explains the Verses/signs in details so that you may be certain of meeting your Lord.
13|3| And He is the One Who has stretched the earth to make mountains and rivers therein. And of every kind of fruit He made a pair mate therein. He draws the night as a veil over the day. Indeed there are signs in this for people who reflect.
13|4| And on the earth there are tracts side by side with gardens of grapes and corn and palm trees — having one common root and others having distinct roots — all irrigated with same water. And yet We make some of them excel others in flavour. There are signs indeed in this for people who understand.
13|5| And if you would consider anything as strange, then strange it is that they say, "When we turn to dust, shall we even then be there in a new creation?" These are they, who suppress the Truth in regard to their Lord. And they shall have chains round their necks, and they shall be the inmates of the Fire. In it they shall ever be.
13|6| And they ask you to hasten what is not good rather than what is good, and there certainly have been examples of those before them. And indeed your Lord is full of forgiveness for people, notwithstanding their wrongdoings. And indeed your Lord is severe in punishment.
13|7| And those who suppress the Truth say, "Why has not a sign been sent down upon him from his Lord?" You are only a warner and, for every people, a guide.h 
13|8| Allah knows what any female conceives, and what makes the wombs shrink and what makes them swell. And everything with Him is measured. 
13|9| Allah has the knowledge of the unseen and the seen. HE is the One Who is Great, the One Who is High/Exalted.
13|10| The one among you who speaks secretively, the one who speaks openly, the one who hides by night and the one who moves about freely by day — they are all the same for Allah; nothing can escape His notice.
13|11| For every human being there are angels who take turns, in front of him/her and behind, to guard him/her by Allah's command. Allah does indeed not change the condition of a people until they themselves change it. And when Allah wills adversity on a people, there is no averting it. And besides Him they have no ruling authority to defend and take care of them.
13|12| He it is Who shows you the lightning that causes both fear and hope. And He it is Who brings up the heavy cloud.
13|13| And the thunder proclaims His glory with His praise, and the angels stand in awe of Him. And He sends the thunderbolts and hits with them whom He wills. And they quarrel among themselves about Allah, whereas He is extremely powerful.
13|14| To Him is the true prayer! And those whom they pray to besides Allah give them no response on anything. It is just like one stretching his two hands out for water to reach his mouth, but it reaches not. And the prayer of those who suppress the Truth is nothing but an illusion.
13|15| And to Allah does prostrate everything in the heavens and the earth, willingly and unwillingly, as their shadows do morning and evening.
13|16| Ask, "Who is the Lord of the heavens and the earth?" Say, "Allah." Ask, "Do you take then, besides Him, awliya who have no control over any profit and loss to themselves?" Ask, "Are the blind and those able to see alike? Or can the darknesses and the light be equal? Or have they set up gods besides Allah, who have made creation like He has, and, as a result, the creation creates confusion for them?" Say, "Allah is the Creator of all things. And He is the One and Only, the Almighty!"
13|17| He sends down water from the sky. And valleys flow with water as per their given measure. And the stream bears the swelling froth. And from what they melt in the fire for making ornaments or apparatus arises similar froth. Thus does Allah compare truth with untruth. Then, as for the froth, it just passes away as a worthless thing. And as for that which profits the people, it remains on the earth. Thus does Allah explain things giving examples.
13|18| The good is for those who respond to their Lord. And as for those who do not respond to Him, had they all that is in the earth and the like thereof with it, they would certainly offer it for a ransom. An evil reckoning shall await them and their abode shall be Hell — the worst place to rest in.
13|19| Is he who knows that what has been revealed to you from your Lord is the truth, then, like him who is blind?Only those endowed with insight will ponder on this,
13|20| Those that fulfill the promise to Allah and break not the covenant,
13|21| And those who maintain all the proper relationships that Allah has commanded to be maintained and fear their Lord and dread a bad account of their own deeds.
13|22| And those who exercise patience seeking the pleasure of their Lord, establish regular prayer, spend out of what We have given them secretly and openly, and repel evil with good. For them is the ultimate/best abode.
13|23| The gardens of perpetual abode which they will enter along with those who had done good deeds from among their parents and their spouses and their offspring. And the angels will enter in upon them from every gate, saying,
13|24| "Peace on you because you exercised patience. How excellent, then, is the ultimate/best abode!"
13|25| And those that break the pledge with Allah after affirming it, sever ties that Allah has ordered to be honoured and spread corruption in the land — for them there is the curse and the wicked abode.
13|26| Allah provides — in abundance or in short measure — for whom He wills. And they rejoice the life of this world, and the life of this world is nothing but a delusion in the Hereafter.
13|27| And those who suppress the Truth say, "Why is not a sign sent down upon him from his Lord?" Say, "Allah does indeed let him go astray whom He wills. And He guides to Himself those who turn to Him."
13|28| Those who believe and whose hearts find satisfaction in the remembrance of Allah! Surely, in Allah's remembrance hearts do find satisfaction.
13|29| Those that believe and do good deeds — for them, a state of happiness and a good place to return to.
13|30| Just as We had sent Messengers to their peoples before, We have sent you to these people now, so that you recite to them what We have revealed to you. And they have been suppressing their belief in the Gracious Being! Say, "He is my Lord. There is no god but Him. In Him do I trust and to Him is my return."
13|31| And the suppressors of the Truth like to think that they would believe if only the mountains were moved by the Qur'aan, or the earth was cut asunder thereby, or the dead were made to speak! But it is Allah Who can do anything and everything. Have the believers then become despaired of the Truth that had Allah so willed, He could have guided all mankind!? And disaster shall not cease to afflict those that suppress the Truth because of what they do, or to strike near their homes, until what Allah has promised comes to pass. And, indeed, Allah fails not to keep the appointment.
13|32| And Messengers that came before you did get mocked at. And I gave those that suppressed the Truth a long rope, and then seized them. And what a punishment it was!
13|33| And they worship others besides Allah — the One Who is ever alert over what everybody does and accordingly deserves! Say, "Name them!" Or, do they tell Him something on the earth of which He is not aware? Or, is it just a show that they make with the words they utter? Nay, the intrigue indulged in by the suppressors of the Truth is made to look pleasing to them and they are held back from the Right Path. And him whom Allah has led astray, no one can guide.
13|34| For them a punishment in the life of this world. And the punishment of the Hereafter is certainly harder. And, there is none to defend them against Allah.
13|35| Some of the things provided in the Garden promised to those who fear Allah: rivers flowing underneath, its fruits and shade everlasting. This is what those who fear Allah shall get in the end. And those who suppress the Truth shall end up in the Fire.
13|36| And those to whom We have given the Book rejoice in that which has been revealed to you. And among groups of people there are some who deny a part of it. Say, "I am commanded that I should worship only Allah and none else. Him I pray to and to Him I return."
13|37| And thus have We revealed it as the divine code of conduct for humanity in Arabic. And if you follow their desires after what has come to you of knowledge, you shall have neither any wali nor anyone to defend you against Allah.
13|38| And We had certainly sent Messengers before you and gave them wives and children. And no Messenger could bring a sign save by Allah's leave. , For every age there is a Book decreed.
13|39| Allah obliterates or preserves what He wills. And with Him is the Master Copy of the (or the Original) Book.
13|40| And whether We let you see part of what We promise them or We cause you to die before that, your responsibility is only the delivery of the divine Message, and it is for Us to call them to account.
13|41| Do they not see that We are closing in on them from all sides? And Allah judges; His judgment is irrevocable. And He is swift to keeping accounts.
13|42| And those before them did make plans, but all planning is Allah's. He knows what every one earns, and those who suppress the Truth shall come to know for whom the Ultimate Abode is.
13|43| And those who suppress the Truth say, "You are not a Messenger of Allah." Say, "Allah — and whoever has knowledge of the Book — is a sufficient witness between me and you." 
14|1| Alif Lam Ra. A Book that We have revealed to you to bring out mankind, by their Lord's permission, from darknesses towards light — towards the way of the Omnipotent, the Praised One,
14|2| Allah is He to Whom belongs whatever there is in the heavens and the earth. And woe, from severe punishment, unto those who suppress the Truth.
14|3| Those who love the life of this world more than the Hereafter, and turn people away from Allah's Path and seek perversity in it. They are in deep delusion.
14|4| And We did not send any Messenger with Our Message but in the language of his people, so that he might narrate it to them clearly. Allah then leaves whom He wills to stray away from His Path and He guides whom He wills to His Path. And He is the Omnipotent, the Wise.
14|5| And We did certainly send Moses with Our signs, "Bring out your people from the darknesses towards light and remind them of the annals of Allah. Therein indeed are signs for everyone who is patient and grateful."
14|6| And when Moses said to his people, "Remember Allah's favour upon you when He delivered you from Pharaoh's people who had subjected you to severe persecution, and killed your sons and spared your women. And in this there was a great test from your Lord."
14|7| And when your Lord declared, "If you are grateful, I will certainly give you more. And if you are ungrateful, My punishment is indeed severe."
14|8| And Moses said, "Even if you are ungrateful — you and those on earth all together — Allah certainly indeed can do without you being grateful to Him. HE is Self-sufficient, Praiseworthy."
14|9| Have you not heard of those before you — of the people of Noah and AAad and Thamood, and those after them? None knows them but Allah. Their Messengers came to them with clear signs. And they thrust their hands into their mouths in astonishment while witnessing those signs, but said, "We do not believe in the Message that you are sent with, and we are indeed utterly in doubt about what you invite us to." 
14|10| Their Messengers said, "Is there any doubt about Allah, the Maker of the heavens and the earth? He invites you to Him so that He may forgive you your sins and give you time till an appointed term to redeem yourselves." They said, "You are but mortals like us. You wish to turn us away from what our fathers worshipped. Bring to us then some clear evidence for this."
14|11| Their Messengers said to them, "We are but mortals like you, but Allah bestows His favours upon whom He wills of His worshippers. And we cannot bring you any evidence except by Allah's permission. And in Allah then the believers should have trust."
14|12| "And what reason have we that we should have no trust in Allah, when, surely, He has guided us to our paths? And we shall certainly bear your persecution with patience. And those that trust do trust in Allah."
14|13| And those who suppressed the Truth told their Messengers, "We shall drive you out of our land, or you shall come back into our lifestyle." Their Lord then revealed to them, "We will destroy the wicked people."
14|14| "And We shall certainly settle you in the land after them. This is for him who fears standing in My presence and who fears My warnings."
14|15| And they sought victory and every obstinate tyrant was frustrated.
14|16| Behind him [every obstinate tyrant] is Hell waiting to quench his thirst with fetid water.
14|17| He will sip at it and it will not be easy for him to swallow it. And death will come to him from every quarter, but he shall not die. And further severe punishment shall await just behind him.
14|18| Deeds of those who suppress the Truth about their Lord are like ashes on which the wind blows hard on a stormy day. They shall have no power over any thing they earn. This is far too grievous a loss of way.
14|19| Do you not see that Allah created the heavens and the earth in Truth? If He wills He will take you off and bring a new creation. 
14|20| And this is not at all difficult for Allah!
14|21| And they shall all present themselves before Allah. Then the weak shall say to those who were proud, "We had indeed been your followers. Would you then withstand anything of Allah's punishment from us?" They would say, "If Allah had guided us, we too would have guided you. It is immaterial to us now whether we bewail or be patient. There is no place for us to escape to."
14|22| And the Satan shall say after the Judgment is pronounced, "Allah did indeed give you the true promise. And I gave you promises, but failed to keep them. And I had no authority over you except to call you to me, and you obeyed me! So blame me not, but blame yourselves. I cannot be of any help to you now, nor can you be of any help to me. I do indeed deny that you had worshipped me, besides Allah, before." For the wicked people there shall indeed be a painful punishment.
14|23| And those who believe and do good deeds shall be admitted to gardens beneath which rivers flow. They shall stay eternally therein by their Lord's leave. Their greeting therein shall be, "Peace."
14|24| Don't you see how Allah exemplifies a good word as a good tree with firm roots and with its branches spread out in the sky.
14|25| Yielding its fruits every season by its Lord's leave? And Allah gives examples for the benefit of mankind so that they may ponder and remember.
14|26| And the example of a bad word is a bad tree which can easily be uprooted from the earth's surface; it has no stability.
14|27| Allah establishes, in the life of this world and in the Hereafter, those who believe in the firm Testament. And Allah leads the wicked persons astray, and Allah does what He wills.
14|28| Have you not seen those who have changed Allah's favour by being ungrateful, and made their people eligible for the abode of ruin?
14|29| Hell — they shall burn therein. And a very bad place it is to settle in!
14|30| And they set up rivals to Allah that they may lead people away from His Path. Say, "Enjoy for now! Your destination then shall indeed be to the Fire."
14|31| Tell My subjects who believe that they should establish regular prayer and spend out ofh what We have given them, secretly and openly, before the coming of the day in which there shall be no trading nor any friendly give-and-take.
14|32| Allah is He Who created the heavens and the earth and sent down water from the sky. Then, with it, He brought forth fruits as sustenance for you. And He made the ship subservient to you, so that it sails on the sea by His command. And He made the rivers serve your needs.
14|33| And He made the sun and the moon — both pursuing their respective courses — serve your needs. And He made the night and the day serve you.
14|34| And He gives you of all that you ask Him. And if you would like to know the number of times Allah favours you, you will not be able to count. Man is indeed very wicked, thankless.
14|35| And when Abraham said, "My Lord! Make this a city of peace. And save me and my sons from worshipping idols."
14|36| "My Lord! They have indeed led many of mankind astray. The one, then, that follows me, is indeed of me. And as for the one that disobeys me, You indeed arc Forgiving, Merciful."
14|37| "O our Lord! I have indeed inhabited some of my offspring in an uncultivable valley near Your Sacred House, our Lord, that they may establish regular prayer there. Hence make some people come and settle near them, and provide them with fruits that they may be grateful." 
14|38| "O our Lord! You do indeed know what we hide and what we do not. And nothing in the earth or in the heaven above is hidden from Allah."
14|39| "Praise to Allah, Who has given me, in old age, Ishmael and Isaac. My Lord does indeed hear the prayer."
14|40| "My Lord! Inspire me to establish regular prayer and inspire those from my offspring too. And, O our Lord, accept my prayer!"
14|41| "O our Lord! Pardon me, my parents and the believers on the Day of Accounting!"
14|42| And do not think that Allah is unaware of what the wicked people do. He does but give them respite till the day when the eyes shall get transfixed,
14|43| Hurrying on in fear, their heads upraised — not glancing at themselves — and their hearts vacant.
14|44| And warn people of the Day when the punishment shall come to them. Then those who were wicked will say, "O our Lord! Give us respite for a short term to enable us to respond to Your call and follow the Messengers." Did you not swear before that you shall have no downfall?
14|45| And you had lived where those, who had transgressed against themselves, lived. And it was clear to you how We had dealt with them. And We had given you examples.
14|46| And they did plan their plan. But their plan is with Allah, though their plan was such that the mountains could come down thereby.
14|47| Think not then that Allah is one to fail in His promise to His Messengers. Allah is indeed Omnipotent and has the power to give a fitting retribution.
14|48| On the Day when the earth shall be changed into a different earth — and the heavens too! And they shall present themselves before Allah, the One, the Almighty.
14|49| And you will see the sinners on that day bound together in chains.
14|50| Their dresses made of tar and the fire covering their faces.
14|51| That Allah may repay everyone for what it earned. Allah is indeed quick in keeping accounts.
14|52| This (Qur'aan) is a sufficient and eloquent exposition of the divine Message for the people that they may be warned thereby, that they may know that He is the One and Only Being worthy of being worshipped, and those endowed with insight may remember it and remind other people about it. 
15|1| Alif Lam Ra. These are Verses of the Book and it is a clear Qur'aan (Reader).
15|2| Those who suppress the Truth shall frequently wish that they had been Muslims (submitters to divine Will).
15|3| Leave them free to eat and enjoy, and let desire distract them. They will soon know.
15|4| And never did We destroy any population, but only when it had reached its known destiny.
15|5| No people can prepone their end nor can they postpone it.
15|6| And they say, "O you to whom the Reminder (Qur'aan) has been revealed! You are indeed mad."
15|7| "Why do you not bring to us the angels if what you claim is true?"
15|8| We do not send the angels but only when necessary (to destroy wicked persons, for instance), and then they would not be given any respite.
15|9| Indeed, We have sent down the Reminder (Qur'aan) and indeed We are most certainly guardians to it.
15|10| And We did certainly send Messengers, before you, among the earlier generations.
15|11| And never did a Messenger come to them but they mocked him.
15|12| Thus do We make it (making a mockery of a Messenger) enter the hearts of the sinners.
15|13| They believe not in it (the divine Message brought by the Messenger), just as the earlier peoples, that passed away, did not believe (in the divine Messages brought to them by Messengers sent to them).
15|14| And they won't believe, even if We open to them a gateway into the sky above, and they keep on ascending thereinto.
15|15| They would still only say, "Our sights.are dazed. Nay, we are a people bewitched!"
15|16| And certainly We have made constellations in the skies above and We have made it look beautiful for the beholders.
15|17| And We have guarded it against every accursed Satan.
15|18| Except that a visible flame follows the one that manages to steal a celestial secret. 
15|19| And We have spread out the earth and cast mountains into it. And We have caused every appropriate thing to grow in it.
15|20| And We have created in it means of subsistence for you, and for him whom you do not provide for.
15|21| And there is nothing of which We do not have treasures with us. And We do not send it down but in a measured quantity.
15|22| And We send the winds that facilitate pollination, and then send down water from the sky for you to drink. And it is not in your power to store it up.
15|23| And indeed it is We Who give life and cause death. And We are the heirs. 
15|24| And We do certainly know those of you who have preceded and We do certainly know those who would follow.
15|25| And your Lord will indeed gather them together. He is indeed Wise, Knowledgeable.
15|26| And certainly We created man of clay, of moulded mud.
15|27| And the jinn We created before, of radiating fire.
15|28| And your Lord said to the angels, "I am going to create a man of clay, of moulded mud."
15|29| "So when I give him a proper form and breathe into him of My Rooh, get down to your knees prostrating."h 
15|30| So the angels prostrated — all of them together.
15|31| Except Iblees — he refused to be with those who prostrated.
15|32| Allah asked, "O Iblees! What excuses have you that you are not with those who prostrated?"
15|33| Iblees said, "I am not the one to prostrate to a man whom You have created of clay, of moulded mud."
15|34| Allah said, "Then get out of here! You are indeed damned."
15|35| "And indeed the curse is on you till the Judgment Day."
15|36| He said, "My Lord! Then give me respite till the time when they are raised."
15|37| Allah said, "You are granted the respite"
15|38| "For the appointed period."
15|39| He said, "My Lord! As You have made me deviate from the right way, I will certainly keep them enthralled in the earth, and I will certainly cause them all to deviate"
15|40| "Except for those among them who worship you devotedly and exclusively."
15|41| Allah said, "This is the Path that leads straight to Me."
15|42| "Indeed, you shall have no power over My subjects, except those who follow you in deviating from the right way."
15|43| And indeed Hell is the place promised to them all.
15|44| It has seven gates assigned separately to separate sections of them.
15|45| And those who fear Allah shall indeed be in gardens and fountains.
15|46| They shall enter there in peace and security.
15|47| And We will clean their hearts of any rancour. They shall be on couches face to face as brethren.
15|48| They shall not have to suffer any fatigue therein, nor shall they be ever ejected from it.
15|49| Inform my subjects that I am the Forgiver, the Merciful.
15|50| And that My punishment is the painful one.
15|51| And tell them about Abraham's guests.
15|52| When they came to him and greeted, "Peace!" He said, "We are indeed apprehensive of you."
15|53| They said, "Be not afraid! We do indeed give you the good news of a learned son."
15|54| He said, "Do you give me the good news when old age has come upon me? What kind of good news is this that you give me?"
15|55| They said, "There is truth in the good news We give you! So be not of those who despair.
15|56| He said, "And who would despair of the Mercy of his Lord but the wicked ones?"
15|57| He said, "What is your mission then, O Messengers?"
15|58| They said, "We have indeed been sent towards a sinning people."
15|59| "Excepting Lot's family, all of whom We certainly will save."
15|60| "But not his wife. We ordained that she shall indeed be of those who remain behind."
15|61| So when the Messengers came to Lot's family,
15|62| He said, "You indeed are strangers."
15|63| They said, "But we have come to you with that about which they had doubts."
15|64| "And we have come to you with the authority, and what we say is most certainly the truth."
15|65| "So leave this place with members of your family in a part of the night and you yourself follow their rear. And let not any one of you turn around, and proceed whither you are commanded."
15|66| And We declared to him this decree, that the roots of these (people left behind) shall be cut off by the morning.
15|67| And the people of the town came to him rejoicing.
15|68| He said, "These are my guests! Disgrace me not."
15|69| "And fear Allah and do not put me to shame."
15|70| They said, "Have we not prohibited you from meddling with other people's matters?"
15|71| He said, "Here are my daughters, if you have to do it. "
15|72| By your life! They were wandering blindly in their intoxication.
15|73| Then, at sunrise, the terribly rumbling sound struck them.
15|74| We turned the place upside down, and rained stones of baked clay upon the people.
15|75| In this indeed are signs for those with insight.
15|76| And indeed it is located on an established road.
15|77| Indeed there is a sign in this for the believers.
15|78| And the dwellers of the wood too were most wicked.
15|79| So We avenged them, and they are both, indeed, on an open road.
15|80| And the dwellers of the Rock did certainly reject the Messengers.
15|81| And We gave them Our Verses/signs, but they turned away from them.
15|82| And they were wont to hew houses in the mountains for security.
15|83| So the terribly rumbling sound seized them in the morning.
15|84| And what they earned availed them not.
15|85| And We did not create the heavens and the earth and what is between them, but by due authority. And the Hour is most surely going to come. So fogive things — those that are forgivable. 
15|86| Your Lord is indeed the Knowledgeable Creator of all things.
15|87| And certainly We have given you seven of the repeated Verses and the Glorious Qur'aan.
15|88| Pine not for that which We have given some of them to enjoy, nor grieve for them. And be kind to the believers.
15|89| And say, "I am indeed the plain warner."
15|90| It is as though what We have sent down is on those who make divisions therein.
15|91| Those that tear the Quran into shreds.
15|92| And, by your Lord, We shall certainly question them all
15|93| As to what they did!
15|94| Declare then openly what you are commanded with, and turn away from the polytheists.
15|95| We shall certainly provide you sufficient protection against those who scoff.
15|96| Those who worship others besides Allah. They shall soon know their folly!
15|97| And We do know that your (Prophet's) heart is distressed at what they say.
15|98| Hymn then the praise of your Lord, and be of those who prostrate to Him.
15|99| And worship your Lord until there comes to you that certain composure.
16|1| Allah's command is already issued! So, hasten it not. Glorified and highly exalted is He above what they worship besides Him.
16|2| He sends down the angels, on whom He pleases of His subjects, with the inspiration of His command: "Give the warning that there is no god but Me, and so fear Me."
16|3| He has created the heavens and the earth with the Truth and due Authority. He is far too high and exalted above what they worship besides Him.
16|4| He (Allah) created man from tiny fertilized ovum. And, lo, he has become an open adversary!
16|5| And He created the cattle. You get from them warm clothing and other benefits. And from them you get meat to eat.
16|6| And you feel good when you drive them back home, and when you send them out to pasture.
16|7| And they carry your heavy loads to lands you could not reach but with much difficulty. Your Lord is indeed Kind, Merciful.
16|8| And horses, mules and asses for you to ride upon and as assets, and He creates what you do not know.
16|9| And upon Allah is the determination of the Path and the deviations from it. And if He had so willed He would have certainly guided you all.
16|10| He it is Who sends down water from the sky. You drink thereof, and therefrom you get the shrubbery upon which you let your cattle graze.
16|11| He causes the green cultivated fields, the olives, the palm trees, the grapes and all kinds of fruits to grow for you thereby. There is indeed a sign in this for a people who think.
16|12| And He has made the night, the day, the sun and the moon to work for you. And the stars are made subservient by His command. There are indeed signs in this for a people who ponder.
16|13| And what He has created on the earth are of different hues and colours. There is a sign in this for a people who reflect.
16|14| And He it is Who has made the sea subservient so that you may eat fresh flesh from it and bring out of it jewels you wear. And you see the ships cut through it so that you might seek His bounty and be thankful.
16|15| And He has cast firm anchors [mountains] in the earth lest it should shake with you. And rivers and roads, that you may find your way.
16|16| And they find their way by landmarks and the stars.
16|17| Is He then Who creates like the one who does not? Do you not then reflect?
16|18| And if you would count Allah's favours, you won't be able to do it. Allah is certainly indeed Forgiving, Merciful.
16|19| And Allah knows what you conceal and what you do openly.
16|20| And those, whom they pray to besides Allah, have not created anything; they are themselves created!
16|21| They are dead — not living — and they know not when they shall be raised.
16|22| The object of your worship is Allah, the One and Only! And those, who do not believe in the Hereafter, are defiant in their hearts, and arrogant.
16|23| Allah does indeed, without doubt, know what they hide and what they declare. He does not, indeed, love those who are arrogant.
16|24| And when they are asked, "What is it that your Lord has sent down?" They say, "Stories of the ancients."
16|25| By saying so they are going to bear not only their own entire burdens on the day of Resurrection, but also of the burdens of those whom they led astray with misinformation. Is it not too bad what they bear?
16|26| Those before them plotted. But Allah struck their edifice at its foundations, so that the roof fell down on them from above them. And the punishment came to them from whence they knew not.
16|27| Then on the Resurrection Day He will disgrace them and ask, "Where are they whom you worshipped besides Me, and for whose sake you caused discord?" Those who are endowed with knowledge will say, "Indeed, the disgrace and the evil, this day, shall be upon those who had suppressed the Truth."
16|28| Those that the angels caused to die while they indulged in deeds, which were ultimately injurious to their own selves. Then they would submit, "We didn't do anything bad." Aye! Allah does indeed know what you did.
16|29| Enter then the gates of Hell, to be there forever! And the dwelling place of the arrogant people is certainly bad.
16|30| And those who fear Allah are asked, "What is it that your Lord has sent down?" They say, "That which is good." There is goodness for those who do good deeds in this world. And certainly the abode of the Hereafter is better. And excellent certainly is the abode of those who fear Allah.
16|31| They shall enter gardens of perpetuity, having rivers flowing beneath them. They shall have, in them, what they please. Thus does Allah reward those who fear Him.
16|32| Those that the angels caused to die while they did good deeds, the angels saying to them, "Peace upon you! Enter the garden as a reward for what you did."
16|33| They do not wait for anything but that the angels should come to them or that the Commandment of your Lord should come to pass. This is what those before them did. And Allah oppressed them not, but they oppressed themselves.
16|34| So the bad things they did shall afflict them and the things they mocked at shall besiege them.
16|35| And they who worship others besides Allah say, "Had Allah so willed, we would not have worshipped anything besides Him. Nor would our fathers do it. And we would not have prohibited anything without His Command." This is what those before them did. Are the Messengers then responsible for anything but the plain and clear conveyance of the divine Message?h 
16|36| And certainly We raised in every community a Messenger saying, "Worship Allah and shun whatever is worshipped other than Allah." So there were some, among them, whom Allah guided and there were others who were destined to be misguided. Travel in the land then, and see what the end of those who rejected the divine Message was.
16|37| Even if you are anxious for their guidance, Allah does not indeed guide him who willfully goes astray. And there shall be none to help them.
16|38| And they swear by Allah most solemnly that Allah will not raise anyone who dies. Yea! It is a promise binding on Him, but most people know it not.
16|39| Allah will raise the dead so that He might make matters, in which they differ, clear to them, and that those who suppress the Truth might know that they were liars.
16|40| When We intend a thing, We just say "Be" and it is.
16|41| And those who migrate for Allah's sake after they are oppressed, We will certainly resettle them in a good position in this world. And the reward of the Hereafter is certainly much greater, if they but know.
16|42| Those that are patient and have trust in their Lord.
16|43| And We did not send before you any but men to whom We revealed our Verses/signs. Ask the people of the divine Reminder/Book if you do not know. 
16|44| We had sent only men, to the earlier people, with clear signs/evidences and scriptures. And We have sent down to you the Reminder (the Qur'aan) that you may make clear to mankind what has been sent down for them, and that they may think about it.
16|45| Do they then who plan evil deeds feel confident that Allah will not cause the earth to swallow them, or that punishment may not overtake them from whence they know not?
16|46| Or that He may not seize them while they are on the move, and so they cannot escape?
16|47| Or that He may not seize them with fear and/or slow destruction? And your Lord is indeed Kind, Merciful.
16|48| Do they not see that anything, which Allah has created, casts its shadow right and left in humble prostration to Allah?
16|49| And to Allah does prostrate any creature that is in the heavens and that is in the earth, and the angels too do protrate. And they do not show pride.
16|50| They fear their Lord over them. And they do what they are commanded.
16|51| And Allah tells human beings not to take two gods. He is Allah, the One and Only. "So Me alone should you hold in awe."
16|52| And whatever is in the heavens and the earth is His, and the way of life ought to be for Him ever. Will you then fear any being other than Allah?
16|53| And the good things, you have, are all from Allah. Then when anything bad afflicts you, to Him do you complain loudly!
16|54| And yet when He removes the hardship from you, lo, some of you worship others besides their Lord!
16|55| And so they become ungrateful for what We have given them. Enjoy then for now! You shall soon come to know your real destiny.
16|56| And they set apart a portion of what We have given them for those of whom they know nothing. By Allah, you shall most certainly be questioned about that which you have been concocting!
16|57| And they arbitrarily attribute daughters (angels) to Allah. HE is too glorious to have any such creaturely attribute. And, for themselves, they would have what they desire (sons)!
16|58| And when news of a daughter being born is given to any of them, his face becomes darkened with suppressed anger.
16|59| He hides himself from the people because of the stigma of the news given to him. Shall he keep it despite the disgrace, or bury it in the dust? Verily, their judgment is vicious. 
16|60| An example of evil applies to those who believe not in the Hereafter. And the best/loftiest example applies to Allah. And He is the Omnipotent, the Wise.
16|61| And had Allah seized mankind for their unjust acts, He would not have left, on the earth, even a single creature. But He gives them a definite time limit. And when their time comes, they shall not be able to postpone it for a moment nor prepone it.
16|62| And they assign to Allah what they hate for themselves. And their tongues philosophically cover up the lie to say that for them there shall be nothing but the good. There is no doubt that for them there shall be the Fire and that they shall be hastened thereto.
16|63| By Allah, We did certainly send Messengers to peoples that existed before you. Then the Satan made their deeds seem good to them. And he became their walihof the day (period). And they shall have a painful punishment.
16|64| And We have not sent down the Book to you but to make clear to them what they differ in, and as Guidance and Mercy for people who believe.
16|65| And Allah it is Who sends down water from the sky and therewith gives life to the earth after its death. There is indeed a sign in this for people who listen.
16|66| And, indeed, in the cattle there is a lesson for you. We give you pure, potable drink of milk out of what they consume in their bellies, and drawn from excreta and blood. a
16|67| And from the fruits of the palm-tree and the vine, you get intoxication as well as good food. There is indeed a sign in this for a people who ponder.
16|68| And your Lord inspired the bee to "have hives in the mountains, in the trees and in the buildings."
16|69| "And then eat of all the fruits and tread the paths of your Lord submissively." A beverage of various colours comes forth from within it, wherein there is curative value for mankind. There is indeed a sign in this for people who reflect.
16|70| And Allah it is Who has created you. It is He then Who causes you to die. And among you there may be someone who, after having acquired knowledge, is reduced to such a decrepit state of life that he knows nothing. Allah is indeed Knowledgeable, Powerful.
16|71| And it is Allah Who has given some of you more/better provisions than to others. Would then those who are thus favoured give away their provisions to their slaves so that they become equal therein? Do they then deny this privilege that Allah has given them?
16|72| And it is Allah Who has made spouses for you from among yourselves, and through your spouses He has given you sons, daughters and their further families. And He has provided wholesome food for you. Do they believe then in the falsehood and suppress the fact that it is Allah Who has given them the good things they enjoy?
16|73| And they worship, besides Allah, those that possess nothing, in the heavens and the earth, wherewith to sustain their worshippers. Nor have those any power to possess anything.
16|74| So liken not anything to Allah! Indeed, Allah knows and you do not.
16|75| Allah gives an example: a slave — property of another person — who has no power over anything, and, on the other hand, a free man whom We have given a good provision from Ourselves and he spends from it secretly and openly. Are the two alike? To Allah is due all praise! But, most of them know not.
16|76| And Allah gives another example, of two men, one of whom is dumb, unable to do anything, and a burden on his master. He is not good at whatever task the master gives him. Can he be held equal to him who enjoins what is just, and is himself on the right path?
16|77| And with Allah is the knowledge of the unseen/secrets of the heavens and the earth. And the happening of the Hour is but as a momentary sight or consuming even less time. Allah indeed can do anything.
16|78| And it is Allah Who brought you out from the wombs of your mothers, knowing nothing. And He gave you hearing and sight and intellect that you may be grateful. 
16|79| See they not how the birds are enabled to be in mid-air above? None keeps them there but Allah! Indeed, there are signs in this for people who believe.
16|80| And Allah has facilitated for you rest, security and solace in your houses. And He has facilitated for you tents.of the skins of cattle which you find light to carry when you travel and when you stay out. And of the animal wool, fur and hair, He has given you assets and possessions for a time.
16|81| And Allah has made for you shelters from what He has created, and places of retreat in the mountains. And He has provided for garments for you to protect you from the heat and for armour to protect you in your armed conflicts. Thus does He complete His favour upon you in order that you submit to Him.
16|82| And if, even then, they turn away, the responsibility on you (Prophet Muhammad) is only to deliver Allah's Message clearly to the people.
16|83| They are aware of Allah's favour, yet they deny it! And most of them are those who suppress the Truth.
16|84| And One Day We will raise a witness out of every community. Then shall no leeway be given to those who suppress the Truth, nor shall they be allowed to solicit favours.
16|85| And when those who are wicked experience the punishment, its severity on them shall not be decreased, nor shall they be given any respite.
16|86| And when those who worship others besides Allah see those others, they shall say, "Our Lord! These are our other gods whom we prayed to besides You." But they will retort, "Certainly indeed you are liars!"
16|87| And they shall tender submission to Allah on that day. And what they used to concoct shall depart from them.
16|88| For those who suppress the Truth and cause hindrance in Allah's Path, We will add punishment over punishment because they have been spreading corruption.
16|89| And One Day We will raise in every people a witness against them from among themselves, and bring you as a witness against these. And We have revealed to you the Book explaining everythingclearly, and as a guidance, mercy and good news for those who submit. 
16|90| Allah does indeed enjoin justice, kindness and giving things to near and dear ones. And He forbids obscenity, abomination and rebellion. He admonishes you that you may remember and take heed.
16|91| And fulfill Allah's covenant when you make one. And break not oaths after affirming them; for, then, you have indeed made Allah stand surety for you. Allah does indeed know what you do.
16|92| And be not like the woman who disintegrates her well-spun yarn into fibres.You take your oaths as means of interference in one another's affairs so that one community gets bigger than another. Allah has not but put you on trial by this; and He will certainly make clear to you, on the Resurrection Day, that, about which you differed.
16|93| And if Allah had so willed, He would certainly have made you a single community. But He causes whom He wills to go astray and guides whom He wills to go on the Right Path. And you will certainly be questioned as to what you did.
16|94| And take not your oaths as means of interference in one another's affairs, lest a footstep should stumble after it is firmly taken and you should taste adversity because you hindered someone from Allah's Path. And grievous punishment should be your lot.
16|95| And trade not covenant with Allah, for petty gains. That which is with Allah is certainly better for you, if you but knew.
16|96| What is with you gets exhausted and what is with Allah endures. And We will certainly give to those who are patient their reward for the good things they did.
16|97| Whoever, male or female, does good work, and he/she is a believer, We will certainly make him/her live a good and clean life, and We will certainly give them their reward for the good things they did.
16|98| And when you recite the Qur'aan, seek refuge with Allah from the accursed Satan.
16|99| Indeed he (Satan) has no authority over those who believe and have trust in their Lord.
16|100| His authority is only over those who befriend him and over those who worship him besides Allah.
16|101| And when We change one Message for another — and Allah knows best what He reveals they say, "You are only a forger." Nay, most of them know not.
16|102| Say, "The Holy Spirit has authoritatively revealed it (the Qur'aan) as from your Lord, in order that it may stabilise those who believe and give guidance and good news for those who submit."
16|103| And We are certainly aware that they say, "A certain man it is who teaches him." The person they are alluding to speaks a foreign tongue, and this is clear Arabic tongue!
16|104| Allah does indeed not guide those who do not believe in His Messages. And they shall have a painful punishment.
16|105| Those that believe not in Allah's Messages, it is they who concoct the lie. And those are the liars.
16|106| Allah's Wrath is on people who deny Allah after having believed in Him, not on those compelled while their hearts are at rest with faith, but on those that open their minds to suppression of the Truth. And they shall have the most severe punishment.
16|107| That is because they love this worldly life more than the Hereafter, and because Allah does not guide people who suppress the Truth.
16|108| These are the people on whose hearts, hearing and eyes Allah has set a seal. And they take no heed!
16|109| No doubt, in the Hereafter, they will be the doomed ones.
16|110| And then, on the other hand, your Lord is indeed Forgiving and Merciful on those who migrate after they are persecuted, then struggle hard and are patient.
16|111| On that Day every one shall come, pleading for one's own self. And every one shall be paid one's full dues, and they shall not be wronged.
16|112| And Allah gives an example of a village/town, safe and secure, to which its means of subsistence came in abundance from every quarter. Then it became ungrateful to Allah's favours. And Allah made it wear the garb of hunger and fear because of what they wrought.
16|113| And, of course, a Messenger from among them had come to them, but they rejected him. So disaster struck them because of their wickedness.
16|114| Eat then of what Allah has given you, lawful and wholesome. And be grateful for Allah's favours, if Him it is that you worship!
16|115| HE has forbidden you only carrion (what dies of itself), blood, flesh of swine and that over which any name, other than that of Allah, has been invoked. But if anyone is driven by necessity — and not desire — and does not exceed limits, then Allah is indeed Forgiving, Merciful.
16|116| And describe not anything falsely, with your tongues, as being lawful or unlawful so as to concoct a lie and ascribe it to Allah. Indeed, those who concoct a lie and ascribe it to Allah shall not prosper.
16|117| They will enjoy a little and then have a painful punishment.
16|118| And for those who were Jews, We prohibited what We have related to you already.h And We did them no wrong, but they wronged themselves.
16|119| And your Lord is indeed Forgiving and Merciful to those who do an evil act in ignorance, then turn in repentance after that and make amends.
16|120| Abraham was indeed an institution by himself, firmly committed to Allah. And he was never a polytheist.
16|121| He was ever grateful for Allah's favours. HE chose him and guided him to the Straight Path.
16|122| And We gave him a good life in this world, and, in the next, he will indeed be among the good, righteous people.
16|123| We then instructed you to follow Abraham's lifestyle steadfastly. And he was not of the polytheists.
16|124| The Sabbat was ordained only for those who differed about it, and your Lord indeed will judge between them on the Resurrection Day concerning that about which they differed.
16|125| Call people to the Path of your Lord with wisdom and good counsel, and argue with them in the best possible manner. Your Lord does indeed know who go astray from His path, and who follow it.
16|126| And if you retaliate, then retaliate with the like of that with which you were afflicted. But if you are patient, it will certainly be better for those who are patient.
16|127| And be patient and your patience is not but by Allah's Grace. And grieve not for them, and do not distress yourself at what they plot.
16|128| Allah is indeed with those who fear Him and with those who do good deeds.
17|1| Glorified He is Who took His devotee on a night journey from the Sacred Place of Worship (at Makkah) to the Distant Place of Worship, the precincts of which We have blessed, so that We may show to him some of Our signs. It is He indeed Who hears, sees, everything. 
17|2| And We gave Moses the Book and made it a guidance for the Children of Israel, "Entrust none but Me for management of your affairs!"
17|3| They were offspring of those whom We bore with Noah on the Ark. He was indeed a grateful subject.
17|4| And We had decreed, in the Book, to the Children of Israel, "You will surely make mischief on the earth twice, and you will surely rise to great heights of haughtiness."
17|5| So when the first of the two prophecies came to pass, We let loose over you Our subjects of mighty strength; and they ravaged through the houses. And it was a prophecy accomplished. a
17|6| Then We gave you back the turn to prevail against them, and aided you with wealth and children and made you a numerous predominant force.
17|7| If you do good deeds, you do it for your own good. And if you do bad deeds, you do it to your own detriment. So when the second prophecy would come so that they (your enemies) disgrace you and enter the Place of Worship as they had entered it the first time, and that they might destroy utterly whatever they lay their hands on. 
17|8| It may be that your Lord will have mercy on you. And if you revert to disobedience, We too will revert to punishing you. And We have made Hell a prison for those who suppress the Truth.
17|9| This Qur'aan does indeed guide to that which is straight and stable. And it gives the good news to the believers who do good work that they shall have a great reward.
17|10| And the Qur'aan warns those who do not believe in the Hereafter that We have prepared a painful punishment for them.
17|11| And man prays for evil as he ought to pray for good. And man is ever hasty.
17|12| And We have made the night and the day as two signs. We efface the sign of the night and make the sign of the day clear, so that you may seek favour from your Lord, know the calendar and keep accounts. And We have explained everything in details.
17|13| And We have tied every man's actions to his neck. And We will bring out for him on the Resurrection Day a record thrown wide open.
17|14| "Read your record! You yourself are sufficient as an auditor against you this day."
17|15| One that goes on the right path does so for one's own self. And one that goes astray does so to one's own detriment. And no bearer of a burden bears the burden of another, nor do We punish until We send a Messenger.
17|16| And when We wish to destroy a town, We send Our commandment to its wealthy people who lead easy lives, but they defiantly disobey! So the divine Word takes effect against that town, and We deal with it destructively.
17|17| And many a generation, after Noah, did We destroy! And your Lord has a sufficient knowledge of and is a sufficient Witness to His subjects' faults/mistakes/sins.
17|18| As for one who desires instant gains in this present life, We do hasten therein, to whom We will, what We please. Then We make the Hell burn, to disgrace and reject that one.
17|19| And as for one who desires the Hereafter and strives for it as one ought to strive and is a believer, the strivings of such people are duly accepted.
17|20| We do aid all — these (mentioned in Verse above) as well as those (mentioned in Verse
17|21| See how We have favoured some of them over others. And, of course, the Hereafter is much superior in ranks and favours.
17|22| Worship none but Allah lest you remain disgraced, forsaken.
17|23| And your Lord has commanded that you shall worship none but Him, and that you shall be good to your parents. If either or both of them reach old age while with you, you shall not utter even a word of the slightest annoyance or reproach to them. And speak to them kindly.
17|24| And be submissively and compassionately protective of them, and pray, `O my Lord! Have mercy on them as they had brought me up during my childhood.'
17|25| Your Lord knows what is in your minds. If you are good, then He does indeed forgive those who often turn to Him in penitence.
17|26| And give to the near of kin his/her due, and to the needy and the wayfarer their dues. And be not a spendthrift.
17|27| Indeed, the spendthrifts are brothers of the satanic people and the Satan is ever ungrateful to his Lord.
17|28| And if you are not in a position to help them out and you are yourself seeking mercy from your Lord, speak to them a kind word.
17|29| And do not make your hand tied to your neck nor extend it to its utmost limit, lest you should be left blamed and impoverished.
17|30| Your Lord does indeed enlarge means of subsistence for those He wills and restrict for those He wills. He does indeed have full knowledge of and does constantly keep watch on His creatures that always ought to obey Him.
17|31| And kill not your children for fear of poverty. We give them sustenance as We give it to you. Killing them is indeed a great wrong.
17|32| And go not near fornication/adultery! It is indeed an abomination and an evil path.
17|33| And do not kill any one, whose killing Allah has forbidden, unless duly authorized to do so. And whoever is slain unjustly, We have of course given to his heir power to retaliate. But let him not then exceed just limits in killing. He does indeed deserve help.
17|34| And come not near the property of the orphan except as propriety demands till he attains his maturity. And keep the promise you make. The promise shall indeed be questioned about.
17|35| And give full measure when you give anything by measure, and weigh with a true balance. This is fair and yields a better result in the end.
17|36| And follow not that of which you have no knowledge! The hearing, the sight and the mind shall all be questioned thereon.
17|37| And walk not on earth exultantly, for you cannot tear the earth nor reach the mountains in height.
17|38| All that — the evil thereof — is hateful in the sight of your Lord.
17|39| This is of what your Lord has revealed to you of wisdom. And worship not any god other than Allah lest you should be thrown into Hell, blamed, rejected.
17|40| Has then your Lord chosen sons for you, and taken daughters for Himself from among the angels!? What you say is indeed very grave!
17|41| And We certainly have explained things variously in this Quran that they may take heed. But it adds nothing but aversion to their credit!
17|42| Say, "If, as they say, there were other gods along with Him, then certainly they would have sought a way to the Lord of the Throne." a
17|43| Glorified He is and exalted extremely high above what they say.
17|44| The seven heavens, the earth and whoever or whatever is in them declare His glory. And there is not a thing but glorifies Him with His praise, but their glorification you understand not. He is indeed Considerate, Forgiving.
17|45| And when you recite the Qur'aan, We place between you and those who do not believe in the Hereafter a hidden barrier.
17|46| And We have placed a veil on their hearts and deafness in their ears lest they understand it. And when you mention only your Lord (and not their deities other than Allah) in the Qur'aan, they turn their backs in aversion.
17|47| We know best what they listen to when they listen to you, and when they talk secretly among themselves. Then the wicked people say, "You follow none but one who is under a magic spell."
17|48| See what they liken you to! That is because they have gone astray and cannot find the way.
17|49| And they ask, "When we shall have become bones and dust (after death), shall we even then be raised up as a new creation!? " 
17|50| Say, "Even when you become stones or iron,"
17|51| "Or some other creation that is too hard to be revived to life in your minds!" Then they will ask, "Who will revive us?" Say, "He Who created you the first time." Then they will shake their heads at you in disbelief and say, "When will it be?" Say, "Maybe it is near. " 
17|52| On that Day of Resurrection, He will call you, and you shall respond uttering His praise. And you will think that you had remained in the grave for only a little while.
17|53| And say to My human creatures, who all ought to obey Me, that they speak that which is most appropriate and proper. Indeed, the Satan sows discord among them. The Satan is indeed an open enemy to man.
17|54| Your Lord knows you. He will have mercy on you, or He will punish you, as He wills. And We have not sent you as the manager of their affairs.
17|55| And your Lord knows those who are in the heavens and the earth. And We have certainly favoured some of the prophets over others. And We gave Dawood the Psalms.
17|56| Say, "Call on whom you want to, besides Him! They cannot remove the distress from you nor can they change it."
17|57| They themselves — whom they call upon — seek the means of getting closest, among themselves, to their Lord. And they hope for His mercy and fear His punishment. Indeed, the punishment of your Lord is a thing to be afraid of.
17|58| And not a village/town/city but We will destroy it before the Day of Resurrection or punish it with a severe punishment. This stands recorded in the Divine Ordinance.
17|59| And nothing prevented Us from sending miracles except that the ancients rejected them. And We gave Thamood the she-camel — a manifest miracle — but they wronged her. And Weh do not send miracles but to warn. 
17|60| And We did say to you, "Your Lord has indeed kept mankind under His control. And We did not make the visionwhich We showed you — as also the tree cursed in the Qur'aan — but a trial for mankind. And We warn them. But it only adds to their utter transgression."
17|61| And when We asked the angels to prostrate to Adam, they prostrated. But Iblees did not. He said, "Shall I prostrate to him whom You have created of dust?"
17|62| He said, "Do you see whom You have honoured above me? If You should give me parole till the Day of Resurrection, I will most certainly keep a tight leash on his progeny but for a few of them."
17|63| Allah said, "Get out of here! And Hell is the due recompense to you and to all those who, among them, will follow you."
17|64| "And beguile whom you can of them with your voice, and cover them with your thinking and your behaviour, and be their partner in wealth and children, and feed them with promises." And the Satan promises them not but to deceive.
17|65| "Indeed, you have no authority over all those whom I have created and who all obey Me. And your Lord is sufficient as a Guardian/Manager of their interests."
17|66| Your Lord is He Who navigates the ships for you in the sea that you may seek things out of His grace. He is indeed ever Merciful to you.
17|67| And when, while on the sea, distress strikes you, all, but He, whom you pray to, desert you. Then when He brings you back safe to the land, you turn away from Him. And man is ever ungrateful.
17|68| Do you then feel secure that He will not crush you under a landslide or send upon you a violent storm? Then you may not find anyone to save you.
17|69| Or, do you feel secure that He will not take you back into it (sea) another time, then send on you a stormy wind and thus drown you on account of your ungratefulness? Then you may not find anyone to help you against Us in the matter.
17|70| And verily We have been liberal to the children of Adam, and We have carried them in the land and the sea, and We have provided them with wholesome good things, and We have preferred them, in granting favours, over most of our creations.
17|71| On the Day of Resurrection, We will call every people with their Imam. Then those shall read their books, every one of whom will be given his book in his right hand. And they shall not be wronged a bit.
17|72| And he, who is blind in this world and has strayed away from the Path, shall also be blind in the Hereafter.
17|73| And, indeed, they wanted to turn you away from that which We have revealed to you, so that you concoct against Us something else. And then they would certainly have taken you as a friend. 
17|74| And had We not made you firm, you would almost certainly have inclined to them a little.
17|75| In that case We would certainly have doubled for you the suffering in life and in death. Then you would not have found any one to help you against Us.
17|76| And, indeed, they wanted to make you unsettled in the land in order to drive you therefrom. And in that case they would not have lived there after you but a little.
17|77| This was Our custom with regard to those of Our Messengers whom We had sent before you, and you shall find no change in Our custom.
17|78| Establish ritual prayer during the interval from the time the sun sets till the darkness of the night spreads completely. And recite the Qur'aan at dawn. The recitation at dawn is indeed to be in the presence of a congregation.
17|79| And keep awake part of the night reciting it (Qur'aan). This is an additional thing for you (the Messenger) to do. Maybe your Lord will raise you to a praiseworthy position. 
17|80| And say, "My Lord! Grant me a truly sound entry into and a truly sound exit from any course of action I undertake in this world. And My Lord! Grant me Your powerful support in whatever good I do."
17|81| And say, "The Truth has come and the falsehood has perished. The falsehood is bound to perish."
17|82| And We reveal, of the Quran, that which is a healing and a mercy to the believers. And it adds to nothing but doom of the wicked people.
17|83| And when We bestow some favour on man, he keeps himself arrogantly aloof. And when anything bad happens to him, he is in despair.
17|84| Say, "Every one goes his own way. And your Lord knows who it is that is guided to the right path."
17|85| And they ask you about the soul. Say, "The soul is one of the commands of my Lord. And you are not given knowledge but a little thereof."
17|86| And if We so will, We could certainly take away that which We have revealed to you. Then you would not find anyone to guard it for you against Our doing so
17|87| Except for Mercy from your Lord! His favour upon you is indeed abundant.
17|88| Say, "Even if men and jinn should join together and help each other to bring about the like of this Quran, they would not be able to do it."
17|89| And certainly, in this Quran, We have variously explained every aspect of life for mankind. But most of them did not but reject it ungratefully. 
17|90| And they say, "We will not believe in you until you cause a fountain to gush forth from the earth for us."
17|91| "Or there are for you a garden of date-palms and grape-vines with rivers flowing luxuriantly through them."
17|92| "Or you cause the heaven to come down upon us in pieces as you think it would, or you bring Allah and the angels before us."
17|93| "Or you have a house of gold, or you ascend into heaven, and we will not believe in your ascent until you bring down to us a book for us to read." Say, "Glorified is my Lord! Am I anything but a mortal man sent with a divine Message?"
17|94| And nothing prevented people from believing when the divine Guidance came to them except for what they said, "Has Allah raised a mortal man as His Messenger!?"
17|95| Say, "Had angels been the normal inhabitants on earth, We would certainly have sent down to them from the heaven an angel as divine Messenger."
17|96| Say, "Allah suffices as a witness between me and you. HE is indeed well aware and minutely observant of all His human creatures."
17|97| And the one, whom Allah guides, is the one who is guided. And the one, whom He leaves to go astray, you shall not find any awliya for him besides Him. And We will gather them together, on the Day of Resurrection, all lying on their faces — blind, dumb and deaf. Their abode shall be in Hell. We will increase the intensity of the blazing Fire, whenever it abates, for them.
17|98| This is their retribution because they suppressed the truth of Our Messages/Verses/Signs and because they said, "What! When we shall have become bones and dust, shall we then indeed be raised up as a new creation?"
17|99| Do they not see that Allah — Who created the heavens and the earth and appointed an end for them wherein there in no doubt — is able to create their like?hBut the wicked people do not but suppress the Truth.
17|100| Say, "Even if you were in control of the treasures of the Mercy of my Lord, you would miserly hold on to it for fear of exhausting it. And man is stingy."
17|101| And We did give Moses nine clear signs. Ask the Children of Israel about them. When he came to them, Pharaoh told him, "I do indeed consider you, O Moses, to be a man bewitched."
17|102| Moses said, "You do know that none but the Lord of the heavens and the earth has sent down these as clear evidence. And I do indeed consider you, O Pharaoh, to be a man doomed."
17|103| Then Pharaoh wanted to get them destabilised in the land. And We drowned him and those with him all together.
17|104| And, afterwards, We said to the Children of Israel, "Settle down in the land. Then when the second prophecy would come to pass, we will bring you together in one place."
17|105| And in truth have We sent itdown, and in truth has it come down. And We have not sent you but as the giver of good news and as a warner.
17|106| And We have made divisions in the Qur'aan and sent it down in stages, so that you recite it to the people at intervals.
17|107| Say, "Believe in it or not; but they indeed, who are given the knowledge before it, fall down on their faces in humble prostration, when it is recited to them." 
17|108| And they say, "Glorified is our Lord! The prophecy of our Lord was bound to be fulfilled."
17|109| And they fall down on their faces weeping, and it adds to their humility.
17|110| Say, "Pray to Allah or pray to the Gracious One; you may pray to Him by any of His beautiful names. And say your ritual prayer neither too loudly nor in an undertone, but choose a suitable tone in between." 
17|111| And say, "To Allah is due all praise, Who has taken no son to Himself. And He has no partner in His absolute sovereignty, and has no infirmity to protect against. And do proclaim His greatness!" 
18|1| All praise is due to Allah, Who sent down the Book to His devotee and made it flawless.
18|2| That shall remain immutable and straight so that it might warn them of severe punishment from Him and give good news to the believers, who do good deeds, that they shall have a good reward (Paradise).
18|3| They (the believers) shall stay therein for ever.
18|4| And warn those who say, "Allah has a son."
18|5| They know nothing of it, nor did their fathers know. A grave word it is that comes out of their mouths! They speak nothing but a lie.
18|6| Then maybe you (Prophet) will kill yourself with grief, on their account, if they do not believe in this Pronouncement (Qur'aan).
18|7| We have indeed made whatever is on the earth as an adornment for it, and We put them on trial to see which of them do good deeds.
18|8| And We will indeed turn everything thereon into barren soil.
18|9| Did you perchance consider the Men of the Cave and the story about them as among Our extraordinary signs?
18|10| When the youths sought refuge in the cave, they said, "Our Lord! Grant us mercy from Thee, and facilitate for us the right course in our affair." 
18|11| So We put a seal on their ears for a number of years in the cave.
18|12| Then We raised them up to see which of the two groups was best able to compute the time they had remained there in their unconscious state.
18|13| We relate to you their story in truth. They were indeed youths who believed in their Lord and We favoured them with more guidance.
18|14| And We strengthened their hearts when they stood up and said, "Our Lord is the Lord of the heavens and the earth. We pray not to any god besides Him; for, then, certainly, we would have uttered an abominable thing."
18|15| "These, our people, have taken gods besides Him! Why do they not produce any clear evidence in their support? Is there, then, anyone committing a greater wrong than one who concocts a lie against Allah!?"
18|16| "And when you leave them and what they worship besides Allah, go to the cave for refuge. Your Lord will extend His mercy to you and facilitate ease in your affair."
18|17| And you would see the sun bypass their cave, as it rose in the morning on the right; and as it declined in the afternoon on the left, it would pass them by while they lay in the spacious space in the cave. This is one of the signs of Allah. The one whom Allah guides, is the one rightly guided, and the one whom He misleads, you shall not find for that one any wali to direct him to the right path.
18|18| And you might think them awake, but they were asleep. And We made them turn to the right side and to the left, and their dog squatted on its outstretched forelegs at the entrance. Had you come upon them you would certainly have run away from them, and you would certainly have been overwhelmed with fear of them.
18|19| And so We roused them to make enquiries among themselves. One of them asked, "How long have you been here?" They said, "We have been here for a day or less than a day." Some said, "Your Lord alone knows how long you have been. Now send one of you with this silver coin of yours to the city, and let him find and bring some good food for you. And let him ensure that none comes to know about you."
18|20| "For indeed if they should find you out, they would stone you to death or force you back into their religion. And, then, you will never get salvation."
18|21| And thus We made people to stumble upon them (the Men of the Cave) that they (people) might know — when they quarrelled among themselves in their affair — that Allah's promise is true and that there is no doubt about the Hour. And they (the people who came to know the story of the Men of the Cave) said, "Erect a monument over them." Their Lord is well aware of them. Those who had authority over people's affairs said, "We will certainly raise a place of worship over them." 
18|22| Some of the people would later say, "They (the Men of the Cave) were three, the fourth being their dog." and some others would say, "Five, the sixth being their dog," making conjectures about what is unknown. And still others would say, "Seven, and the eighth was their dog." Say, "My Lord knows their number. None but a few know it. So argue not about them except for what you do know, and make no enquiries concerning them with any of the people."
18|23| And never say about anything, "I will indeed do it tomorrow." 
18|24| Without adding, "If Allah pleases." And remember your Lord when you forget and say, "Maybe my Lord will guide me to better conduct than this."
18|25| And they remained in their cave for three hundred years and some add nine to the number.
18|26| Say, "Allah knows how long they remained. To Him belong secrets of the heavens and the earth. HE sees them and He hears! There is no walih for them besides Him, and He does not share His Sovereignty with any one."
18|27| And recite what has been revealed to you of the Book of your Lord! There is none who can alter His words. And you shall find no provider of shelter besides Him.
18|28| And be yourself patient with those who pray to their Lord, morning and evening, desiring His good pleasure. And let not your eyes stray away from them, desiring glamour of life in this world. And follow not him whose heart We have made neglectful to Our remembrance and who follows his carnal desires and is reckless in his deeds.
18|29| And say, "This is the truth from your Lord. So he who wants to, let him believe, and he who wants to, let him suppress the Truth." We have indeed prepared for those who indulge in wrong-doing a fire, the flames of which shall encompass them. And if they cry for help, they shall be given water like molten brass which will scald their faces. What a miserable drink and what a miserable resting-place!
18|30| We shall indeed not let the reward, of those who believe and do good, go waste.
18|31| These it is for whom are gardens of perpetuity beneath which rivers flow. Reclined comfortably on decorated couches, they will be adorned therein with bracelets of gold, and they will wear green robes of fine silk and heavy brocade. What an excellent reward and how beautiful a resting place!
18|32| And tell them the parable of two men. For one of them We made two gardens of grape vines, and We bordered them both with date-palms. And between the two gardens We made cornfields.
18|33| Each of the gardens yielded its fruits, and nothing went wrong therein. And We caused a spring to gush forth in their midst.
18|34| And he had good yield. So he said to his companion in a conversation with him, "I have more wealth than you, and I command greater respect among the people."
18|35| And he entered his garden; and he was unfair to himself. He said, "I do not think that this will ever perish."
18|36| "And I do not think the Hour will ever occur. And even if I am returned to my Lord I will certainly find there a better place than this."
18|37| His companion answered, "Do you deny Him Who created you from dust, then from a tiny seed of fertilized ovum and then shaped you into a man?"
18|38| "But as for me, He, Allah, is my Lord, and I do not associate anyone with my Lord."
18|39| "And why did you not say when you entered your garden that it is as Allah has willed and that there is no power but with Allah? If you see me inferior to you in wealth and children,"
18|40| "Then maybe my Lord will give me something better than your garden, and send a thunderbolt from heaven on your garden so that it shall become just a barren land."
18|41| "Or its waters should sink deep into the ground so that you are unable to find it."
18|42| And the yield of his gardens was caught in a disastrous wave of destruction. And he started wringing his hands for his investments therein, which had turned upside down. And he said, "Alas! I should not have associated anyone with my Lord."
18|43| And he had no manpower to help him besides Allah, nor could he help himself.
18|44| There! Allah is the only True Wali. He is best in giving rewards and the best to go to in the end.
18|45| And tell them that the life of this world is like water which We send down from the sky. Spring forth therewith all kinds of vegetation on the earth. Then it (vegetation) becomes dry and brittle and the winds scatter it. And Allah has the ability to do all things.
18|46| Wealth and children are but an adornment of the life of this world. And the abiding good deeds are better, for reward and hope, with your Lord.
18|47| And on the Day when We will cause the mountains to move away and you will see the barren earth, We will gather them and leave none of them behind.
18|48| And they shall be lined up before your Lord. "Verily, you have come to Us in the state We created you at first. But you had thought that We had not fixed any appointment for you."
18|49| And the Book shall be produced. And you will see the sinners scared of its contents. And they will say, "Oh, woe to us! What a book is this! It omits nothing, small or big, but mentions them all." And whatever they had done, they shall find it there. And your Lord causes no wrong to anyone.
18|50| And when We asked the angels to prostrate to Adam, they all did prostrate, but Iblees did not! e was a jinni, and he swerved from the commandment of his Lord. Would you then take him and his progeny, rather than Me, as awliya, and they are your enemies? What a miserable exchange for the wrongdoers!
18|51| I did not make them witness the creation of the heavens and the earth, nor of the creation of their own selves. And there was no question of my taking those who mislead as helping hands.
18|52| And on the Day when He shall say, "Call those whom you considered to be My associates!" So they shall call them, but they shall not respond to them. And We shall place a destructive barrier between them.
18|53| And the sinners shall see the Fire, and they shall know that they are going to fall into it. And they shall find no way out therefrom.
18|54| And We have certainly explained in this Quran, for the benefit of mankind, examples of every kind. And man is, in most things, quarrelsome.
18|55| And nothing prevents people from believing and asking forgiveness of their Lord — when the guidance has already come to them — except that what happened to the ancient peoples should overtake them or that the punishment should confront them.
18|56| And We do not send Messengers but as givers of good news and of warnings. And those who suppress the Truth resort to falsehoods that they may extinguish the truth thereby. And they hold My Verses/signs and warnings in ridicule.
18|57| And who is worse in wickness than he who is reminded of the Verses/signs of his Lord, but turns away therefrom and forgets what his two hands have sent before ? We have indeedh placed covers over their hearts, and deafness in their ears, lest they should understand it (Lord's Verses/signs). And if you call them to guidance, they will not follow it ever.
18|58| And your Lord is Forgiving, full of Mercy. Was He to catch them for what they earn, He would certainly have hastened the punishment for them. But there is an appointed time for them from which they shall find no escape.
18|59| And these towns We destroyed when they acted unjustly — We had fixed an appointed time for their destruction!
18|60| And when Moses said to the youth accompanying him, "I will not stop until I reach the confluence of two rivers even if I have to continue this journey for a long time."
18|61| So when they reached the confluence, they forgot their fish, and it burrowed its way into the sea.
18|62| But when they had gone farther, he said to his young companion, "Take out our breakfast. We have certainly met with fatigue in this journey of ours."
18|63| The youth said, "You know when we took some rest on the rock, I forgot about the fish — and nothing but the Satan made me forget to tell you about it — when, strangely, it found its way into the river!"
18|64| Moses said, "That was the spot we had sought for!" They then retraced their footsteps back to the spot.
18|65| There they found one of Our devotees. We had favoured him with mercy from Us and We had given him some knowledge from Us.
18|66| Moses said to him, "May I follow you so that you teach me of the right knowledge you have been taught?"
18|67| He said, "You can never have patience with me."
18|68| "And how can you have patience in matters over which you do not have comprehensive knowledge?"
18|69| He said, "Allah willing, you shall find me patient and I shall not disobey you in any matter."
18|70| He said, "If you would follow me, question me not about any thing until I myself speak to you about it."
18|71| And both of them went out on a journey. And there arose no problem between them until when they boarded a boat he (Moses' new companion) made a hole in it. Moses said, "Have you made a hole in it to drown the people thereon? Certainly you have done a grave thing."
18|72| Moses' companion said, "Did I not say that you will not be able to have patience with me?"
18|73| Moses said, "Hold me not responsible for a thing I forgot, and burden me not with difficulty in my affair."
18|74| And they both went on until, when they met a boy, he (Moses' companion) killed him. Moses said, "Have you killed an innocent person otherwise than for manslaughter? Certainly you have done a condemnable thing."
18|75| Moses' companion said, "Did I not tell you that you will not be able to have patience with me?"
18|76| Moses said, "If I ask you about anything after this, keep me not in your company. Verily, you shall have then an excuse, provided by me, for you to do so."
18|77| And they both went on until, when they came to a town, they requested its people to give them some food, but they refused to feed them as guests. They then found in it a wall which was about to collapse and Moses' companion set it right. Moses said, "You could certainly have taken some wages for it."
18|78| Moses' companion said, "This shall be the parting between me and you. I will now inform you of the true perspective of my actions over which you could not have patience."
18|79| "As for the boat, it belonged to some poor men who worked on the river. And I wished to make it defective as there was, across them, a king who seized every boat by force."
18|80| "And as for the boy, his parents were believers, and we feared lest he should trouble them with disobedience and ingratitude."
18|81| So we desired that their Lord would give them in his place a boy better than him in purity and more compassionate.
18|82| "And as for the wall, it belonged to two orphaned boys in the city, and there was beneath it a treasure belonging to them, and their father was a righteous man. So your Lord desired that they should attain their maturity and take out their treasure as a mercy from your Lord. And I did not do it of my own accord. This is the true perspective of my actions over which you could not have patience."
18|83| And they ask you about Zulqarnain. Say, "I will recite an account of him to you."
18|84| We did indeed give him authority on earth and means to pursue any thing he did.
18|85| So he followed a means.
18|86| And when he reached a place as the sun declined in the west, he found it declining on a oligotrophic spring. And he found a people living near it. We said, "O Zulqarnain! Cause them to suffer or treat them well."
18|87| He said, "We will punish only the one who is wicked. He shall then be returned to his Lord, and He will punish him with a severe punishment."
18|88| And as for him who believes and does good deeds, he shall have good reward, and We will make Our command easy for him.
18|89| Then he followed another means.
18|90| And when he reached a place as the sun rose in the East, he found it rise on a community to whom We had given no shelter therefrom.
18|91| And thus We had put a limit to the knowledge he (Zulqarnain) could have. 
18|92| Then he followed yet another means.
18|93| And when he reached a place between two mountains, he found beyond these a people who could hardly understand a word.
18|94| They said, "O Zulqarnain! Gog and Magog do indeed make mischief in this land. May we then give you expenses so that you raise a barrier between us and them?"
18|95| Zulqarnain said, "What my Lord has given me is better than what you would give me. So you assist me with labour only and I will construct an obstruction between you and them."
18|96| "Bring me iron sheets." And when he had filled up the gap between the two mountain sides, he said, "Blow!" And when he had turned it red hot, he said, "Bring me molten brass to pour over it."
18|97| So they were not able to scale it nor could they breach it.
18|98| He said, "This (construction of the barrier/gate) is a mercy from my Lord. But when the prophecy of my Lord comes to pass, He will level it to the ground, and the prophecy of my Lord has ever to come true."
18|99| And, one day, We shall let the different communities of mankind get mixed up with one another like waves.And then the trumpet will be blown, and We shall gather them all together.
18|100| And We shall present the Hell, that Day, for display before those who had suppressed the Truth.
18|101| — Those whose eyes had a cover against seeing My Reminder (Qur'aan) and who were unable to listen to it.
18|102| Do they then who suppress the Truth think that they can take My subjects as awliya, besides Me? We have indeed prepared Hell as the destination of those who suppress the Truth.
18|103| Say, "Shall We inform you who the greatest losers are in their deeds?"
18|104| "They are those whose efforts in the life of this world are misdirected and they think that they are doing good work!"
18|105| Those are the people who suppress the Truth in the Verses/signs of their Lord and of the appointment with Him. So their deeds have become null and void. And so We will not assign any weightage to their deeds on the Day of Resurrection.
18|106| That Hell is their recompense because they suppressed the Truth and held My Verses/signs and My Messengers in ridicule.
18|107| For those who believe and do good deeds, their bestowal shall indeed be the gardens of paradise.
18|108| They will abide therein; they will never seek any transfer therefrom.
18|109| Say, "If the sea were ink for the words of my Lord, the sea would surely be exhausted before the words of my Lord are exhausted, though We were to bring the like of it (sea) in aid."
18|110| Say, "I am only a man like you. It is revealed to me that the Entity you should worship is One and Only. So, whoever hopes to meet his Lord, he should do good deeds, and worship none besides his Lord." h 
19|1| About such initials at the beginning of certain Chapters, please see study note : (Manzil I).
19|2| This is a narration of the mercy of your Lord on His devotee Zachariah.
19|3| When he prayed to his Lord silently.
19|4| He prayed, "My Lord! My bones have indeed become weak and my head shining white. And, my Lord! I have never been disappointed in my prayer to You."
19|5| "And indeed I worry about what my relatives will do after me. And my wife is barren. So bestow upon me a proper heir from You."
19|6| "Who shall be an heir to me and an heir to the children of Jacob. And make him, my Lord, one in whom You are well pleased!"
19|7| [The divine response was,] "O Zachariah! We do indeed give you the good news of a boy whose name shall be Yahya (John). We had not given this name to anyone before."
19|8| Zacharia said, "O my Lord! How can I have a son, and my wife is barren, and I have myself grown too old!?"
19|9| [The divine response was,] "So shall it be. Your Lord says, `It is not at all difficult for Me, and indeed I created you before, when you were nothing.'"
19|10| Zachariah said, "My Lord! Give me a sign." The Lord said, "Your sign is that you will not be able to speak to the people for three consecutive nights."
19|11| So he came out to his people from the chamber, then he communicated to them, through signs, that they should glorify Allah morning and evening.
19|12| "O John! Hold on to the Book firmly." And We granted him the authority over men while he was yet a child.
19|13| And We gave him the gift of compassion from Us and of purity, and he feared Allah.
19|14| And ever courteous to his parents, he was never insolent, disobedient.
19|15| And peace on him on the day he was born, the day he dies, and the day he is raised to life again.
19|16| And mention Mary in the Book when she withdrew from her family to stay at a place towards the East.
19|17| And she screened herself from them, and We sent to her Our spirit, and it appeared before her as a man well-made.
19|18| She said, "I do indeed seek the Gracious Allah's protection against you, if you do really fear Allah."
19|19| He said, "I am a Messenger of your Lord: I am sent to give you a gem of a boy."
19|20| She said, "How can I have a boy when no man has ever touched me? And I have never been unchaste."
19|21| He said, "It will be so even in those circumstances — Your Lord says, `It is easy for Me.' — so that We may make him a sign for men, and a mercy from Us. And it is a matter which has already been decreed."
19|22| So she conceived him and then withdrew with him to a remote place.
19|23| And the throes of childbirth drove her to the trunk of a palm tree. She said, "Oh, would that I had died before this, and had been a thing long forgotten!"
19|24| Then a voice called out to her from beneath her, "Grieve not, your Lord has surely made a canal flow beneath you."
19|25| "And shake the trunk of the palm tree towards you. It will drop on you fresh ripe dates."
19|26| So eat and drink and relax! Then if you should see any man, tell him (by signs), "I have indeed vowed unto the Gracious Allah not to speak to any man today."
19|27| And she came to her people carrying the child. They said, "O Mary! You have verily done a terrible thing."
19|28| "O sister of Aaron ! Your father was not a bad man, nor was your mother an unchaste woman."
19|29| But she pointed to him. They said, "How could we speak to a mere child in cradle?"
19|30| The child said, "I am indeed a devotee of Allah. HE has given me the Book and made me a Prophet."
19|31| "And He has made me blessed wherever I may be, and He has enjoined on me prayer and charity so long as I live."
19|32| "And to be couteous to my mother. And He has not made me insolent, impudent."
19|33| "And peace on me on the day I was born, the day I die and the day I am raised to life again."
19|34| This (as narrated in Verses to above) then is Jesus, son of Mary — the word of Truth about which they raise disputes.
19|35| It is not befitting the majesty of Allah that He should beget a son. Glorified He is! When He has decreed a matter, He only says to it "Be," and it is.
19|36| And, indeed, Allah is my Lord and your Lord; hence, worship Him. This is the Straight Path.
19|37| But the tribes disagreed among themselves — and woe to those who disbelieve — about the Court of Judgment to be assembled on a tremendous Day.
19|38| Make them listen to you when you speak to them about the Day they shall appear before Us, and make them understand the significance of that Day. But those who are wicked shall continue to remain grossly mistaken about the Day.
19|39| And warn them of the Day of intense regret, when all matters get finally decided. And they are under a delusion and they do not believe.
19|40| We do indeed inherit the earth and all those who are on it, and to Us they all shall be returned.
19|41| And make mention of Abraham in the Book. He was indeed a true Prophet.
19|42| When he said to his father, "O my father! Why do you worship a thing that neither hears nor sees, nor does it give you any benefit whatsoever?"
19|43| "O my father! I do have some knowledge that you do not. So follow me! I will show you the Right Path."
19|44| "O my father! Worship not the Satan. The Satan is indeed a rebel against Allah, the Gracious."
19|45| "O my father! I am afraid, a punishment from the Gracious Allah may afflict you and you may befriend the Satan."
19|46| He (Abraham's father) said, "Are you averse to my gods, O Abraham? If you do not desist I will certainly pelt you with stones. And leave me alone for now."
19|47| Abraham said, "Peace on you! I will pray to my Lord to forgive you. He is indeed ever benevolent to me."
19|48| "And I will go away from you and what you pray to besides Allah, and I will pray to my Lord; may be my prayer to my Lord shall not remain unanswered."
19|49| So when he had gone away from them and what they worshipped besides Allah, We bestowed upon him Isaac and Jacob, and We made each a Prophet.
19|50| And We bestowed upon them Our mercy, and We gave them each a highly truthful tongue.
19|51| And mention Moses in the Book. He was indeed pure and clean; and he was a Messenger Prophet.
19|52| And We called to him from the right side of Mount Sinai, and We drew him near for a talk.
19|53| And We made for him, by Our mercy, his brother Aaron a Prophet.
19|54| And mention Ishmael in the Book. He was indeed true to his word, and a Messenger Prophet.
19|55| And he used to enjoin his family to pray and to give in charity, and his Lord was well pleased with him.
19|56| And mention Idris in the Book. He was indeed a true Prophet.
19|57| And We raised him high in status.
19|58| Those were men on whom Allah bestowed favours. Those were from among the Prophets of the seed of Adam, and of those whom We carried in the Ark with Noah, and of the seed of Abraham and Israel, and of those whom We guided and chose. Whenever Verses/signs of the Gracious Allah were recited to them, they would fall down prostrating and weeping.
19|59| But then generations that followed them became negligent of prayers and followed sensual desires. And they shall encounter disaster
19|60| Except such as repent and believe and do good deeds. These shall enter the Garden, and no injustice shall be done to them.
19|61| Gardens of perpetuity which the Gracious Allah has promised to those who worship Him even when they do not see Him. His promise shall indeed come to pass.
19|62| They shall not hear therein any vain discourse; the discourse shall be only on peace. And they shall have all their provisions therein morning and evening.
19|63| This is the garden that We cause those of Our subjects to inherit who fear Allah.
19|64| And we (angels) do not descend but by the command of your Lord. To Him belongs whatever is before us and whatever is behind us and whatever is in between. And your Lord does not forget,
19|65| The Lord of the heavens and the earth and what is in between them. So worship Him and be patient in worshipping Him. Do you know any one equal to Him?
19|66| And says man, "When I am dead and gone, shall I even then certainly be brought out alive?!"
19|67| Does not man remind himself that We had created him before, when he was nothing?
19|68| And, by your Lord, We will most certainly gather them and the satanic people together. Then shall We certainly cause them to be present around Hell on their knees.
19|69| Then We will most certainly pull out from every group one who had transgressed most against Allah, the Gracious.
19|70| And We do certainly know best those who deserve most to be burned therein.
19|71| And there is not one of you, but shall come to it. For your Lord this is a decree already issued.
19|72| And We will save (from Hell) those who fear Allah, and We will consign the wrongdoers therein on their knees.
19|73| And when Our clear Verses/signs are recited to them, those who disbelieve say to those who believe, "Which of the two groups of us are better in position and well organised?"
19|74| And how many of the generations have We destroyed before them who were apparently well established!
19|75| Say, "The Gracious Allah will surely give a long lease to all those who have gone astray, until they see what they were warned about: the punishment or the Hour. Then they shall know who is worse in position and weaker in force."
19|76| And Allah increases guidance of those who go by the Guidance. And lasting good deeds are better for reward with your Lord and yield better return.
19|77| Have you, then, seen him who suppresses the Truth in Our Verses/signs and says, "I shall certainly be given wealth and children?"
19|78| Has he gained knowledge of the unseen, or made a pact with the Gracious Allah?
19|79| By no means! We write down what he says, and We will extend the duration of the punishment for him.
19|80| And We will inherit from him what he talks of (his wealth and his children), and he shall come to Us alone.
19|81| And they have taken gods, besides Allah, as sources of power for them!
19|82| By no means! They shall soon deny their worshipping them, and they shall be adversaries to them.
19|83| Do you not see that We have sent the devils against those who suppress the Truth, inciting them on in their pernicious deeds?
19|84| So be not hasty about them. Their days are numbered.
19|85| The Day on which We shall gather before Allah, the Gracious, groups of pious people.
19|86| And We will drive the criminals in herds towards Hell.
19|87| They shall have no power of intercession, unless one has struck a deal with the Gracious One.
19|88| And they say, "The Gracious One has a son."
19|89| Certainly you have come up with an atrocious thing.
19|90| The heavens almost were torn asunder thereat, the earth was disturbed, and the mountains collapsed devastatingly
19|91| At that they ascribed a son to the Gracious One!
19|92| And it is inconceivable that the Gracious One could have a son.
19|93| None in the heavens and the earth but will come to the Gracious One obediently as a slave.
19|94| Certainly He has counted them and He has given everyone a number.
19|95| And all of them will come to Him, individually, on the Day of Resurrection.
19|96| Allah will certainly create affection for those who believe and do good deeds.
19|97| And then We have made it (the Qur'aan) easy in your tongue only so that you may give good news thereby to those who fear Allah and warn thereby a hostile people.
19|98| And how many a generation before them have We destroyed! Do you have any perception of any of them or hear any sound from them? 
20|1| Ta-ha
20|2| We have not sent down the Quran upon you to cause you distress.
20|3| It is but a Memorandum for one who fears Allah.
20|4| It is a bestowal from the One Who created the earth and the lofty heavens.
20|5| From the Gracious One, firmly established on the throne of absolute authority.
20|6| Everything — that which is in the heavens, on the earth, in between the two, and underneath the ground — is all His.
20|7| And if you say anything aloud, mind you, He knows the secret, and the hidden!
20|8| Allah — there is no god but He; His are the very best attributes. 
20|9| And has Moses' story come down to you?
20|10| When he saw some fire, he said to his wife escorting him, "Wait! I do indeed see a fire. Maybe, I can bring to you therefrom a live burning coal or come to know about the right way from someone at the fire."
20|11| And when he came to it (the fire), he was called out, "O Moses!"
20|12| "Verily, I am your Lord; so take off your shoes! You are indeed in the sacred valley of Tuwa."
20|13| "And I have chosen you, so then listen to what is revealed."
20|14| "Indeed, I, Myself, am Allah! There is no god but I. So worship Me and establish regular prayer to remember Me."
20|15| "The Hour (Last Day) is indeed coming. I will unravel it anytime so that every soul is recompensed for what it strived."
20|16| "So let him not, who does not believe in it (the Hour) and follows his low desires, turn you away from it so that you should perish."
20|17| "And what is this in your right hand, Moses!"
20|18| Moses said, "It is my staff. I lean upon it and I beat the leaves with it to make them fall upon my sheep, and I have other uses for it."
20|19| Allah said, "Cast it down, O Moses!"
20|20| And as Moses cast his staff down, it instantly became a serpent moving!
20|21| Allah said, "Hold it and be not afraid! We will restore it to its original state."
20|22| "And, another sign: put your hand under your arm, it shall come out perfectly white!"
20|23| "That We may show you some of Our great signs."
20|24| "Go to Pharaoh! He has indeed exceeded all bounds."
20|25| He said, "O my Lord! Broaden my mind for me."
20|26| "And make my task easy for me."
20|27| "And correct the stammer in my speech."
20|28| "Make them understand what I say."
20|29| "And appoint, from my family, an assistant for me."
20|30| "My brother, Aaron."
20|31| "Strengthen me with his support."
20|32| "And make him my associate in my work."
20|33| "So that we should glorify You much."
20|34| "And remember You often."
20|35| "You do indeed see us."
20|36| Allah said, "Your petition stands granted, O Moses!"
20|37| "And We did confer a favour on thee another time."
20|38| "When We revealed to your mother that which was revealed."
20|39| "That she should put him into a chest, and then put the chest onto the river. Then the river should throw him on the shore. There, one, who is an enemy to Me and enemy to him, should pick him up. And I made you lovable so that you might be brought up under My watchful eye."
20|40| "When your sister went and said, `May I lead you to one who will feed him?' Thus We returned you to your mother so that she should be comforted and not grieved. And you killed a man, and then We delivered you from that worry. And We tried you variously. Then you stayed for years among the people of Madyan. Then you came here as ordained, O Moses!"
20|41| "And I have made you for Myself."
20|42| "Now go, you and your brother, with My signs and be not remiss in remembering Me!"
20|43| "Go both of you to Pharaoh! He has indeed committed transgression."
20|44| "And speak to him gently. Maybe he takes heed or refrains from further evil."
20|45| Both said, "O our Lord! We do indeed fear that he may take no heed of us or that he may commit some transgression."
20|46| Allah said, "Fear not! I, Myself, am indeed with you both; I hear and I see."
20|47| "So go you both to him and say, `We two are, indeed, Messengers of your Lord. Send the Children of Israel with us and torment them not! Verily, we have brought to you a sign from your Lord. And peace on him who follows the guidance!'
20|48| `It has indeed been revealed to us that punishment will come upon him who rejects and turns away.'"
20|49| Pharaoh asked, "And who is the Lord of you two, O Moses?"
20|50| Moses said, "Our Lord is He Who gave everything its creation, and then guided it." 
20|51| Pharaoh asked, "Then what about the earlier generations?"
20|52| Moses said, "The knowledge thereof is in a record with my Lord. My Lord errs not, nor does He forget."
20|53| The Lord Who made the earth for you a flattened expanse and laid for you therein paths. And He sent down water from the sky. Then thereby We have brought out diverse herbs/plants in pairs.
20|54| Eat and tend your cattle. There are indeed signs in this for those who are prudent.
20|55| From it (earth) We created you and into it We shall send you back and from it will We raise you a second time.
20|56| And verily We showed him Our signs, all of them, but he rejected and turned arrogant.
20|57| Pharaoh said, "Have you come to drive us out of our land by your magic, O Moses?"
20|58| "We shall certainly then bring to you similar magic. Let us then, between us and you, have an appointment at a mutually convenient place, which we should neither of us fail to keep."
20|59| Moses said, "Let your appointment be on the day of the Festival and let the people be gathered together in the morning."
20|60| So Pharaoh withdrew, devised his plan of action, and then came.
20|61| Moses said to them, "Woe to you! Do not fabricate a lie against Allah, lest He should destroy you by a punishment. And he, who fabricates, does indeed fail."
20|62| And the magicians debated among themselves their response to Moses, but kept the discourse secret.
20|63| They said (among themselves), "Indeed, these two are just magicians. They wish to turn you out of your land by their magic and to deprive you of your best traditions."
20|64| "So do combine your plan, and then come in line. And he that is superior will certainly win this day."
20|65| They said (aloud), "O Moses! Will you do your act, or shall we be the first to do it?"
20|66| He said, "No! You do it." And lo! Their ropes and their sticks appeared to him (Moses), by their magic, as if they were moving.
20|67| So Moses felt a fear rising within him.
20|68| WE said, "Fear not, you shall indeed have the upper hand."
20|69| "And cast down that which is in your right hand. It shall devour what they have contrived. They have contrived only what a magician could plan. And the magician shall not succeed wherever he may have come from."
20|70| And the magicians were obliged to fall prostrate! They said, "We believe in the Lord of Aaron and Moses."
20|71| Pharaoh said, "You believed in him before I gave you leave. He ought to have been your superior who taught you magic. I will then certainly cut off your hands and your feet from opposite sides, and I will certainly crucify you on the trunks of the palm trees. And certainly you will come to know which of us is the more severe and the more persistent in punishing."
20|72| The magicians said, "There is no question of our preferring you over Him Who made us, after what has come to us of clear signs. So decide whatever you want to. You can only decide about life in this world."
20|73| "We do indeed believe in our Lord. May He forgive us our sins and that magic which you forced upon us. And Allah is better and everlasting."
20|74| Whoever comes to his Lord as a sinner, for him indeed is Hell. He shall not die therein, nor shall he live.
20|75| And whoever comes to Him as a believer with righteous deeds to his credit, he shall be among those who shall enjoy high ranks.
20|76| Gardens of perpetuity, beneath which rivers flow, to abide therein. And this is the reward of one who purifies oneself.
20|77| And We did reveal to Moses that he should "travel by night with My devotees, then make for them a dry path in the sea, without any fear of being overtaken or of any other sort."
20|78| And Pharaoh followed them with his armies. And so there came upon them from the sea that which came upon them. 
20|79| And Pharaoh led his people astray and guided them not.
20|80| O Children of Israel! We did verily deliver you from your enemy, and We made a covenant with you on the right side of the mountain, and We sent to you the manna and the quails. 
20|81| Make use of the good things We have provided you with, and be not inordinate therein lest My wrath should become due upon you. And he, upon whom My wrath becomes due, certainly perishes.
20|82| And I am indeed most forgiving to him who repents and believes and does good deeds, and then follows the right direction.
20|83| "And what made you come here earlier than your people, O Moses?" 
20|84| Moses said, "They are close behind me. And I hastened to You, my Lord, that You might be pleased."
20|85| Allah said, "But then We put your people on trial after you had left them behind, and the Samiri has led them astray."
20|86| Then Moses returned to his people, angry and sorrowful. He Said, "O my people! Did not your Lord give you a good promise? Did then the time for fulfillment of the promise seem too long to you? Or did you wish to incur wrath from your Lord, so you broke your promise to me?
20|87| They said, "We did not break our promise to you of our own accord, but we were made to bear the burden of the ornaments of the people. So we got rid of that burden just as the Samiri did."
20|88| Then he (Samiri) brought out for them a body of a calf, from which emanated a low sound. Then he told them, "This is your god and the god of Moses. But he (Moses) has forgotten it."
20|89| Could they not see that it did not respond to them at all, and that it did have no power to do any harm or to bring any benefit to them?
20|90| And certainly had Aaron told them earlier, "O my people! You are only being tried therewith. And, indeed, your Lord is the Gracious One. Follow me then and obey my order!"
20|91| They had said, "We will not abandon worshipping it until Moses returns to us."
20|92| Moses said, "O Aaron! What prevented you, when you saw them going astray,
20|93| From following me? Did you then go against my instruction?"
20|94| Aaron said, "O son of my mother! Seize me not by my beard and by my head. I was indeed afraid you might say, `You have caused a rift among the children of Israel and not waited for my word.'"
20|95| Moses then asked, "What have you to say on this, O Samiri?"
20|96| He said, "I saw what they did not see. And I took a handful of traces from the messenger and flung it. And this is what my own self prompted me to do."
20|97| Moses said, "Begone! Indeed, it is ordained for you in this life to say, `Touch me not!' And indeed there is a prediction for you that shall not fail. And look at your god that you hovered around! We will certainly burn it. Then we will certainly reduce it to dust and scatter it in the sea."
20|98| None but Allah is worthy of your worship! He knows everything.
20|99| Thus do We narrate to you some stories from the past. And We have verily given you the account (in the Qur'aan) from Ourselves.
20|100| One who turns oneself away therefromhshall indeed bear a burden on the Day of Resurrection.
20|101| Burdened they shall remain. And too bad for them the burden, On the Day of Resurrection!
20|102| The Day, the trumpet is blown — the Day, We gather the sinful, blue with fear.
20|103| Whispering among them, "You stayed but ten days."
20|104| We know best what they say; and the one among them, with the exemplary method of giving estimates, would say, "You stayed but a day."
20|105| And they ask you about the mountains. Say, "My Lord will pull them down to their roots."
20|106| And reduce it to a smooth, levelled plain.
20|107| You shall not see therein any ups and downs.
20|108| That Day they shall follow the caller, and they shall have no alternative but to follow him. And the voices shall be low in deference to the Gracious One and you shall not hear but a soft murmur.
20|109| That day no intercession shall benefit anyone except from him whom the Gracious One permits and whose word of intercession He approves.
20|110| HE knows what they are aware of, and what they are not aware of, and what is beyond the sphere of their knowledge.
20|111| And the faces shall be bent down before the Living, Everlasting One. And he who bears the burden of wrongdoing is certainly doomed.
20|112| And he who does some good work and is also a believer, he shall have no fear of injustice or of usurpation.
20|113| And so have We sent it down as a Qur'aan in Arabic, and have detailed therein some of the things that are going to happen in the future so that they may fear Allah and take heed or that it may serve them as a Reminder of things that have gone by.
20|114| And exalted is Allah, the true Sovereign! And make no haste with reciting the Quran before its revelation to you is completed. And say, "O my Lord! Increase my knowledge."
20|115| And We had verily given a commandment to Adam in the past, but he forgot! And We did not find in him the trait of resoluteness.
20|116| And when We asked the angels to prostrate before Adam, prostrated they all except for Iblees. He (Iblees) refused! 
20|117| And We said, "O Adam! This is an enemy to you and to your wife; so let him not drive you both out from the garden and thus make you miserable."
20|118| "It is indeed ordained for you that you shall not be hungry therein nor be naked."
20|119| "And that you shall not be thirsty therein nor shall you feel hot."
20|120| Then the Satan seduced him, saying, "O Adam! Shall I show you the tree of immortality and a kingdom that shall not decay?"
20|121| And they both succumbed to the satanic seduction, and then their sexuality got opened to them, and they both began to cover themselves with leaves of the garden. And Adam disobeyed his Lord and thus deviated from the right path.
20|122| Then his Lord chose him, so He accepted his repentance and guided him.
20|123| Allah said, "Down you both (Adam & Satan) go, together, in reciprocal enmity. And whenever Guidance comes to you from Me, then all those who follow My Guidance shall not go astray or be miserable."
20|124| "And he who turns away from My Reminder shall lead a hard life. and We will raiseh him on the Day of Resurrection, blind."
20|125| He will say, "My Lord! Why have You raised me blind? And I was certainly one able to see!"
20|126| Allah will say, "Just as Our Verses/signs came to you but you neglected them, so shall you be neglected this day."
20|127| And thus do We recompense him who is negligent and believes not in the Verses/signs of his Lord. And certainly the punishment in the Hereafter is severe and abiding.
20|128| Do they not take a lesson from the fact that We had destroyed many a generation before theirs, in whose dwelling-places they now move about? Indeed, there are signs in this for those who are prudent.
20|129| And had it not been that the Word had already gone forth from your Lord and an appointed term fixed, the same fate (of destruction in this world) that the earlier generations met with, would certainly be theirs (the generation addressed to in this Verse) too.
20|130| Exercise patience then over what they say. And glorify your Lord with His praise before the rising of the sun and before its going down. And glorify Him, during the night and during parts of the day, so that you get peace of mind. , 
20|131| And covet not that — which We have provided some couples among them with — of the glitter of this worldly life, whereby We try them. And what the Lord provides you with is better and lasting.
20|132| And enjoin prayer on your followers, and be regular and steadfast thereon. We do not ask you for any provision; We give it to you. And in the end it is those who fear Allah, and abide by His instructions, that get all the good things to enjoy.
20|133| And they say, "Why does he not bring to us a sign from his Lord?" Has not there come to them a clear exposition of what the earlier scriptures contain?
20|134| And had We destroyed them with punishment before this, they would certainly have said, "O our Lord! Why did You not send us a Messenger? For, we should then have followed Your Verses/signs before we met disgrace and shame."
20|135| Say, "Everyone is waiting, so you too wait! You will soon come to know who is following the right path and who is guided."
21|1| For the human beings, their time of reckoning is near, and yet they pass their time in utter recklessness.h 
21|2| No aspect of divinity comes to them from their Lord in the form of a fresh anecdote but they listen to it in jest
21|3| Just to serve as a distraction for their minds. And the wicked people secretly whisper, "Is he not just a man like you? Will you then knowingly yield to the magic spell?"
21|4| The Prophet said, "My Lord knows every word spoken anywhere in the heavens and the earth. And He is the One to hear and the One to know everything."
21|5| But they variously said, "Just a confusing mixture of dreams!" "But he has forged it." "But he is a poet." "Let him then bring to us a sign just as the earlier prophets were sent with."
21|6| Any town/village that We had destroyed before them, too, had not believed! Will they, taking this fact into account at least, believe?
21|7| And We sent (as Prophets/Messengers for mankind), before you, none but men inspired with Our Revelation. Ask the people of the Reminder (divinely revealed Book) if you do not know.
21|8| And We had not made them bodies that did not eat food, and they were not immortal.
21|9| And We made Our promise good to them; We saved them and those whom We pleased, and We destroyed the transgressors.
21|10| Verily We have revealed to you a Book in which are things for you to ponder over, remember and abide by. Do you then not use your intelligence to understand it?
21|11| And many a town/village, whose inhabitants were cruel, did We shatter, and We raised up, thereafter, another people!
21|12| No sooner did they perceive Our punishment coming than they began to flee therefrom.
21|13| Flee not, and come back to the affluence you were accustomed to live in and to your homes for being questioned!
21|14| They said, "O woe to us! We were wicked."
21|15| And this cry of theirs continued till We made them like smouldering harvested field.
21|16| And We did not create the heavens and the earth, and what is between them, for fun.
21|17| Had We wished to have some amusement, We would have derived it from within Ourselves, if at all.h 
21|18| Nay! We cast the truth against the falsehood to demolish it (falsehood). And lo! Falsehood perishes. And woe to you for the (wrong) way you perceive things.
21|19| And whoever is in the heavens and the earth is His. And those who are with Him are never too proud to worship Him, nor do they get weary.
21|20| They glorify Allah, night and day, without a break.
21|21| Or have they taken gods whom they themselves have fashioned/designed out of the earth!?
21|22| Had there been in them any gods other than Allah, the two (the heavens and the earth) would certainly have been in a state of disorder. Glorified then is Allah, the Lord of the Throne, above all that they attribute to Him.
21|23| He cannot be questioned concerning what He does but they (human beings) shall be.
21|24| Or have they taken gods other than Him? Say, "Produce your evidence! This is the precept (that there is no god besides Allah) for those with me and the precept for those before me." But most of them do not know the truth, and so they are intransigent.
21|25| And We did not send before you any Messenger but We revealed to him that there is no god but I, and so worship Me.
21|26| And they say, "The Gracious One has begotten (angels)!" Glorified is He. Nay! They are His honoured worshippers.
21|27| They do not speak ahead of Him and they act at His Command.
21|28| HE knows what they know of and what they do not know of. And they intercede not except for him whom He wills and they are on their guard in awe of Him.
21|29| And whoever of them says that he is indeed a god besides Him, We award Hell to such a one. We do thus award the wicked people.
21|30| Do those who suppress the Truth not see that the heavens and the earth were both one in kind, and then We did distinguish the two. And We have made of water everything living, will they not then believe?
21|31| And We have placed mountains in the earth so that positions thereon do not move. And We have made therein passes to enable people to move about and find their way.
21|32| And We have made the sky a protective roof and yet they are oblivious to its signs! 
21|33| And He it is Who created the night and the day, the sun and the moon. All in orbit float.
21|34| And We did not ordain immortality for any man before you. And so if you die, will they remain alive?
21|35| Every one must taste death. And We test you with trial periods of adversity and prosperity. And to Us you shall be brought back.
21|36| And when those who suppress the Truth see you, they do not take you but for one to be scoffed at, "Is this the one who talks of your gods?" And they suppress mention of the Gracious One.
21|37| Man is created hasty in nature. Soon shall I show you My signs. So be not hasty! 
21|38| And they ask, "When will this prediction come to pass if what you say is true?"
21|39| Had those who suppress the Truth but known that a time would come when they shall not be able to ward off the fire from their faces or from their backs! And then they shall get no help.
21|40| But it (the time mentioned in Verse above) shall come on them all of a sudden and catch them unawares. And they shall not be able to avert it. And they shall not be given any respite.
21|41| And certainly Messengers before you were scoffed at. But then the thing they mocked about surrounded those of them who scoffed. 
21|42| Ask them, "Who can guard you, by night and by day, from the Gracious One?" And, yet, they turn away at the mention of their Lord.
21|43| Or, have they gods who can defend them against Us? They shall not be able to help themselves. Nor shall they have any benefit of association with Us.
21|44| But, for a prolonged period in their lives, We did provide for them and their fathers with good things of life. Have they therefore become so complacent as not to see that We are closing in on them from all sides? And does their complacency make them think that they shall still prevail?
21|45| Tell them, "I warn you only because I have been divinely instructed to do so." And the deaf do not hear the call howsoever much they are warned.
21|46| And if punishment of your Lord were to touch them even slightly, they would certainly say, "O woe to us! We did indeed commit wrong."
21|47| And We will set up just scales for the Day of Resurrection, so no wrong shall be done to anyone. And if there be anything as little in weight as that of a mustard seed, We will present it nevertheless. And We are sufficiently proficient in keeping accounts.
21|48| And certainly We did give Moses and Aaron the Criterion, a Light, and a Book often to refer to for guidance to those who would fear Allah and be pious.
21|49| Those that feared their Lord without seeing Him and were anxiously concerned about the Hour (marking the end of this world and heralding the Day of Judgment in the Hereafter).
21|50| And would you then deny that this (Qur'aan) is the blessed Book, often to refer to for guidance, We have now revealed?
21|51| And certainly We did give Abraham, before (Moses and Aaron), his firmly right conduct. And We were aware of this
21|52| When he asked his father and his people, "What statues are these that you are so devoted to?"
21|53| They said, "We found our fathers worshipping them."
21|54| Abraham said, "Certainly you had — you and your fathers — gone far astray."
21|55| They said, "Are you telling us the truth, or just making fun of us?"
21|56| He said, "But your Lord is the Lord of the heavens and the earth. It is He Who created them out of nothing. And I am of those who bear witness to this."
21|57| "And, by Allah! I will certainly do something to your idols after you go away, turning your backs."
21|58| So he broke those (idols) into pieces, except for the biggest of them, that they (polytheists) may turn to it (to inform them as to who did the destruction of the other idols).
21|59| They asked, "Who has done this to our gods? The one who did this is certainly one of those most wicked!"
21|60| Some said, "We had heard a youth called Abraham speaking about them."
21|61| The others said, "Then bring him before the eyes of the people. Let all witness."
21|62| The polytheists said, "Have you done this to our gods, O Abraham!?"
21|63| Abraham said, "Nay, it is this one — the chief of them — that has done it. So ask them, if they can speak coherently!"
21|64| Then, turning to themselves, they said, "You yourselves indeed are in the wrong."
21|65| And, their heads hanging down, they said to Abraham, "You do know they do not speak."
21|66| Abraham said, "Do you then worship, besides Allah, that which brings you no benefit at all, and no harm either?"
21|67| "Fie on you and on that which you worship besides Allah! Why do you not use your intellect?" 
21|68| They said, "Put him in the fire and help your gods, if you are going to do anything."
21|69| WE ordered, "O fire! Be you a source of cool comfort and peace on Abraham."
21|70| And they had designed a plot against him, but We made them themselves the doomed ones.
21|71| And We saved him and Lot and led them to the land in which We had placed Our blessings for all.
21|72| And We gave him Isaac — and, in addition, Jacob — and We made them righteous.
21|73| And We made them leaders who guided people by Our command. And We revealed to them how good deeds are done, how prayers are performed, and how charities are given. And Us certainly they obeyed.
21|74| And Lot — We gave him wisdom and knowledge. And We delivered him from the town that did bad things. They were indeed a wicked, transgressing people (indulging in the sin of homosexuality).h 
21|75| And We took him (Lot) under Our mercy. He was indeed one of the righteous men.
21|76| And Noah — when he called out in an earlier period, We answered him, and delivered him and his family from the acute suffering (of drowning).
21|77| And We helped him against the people who rejected Our Verses/signs. They were indeed a wicked people, and so We drowned them all.
21|78| And David and Solomon — when they gave their judgments in the matter of the field wherein the sheep of some people pastured by night. And We bore witness to their judgments.h 
21|79| And We made Solomon to understand the problem better; but We gave wisdom and knowledge to each one of them. And We made the mountains, and the birds to sing Our praise with David (in the Psalms ). And We did all that.
21|80| And We taught him (David) how to make for you armours that fortify you in your battles. Are you then grateful? 
21|81| And to Solomon We made subservient the stormy wind, which blew at his command to the land We had blessed. And We did know all things.
21|82| And of the devils there were those who dived for him and did other work besides. And We were guardians over them.
21|83| And Job — as he cried to his Lord, "A calamity indeed it is that has afflicted me! And You are the most Merciful."
21|84| And We responded to him and removed whatever affliction he had. And We gave him his family, and as many more with them, out of mercy from Us and for Allah's worshippers to remember.
21|85| And Ishmael and Idris and Zulkifl — they were all of those who were patient.
21|86| And We admitted them to Our Mercy. They were indeed among the righteous people.
21|87| And the man of the fish — when he went away in anger, thinking We would not punish him! Then, among the darknesses (of the fish belly), he cried, "There is no god but You, glorified You are! I have indeed been of those who do wrong."
21|88| Then We responded to him and delivered him from the grief. And thus do We deliver those who believe.
21|89| And Zachariah — when he cried to his Lord, "O my Lord! Leave me not alone (without an heir). And You are the best of inheritors."
21|90| And We responded to him and gave him John (Yahya) and made his wife fit to bear the child. They did indeed try to surpass one another in deeds of goodness and they prayed to Us in hope and fear. And they were humble before Us.
21|91| And the lady (Mary) — who guarded her chastity, and We breathed into her of Our spirit and We made her and her son a sign for the worlds.
21|92| Indeed this community of yours is one community, and I am your Lord! So worship Me.
21|93| And they tore apart their (common) duty (of worshipping the sole Creator) among themselves. All shall return to Us.
21|94| Then one who performs some good deeds, and is a believer too — there shall be no concealment of his/her efforts! And surely indeed We will record it (the good deeds).
21|95| And an injunction against any village/town that We have destroyed: they shall not return!
21|96| Until the time Gog and Magoghare let loose and they descend from every prominent position.
21|97| And the true promise (of Resurrection) shall draw nigh. Then lo! The eyes of those who suppressed the Truth shall open wide in fear. They shall say, "O woe to us! We certainly were heedless of this; nay, we were wicked."
21|98| You and what you worship besides Allah are indeed the fuel of Hell-fire; to it you shall come.
21|99| Had these been gods, they would not have come to it (Hell) and all shall be there eternally.
21|100| For them therein wailing and they therein shall not hear. 
21|101| Indeed those for whom the good has already gone forth from Us shall be kept far off from it (Hell).
21|102| They will not hear its (Hell's) faintest sound, and they shall for ever be in what they desire.
21|103| The great fearful event shall not grieve them, and the angels shall meet and tell them, "This is your promised Day!"
21|104| The Day We roll up heaven like the scroll of records is rolled up! As did We originate the first creation, so shall We revive it! A promise binding on Us. We will indeed fulfill it.
21|105| And certainly We did write in the Zabur, after the recounting of events, that My righteous worshippers shall inherit the earth.
21|106| Indeed in this is a message for people who worship.
21|107| And We have hot sent you but as a Mercy to the worlds. 
21|108| Say, "It is revealed to me that the Entity Whom you all ought to worship is but One and Only [Allah]! Will you then submit?"
21|109| But if they turn back, say, "I have given you a warning in fairness and I know not what you are warned of is near or far."
21|110| "HE does indeed know what is spoken openly and He knows what you hide."
21|111| "And I know not but this (your life in this world) may be a trial for you and a provision to enjoy for a time."
21|112| He (the Prophet) said, "O my Lord! Decide justly (between me and my recalcitrant people). And our Lord is the Gracious One — the One Whose help is sought against what you (the recalcitrant people) say."
22|1| O people! Fear your Lord. Indeed, the cataclysm of the Hour is a trmendous thing.
22|2| That day, were you to witness it, every woman giving suck shall abandon what she suckled, and every pregnant woman shall abort what she bore. And you would see humans appear intoxicated, and they shall not be intoxicated. But the cataclysmic Act of Allah will be so severe (as to make them appear intoxicated).
22|3| And among mankind, one who disputes about Allah without knowledge and follows every rebellious satan;
22|4| Against such a one, it is ordained that he/she shall lead astray — and guide towards the punishment of the Fire — whoever takes him/her for a very close friend (wali).
22|5| O mankind! If you are in doubt about the Resurrection, then — to make things clear to you — We did indeed create you from dust, then from a little seed of fertilized ovum, then from a leech-like clinging clot of curdled blood, then from a chewed-like lump of flesh (foetus) with formed and unformed parts. And We facilitate what We will in the wombs till an appointed time, and then We bring you out as babies. Then We facilitate conditions for you to attain to your maturity. And of you is he who is made to die, and of you is he who is reduced to the worst part of life (very old age), so that he does not remember anything of the knowledge he had acquired earlier. And you see the earth barren, but when We send down the water on it, it stirs to life and flourishes and produces every kind of a beautiful spouse of herbage. 
22|6| That (Resurrection) is bound to happen because Allah is the Truth and because He gives life to the dead and because He has power over all things.
22|7| And because the Hour is coming and there is no doubt about it; and because Allah shall raise up those who are in the graves.
22|8| And among mankind there is such a one as disputes about Allah without knowledge, without guidance and without an enlightening book.h 
22|9| Such a one turns his face away in pride from divine guidance that he may lead others astray from Allah's Path. For him is disgrace in this world. And on the Day of Resurrection We will make him taste punishment in the Hell.
22|10| "This punishment is for what your two hands have sent before." And remember that Allah is not in the least unjust to those whom He has created for His worship.
22|11| And among mankind is he who worships Allah sitting on the fence. Then if anything good happens to him he is satisfied with that. But if he is put to trial with some adversity he turns his face away in disgust. He is doomed here and he is doomed in the Hereafter. That is the doom manifest!
22|12| He prays to someone — other than Allah — who can neither harm nor benefit him. That is going far, far astray!
22|13| He prays to him whose harm is closer than his benefit. Evil certainly is such guardian and evil certainly is such associate.
22|14| Allah will indeed cause those who believe and do good deeds to enter gardens beneath which rivers flow. Allah does indeed do what He wills.
22|15| If anyone thinks that Allah does not help him in this life and the Hereafter, let him reach out to the heavens by means available to him, then (study its functions meticulously by) cutting himself off (his earthly connection), and then see if his obstinacy gets rid of its severity.
22|16| And thus have We revealed it (the Qur'aan) with Verses made clear. And Allah it is Who guides whom He wills.
22|17| Those who believe (in the Qur'aan) and those who are Jews and the Saabieen and theh Christians and the Magians (Zoroastrians or Parsis or fire-worshippers) and the polytheists — Allah will indeed decide between them on the day of Resurrection. Allah indeed is a witness to all things. 
22|18| Do you not see that it is Allah to Whom prostrates whatever is in the heavens and whatever in the earth — the sun, the moon, the stars, the mountains, the trees, the living creatures and many among mankind. And among mankind there are many upon whom punishment has become due. And whomsoever Allah abases, there is none who can make him honourable. Allah does indeed do what He wills.
22|19| These are two adversaries who dispute about their Lord. And garments of fire shall be cut out for those who suppress the Truth, with boiling water being poured over their heads.
22|20| What there is in their bellies, and skins, shall be melted therewith.
22|21| And for them there shall be cages of iron.
22|22| Whenever they will, in their anguish, desire to go out from it, they shall be pushed back into it and told, "Taste punishment by the Fire."
22|23| Allah will indeed admit those who believe and do good deeds into gardens beneath which rivers flow. They shall be adorned therein with bracelets of gold and pearls, and their garments therein shall be of silk.
22|24| And they will be guided to say good things while speaking and they will be guided onto the Path of the Praised One.
22|25| As regards those indeed who suppress the Truth and hinder people away from Allah's Path and from the Sacred Place of Worship — which We have made open equally for all mankind, for the local resident as well as for the visitor — We shall make him taste a painful punishment who intends making unjust and wrongful deviations therein. 
22|26| And when We assigned to Abraham the location of the House (at Makkah), Allah told him, "Worship not anyone but Me, and sanctify My House for those who take the rounds thereof and stand in prayer and bow and prostrate."
22|27| And proclaim among mankind the duty of performing the Pilgrimage. Let them come to you on foot and on every means of conveyance. They will come from every distant broad way.
22|28| That they may witness benefits for themand take Allah's name, during days appointed, over what He has provided for them of the quadruped cattle. Then they eat thereof and feed the distressed, the needy.
22|29| Then let them attend to personal hygiene like cutting superfluous hair and nails, and let them fulfil their vows (like praying for their near and dear ones back home) and let them take rounds of the Ancient House.
22|30| And so it is better for anyone, in the eyes of his Lord, that he honours Allah's injunctions. And the cattle — except for what are mentioned to you — are made lawful for you. Avoid then the abomination of the idols and utter no falsehood.
22|31| Stand firm and upright for Allah, and worship none but Him. And he who worships anyone/anything besides Allah, it is as though he had fallen from the skies, and the bird has snatched him away or the wind carried him off to a distant place.h 
22|32| And so when anyone honours the sacred rites/signs sanctioned by Allah, then it is of the acts that make hearts pious.
22|33| You have benefits in them (cattle brought for sacrifice during the Hajj) for a time, and then their destination is the Ancient House.
22|34| And for every community We appointed a sacrificial rite that they may remember and mention Allah's name over what He has given them of the quadruped cattle. The Entity worthy of your worship then is One and Only. So to Him you all should submit. And give good tidings to the humble.
22|35| Those whose hearts tremble when Allah is mentioned, and those who are patienth over what afflicts them, and those who keep up the prayer as prescribed, and spend appropriately (as prescribed in the Qur'aan) out of what We have given them.
22|36| And the camel! We have made it one of those things (emblems) through which one could come to know Allah. And there is much good in it for you. Mention Allah's name over it as it is lined up (for its sacrifice during the Hajj), and then when it falls down on its sides, eat therefrom and feed the contented as well as the poor. We have thus made it subservient to you, in order that you be grateful.
22|37| Its (the sacrificed animal's) flesh reaches not Allah, nor does its blood. But it is your piety that reaches Him. He has thus made it subservient to you, in order that you may glorify Allah for what He has gifted to you. And give glad tidings to those who do handsome good deeds.
22|38| Allah does indeed repel evil from those who believe. Allah indeed does not love any one who is unfaithful, ungrateful.
22|39| Permission to fight back is given to those who are wrongfully attacked. And indeed Allah is certainly capable of helping them.
22|40| Those that have been displaced from their homes unjustly just because they say, "Our Lord is Allah." And had Allah not withstood some with others among mankind, certainly then monastries and churches and synagogues and masajid, in which Allah's name is much remembered, would have been pulled down. And surely Allah will help him who helps His cause. Certainly indeed Allah is Strong, Powerful.
22|41| Those who will establish prayer, spend in charity, enjoin good and forbid evil, once We give them a foothold in the land. And with Allah is the end of all matters.
22|42| And if they reject you, then so did the people of Noah and AAad and Thamood, before them, reject.
22|43| And the people of Abraham and the people of Lot.
22|44| And those that lived in Madyan (Midian in Hebrew). And Moses was rejected. I let the suppressors of Truth enjoy for a while, and then I seized them. And how severe in effect was My forsaking them!
22|45| And many a town/village We did destroy when it committed injustices. And it lay in ruins with its roofs coming down.. And many a well and lofty castle were deserted.
22|46| Why do they not so conduct themselves on the earth as to have minds with which to understand, or ears with which to hear? For, surely, it is not the eyes that are blind, but it is the minds that are in the heads, which are blind. 
22|47| And they ask you to hasten with the punishment; and Allah is not the One to fail in His promise. And, indeed, a day with your Lord is a thousand years as you keep count of time.
22|48| And how many an unjust town/village had I been indulgent to and patient with! And then I seized it!! And to Me is the final destination.
22|49| Say, "O people! I am here only to give you a plain warning."
22|50| Those then that believe and do good deeds — they shall have forgiveness and a liberal provision.
22|51| And those who strive to get the better of (or defeat the purpose of) Our Verses/signs — they shall be the inmates of the Hell.
22|52| And no Messenger, nor Prophet, did we send before you, but when he delivered the divine Message to the people, the Satan cast doubts into that Message. And Allah blots out that which the Satan casts, and then does Allah make His Verses/signs prevail. And Allah is Knowledgeable, Wise.
22|53| So that He may make what the Satan casts a temptation for those in whose hearts is a disease, and the means for hardening their hearts. And indeed the wrongdoers are in a state of extreme rebellion.
22|54| And so that those endowed with the knowledge know that it is the truth from your Lord, and so they believe in it and their hearts do humbly submit to it. And Allah is certainly indeed the Guide, of those who believe, towards a straight path.
22|55| And those who suppress the Truth shall not cease to be in doubt concerning it until, suddenly, the Hourcomes upon them, or, there comes upon them the torment of a day, any remedial action wherein would be fruitless.
22|56| The sovereignty that day shall be absolutely Allah's; He will judge between them. And those who believe and do good deeds will be in gardens of bliss.
22|57| And those who suppress the Truth and reject Our Verses/signs — for those will there be a disgraceful punishment.
22|58| And those who migrate in Allah's way and are then killed or they die, them shall Allah give the best of provisions. And indeed Allah it is Who is the Best of the providers.
22|59| He will certainly admit them to a place which they shall be well pleased with. And Allah is indeed Knowledgeable, Gentle and Kind.
22|60| So shall that be! And Allah surely helps the one that retaliates to the extent one was wronged but then an excess is committed. Allah is certainly indeed Lenient, Forgiving. 
22|61| That is because Allah causes the night to enter into the day and causes the day to enter into the night, and because Allah hears, sees.
22|62| That is because Allah is the Truth, and that what they pray to besides Him — that is the falsehood. And because, Allah is the One that is high, the One that is great.
22|63| Don't you see that Allah sends down water from the skies and then the earth becomes green? Allah is indeed meticulous, well-informed.
22|64| His it is whatsoever there is in the heavens and whatsoever there is in the earth! And Allah indeed it is that surely is the Self-sufficient One, the Praised One.
22|65| Don't you see that Allah has made everything in the earth subservient to you? And the ship sails on the sea by His command. And He keeps the heavens from falling on the earth, except with His leave. Allah is indeed Kind and Merciful to men.
22|66| And He it is Who has brought you to life, He will then cause you to die, and then again He will bring you to life. Certainly indeed man is ungrateful.
22|67| For every community We devised rites for them to observe. They should not therefore raise a dispute with you in the matter. And do invite them to your Lord! You are indeed on right guidance.h 
22|68| And if they quarrel with you, say, "Allah knows what you do."
22|69| Allah will judge between you on the Day of Resurrection on matters in which you differ.
22|70| Don't you know that Allah knows what is there in the heaven and the earth? That is indeed recorded in a book. That is indeed easy for Allah.
22|71| And they worship, other than Allah, that for which He has sent no authority, and about which they have no knowledge. And no help shall avail those who indulge in wrong-doing.
22|72| And when Our clear Verses are read out to them you will find denial in the faces of those who suppress the Truth. They well-nigh assault those who read out Our Verses to them. Say, "Shall I tell you what is worse than this? The Fire! Allah has promised it to those who suppress the Truth. And it's a horrible place to go to!"
22|73| O mankind! An example is given; listen to it: Those, whom you pray to besides Allah, cannot create a fly, even though they combine together for the purpose. And if the fly snatches away something from them, they have no power to get that something released from the fly. Weak are the seeker and the sought, both!
22|74| They have not given Allah the Credit due to Him! Allah is indeed Strong, Mighty.
22|75| Allah chooses Messengers from among the angels and from among mankind. Allah does indeed hear, He does indeed see.
22|76| HE knows what is before them and what is behind them. And to Allah are all matters returned.
22|77| O you who believe! Bow and prostrate and worship your Lord. And do that which is good so that you may achieve success.
22|78| And strive in Allah's way, as one ought to strive in His way. HE has chosen you [the pronoun is in plural] and has not laid upon you any severity in following the way of life approved by Him for you — the lifestyle of your forefather Abraham. HE named you as the Muslims before and in this (Qur'aan), so that the Messenger may be a witness over you, and you may be witnesses over mankind. Hence, pray to Allah regularly and properly, give charity and hold fast unto Him! HE is your Guardian. How excellent the Guardian, and how excellent the Supporter!h 
23|1| Truly do the believers succeed!
23|2| Those that remain humble in their prayers,
23|3| And those that shun vanity,
23|4| And those that practise charity,
23|5| And those that guard their chastity,
23|6| Except from their spouses or from those whom they rightfully possess. For indulging in sex with them, they are, of course, not to be blamed.
23|7| But whoever seeks to go beyond that — those are the ones that go beyond limits.
23|8| And those who are true to their trusts and who keep their word,
23|9| And those who guard their prayers,h 
23|10| They are the ones who shall inherit.
23|11| They shall inherit the Paradise. And they shall be therein forever.
23|12| And We did create the human being from an extract of clay. @ @ The Nobel Prize winner for medicine Jack W. Czostak says, "...a common clay mineral montmorillonite might have played a role in helping to make RNA." RNA, is one of the three major macromolecules (along with DNA and proteins) that are essential for all known forms of life. [Source]
23|13| Then We made him/her a small seed (fertilized ovum) dropped into a resting-place, secure and compact.
23|14| Then We made the seed a clinging leech-like clot of blood, then We made it a thing looking like a chewed morsel of food, then We made it bones, then We dressed the bones with flesh, and then We caused it to grow into another creature. Blessed then is Allah, the Best of the creators!
23|15| Then, after that, you will indeed certainly die.
23|16| Then, on the day of Resurrection, you shall indeed be raised from the dead.
23|17| And We did make above you seven layers. And We have not ever been heedless about what We have created. 
23|18| And We send down water from the sky in measured quantities, then We cause it to settle down in the earth. And We can indeed certainly make it evaporate.
23|19| Then We bring up thereby gardens of date-palm and grapes for you. There are plenty of fruits for you to eat, in those gardens.
23|20| And a tree (olive) that grows out around Mount Sinai and produces oil and condiment for those who use these in their food.
23|21| And certainly indeed there is a pointer for you in the cattle. We provide for you a drink out of what their bellies contain. And you have in them many benefits. And from them you get meat to eat.
23|22| And on them and on the ships you are carried.
23|23| And We did certainly send Noah to his people. And he said, "O my people! Worship Allah, you have no god other than Him. Will you not then fear Him?"
23|24| And then the leaders of those who suppressed the Truth from among his people said, "He is nothing but a man, like you. He desires to gain superiority over you. And if Allah had willed, He could certainly have sent down angels. We have not heard of such a thing happening during our forefathers' time."
23|25| "He is just a mad man. So keep a watch over him for some time."
23|26| He said, "My Lord! Help me; for, they have rejected me."
23|27| We then revealed our instructions to him: "Build the Ark under Our supervision and revealed instructions. And when, at Our command, the surface of the earth starts overflowing with water, put into it (Ark) two of every pair, and members of your family, except those among them against whom the Word (Allah's decree) has already been issued. And do not plead with Me on behalf of those who are cruel. They shall indeed be drowned."
23|28| "And when you and those with you go on board the Ark, say, `Praise is to Allah Who delivered us from the cruel people.'"
23|29| "And say, `My Lord! Take me to a blessed destination. And You are the One to take us to the best destination.'"
23|30| Surely indeed there are signs in this. And surely, We do put people on trial.
23|31| Then We raised up after them another generation.
23|32| And We sent to them a Messenger from among them to tell them, "Worship Allah! You have no god other than Him. Will you not then take heed?"
23|33| And the leaders of those among his people who suppressed the Truth and considered the appointment in the hereafter a lie, and to whom We had afforded ease and comfort in the life this world, said, "This is none but a man like you! He eats of what you eat from and drinks of what you drink."
23|34| "And if you obey but a man like you, then surely you are doomed."
23|35| "Does he promise you that when you are dead and become dust and bones you shall then be brought out alive!?"
23|36| "What you are promised of is utterly nonsense."
23|37| "There is nothing but our life in this world. We die and we live. And we shall not be raised again."
23|38| "He is none other than a man who has forged a lie against Allah. And we are not going to believe in him."
23|39| He (the Messenger) said, "O my Lord, help me! For, they have rejected me."
23|40| Allah said, "Soon they shall be regretful."
23|41| So the divine punishment caught up with them fairly and squarely. And We turned them into rubble. And so, the wicked people perished!
23|42| Then We raised, after them, other generations.
23|43| They cannot bring about the end of a community before the appointed time, nor can they delay it.
23|44| Then We sent Our Messengers one after another. Whenever their Messenger came to a people, they denied he was the divine Messenger sent to them. So We made one community succeed another to doom and We got them mentioned in tales. And so, people, who believed not, perished!
23|45| And then We sent Moses and his brother Aaron, with Our signs and a clear mandate.
23|46| We sent them to Pharaoh and his chieftains, but they behaved haughtily and they were an egoist people.
23|47| And they said, "What! Shall we believe in two men like us and their people are in our service?"
23|48| So they rejected the two and became of those who were destroyed.
23|49| And We did give Moses the Book to guide them.
23|50| And We made the son of Mary and his mother a sign. And We gave them shelter on a lofty quiet ground with springs.
23|51| Allah told every Messenger, "Eat of the things that are good and wholesome, and act righteously. I do indeed know what you do."
23|52| "And, indeed, this community of yours, is one single community. And I am the Lord of you all! Do take due heed of Me, then."
23|53| But they divided themselves into communities pursuing different ways scripturewise. People of every sect are happy with what they have. 
23|54| So leave them with their delusions for a while.
23|55| Do they think that by helping them with wealth and children,
23|56| We are giving good things to them in a hurry? Nay, they do not perceive (that Allah is only testing them therewith).
23|57| Indeed those that are, out of fear of their Lord, on their guard against evil,
23|58| And those that believe in the Verses/signs of their Lord,
23|59| And those that do not worship anything or anyone other than their Lord,
23|60| And those that give what they should, with their hearts apprehending that they are bound to return to their Lord some day,
23|61| Those are the ones that hasten to do good things and they are in the forefront in doing them.
23|62| And We do not lay on anyone a burden except to the extent he/she can bear. And with Us is a Book that speaks the truth. And they shall not be wronged.
23|63| Nay, they are deluded about this. And, besides, they have other things to do.
23|64| Until, when We punish the affluent among them, they cry foul.
23|65| Cry not this day! You shall indeed not be given any help from Us.
23|66| My Verses were certainly recited to you, but you used to turn back on your heels
23|67| To ridicule the Verses in nocturnal confabulations.
23|68| Is it then that they do not understand the Word, or is it that there has come to them that which did not come to their forefathers?
23|69| Or, are they not acquainted with their Messenger, and so they deny him?h 
23|70| Or do they say he is possessed? Nay! He has brought them the Truth, and most of them are averse to the Truth.
23|71| And should the Truth follow their passions, there would certainly be chaos in the heavens and the earth and in everything therein. But We have brought them their Reminder, and from their Reminder they turn aside!
23|72| Or, do you ask them for recompense? But the recompense of your Lord is the best! And He is the best of those who provide sustenance.
23|73| And you do indeed invite them to the Straight Path.
23|74| And those who do not believe in the Hereafter do indeed deviate from the Path.
23|75| And if We show them mercy and free them of the distress they have, they would still blindly continue with their transgressions.
23|76| And We did certainly punish them, but they did not become humble towards their Lord, nor do they submit. 
23|77| Until when We open upon them a door to severe punishment, they are despaired!
23|78| And He it is Who gave you the ears and the eyes and the minds. You thank but little.
23|79| And He it is Who multiplied you on the earth, and to Him you shall be gathered.
23|80| And He it is Who gives life and causes death. And alternation of the night and the day is His handiwork. Do you not then understand?
23|81| But they say the like of what the earlier peoples said.
23|82| They say, "Are we certain to be raised again to life when we are dead and become dust and bones!?"
23|83| "This promise given to us now was also certainly given to our forefathers. These are nothing but stories of the ancients."
23|84| Ask, "Whose — if you know — is the earth, and whose is whatever therein?"
23|85| They will say, "Allah's." Ask, "Why do you not remember [and worship Him alone] then?"
23|86| Ask, "Who is the Lord of the seven heavens and the Lord of the mighty Throne?"
23|87| They will say, "Allah's." Ask, "Will you not then take heed of Him?
23|88| Ask, "Who is it in Whose hand is the absolute control of all things and Who shelters, but Who needs none to shelter Him, if you do but know?"
23|89| They will say, "Allah." Ask, "How then are you deluded into worshipping someone/thing other than Him?"
23|90| But We have brought them the Truth, and certainly indeed they are lying.
23|91| Never did Allah take to Himself a son, and never was there with him any other god! In that case every god would certainly have taken away what he created. And they would certainly have tried to overpower one another. Glorified is Allah above what they attribute to Him!
23|92| The Knower of the unseen and the seen, He is exalted far above what they worship other than Him!
23|93| Say, "My Lord! If You should make me see what they are warned against"
23|94| "My Lord, place me not then with the wicked people!"
23|95| And We can certainly indeed make you see what We warn them against.
23|96| Dispel evil with what is good! We do know what they say.
23|97| And say, "My Lord! I seek refuge in You against satanic promptings."
23|98| "And I seek refuge in You, my Lord, lest they approach me."
23|99| Wicked people continue with their misdeeds until when death comes to one of them, he says, "My Lord! Send me back."
23|100| "So that I may do good deeds in what I have left behind." Nay! It is just a wishful utterance that he makes. And before them is a barrier until the day they are raised.
23|101| So when the trumpet is blown on the Resurrection Day, there shall be no ties of relationship between them, nor shall they ask of one another.
23|102| Then all those are the successful ones who are heavy with good deeds.
23|103| And those that are light in good deeds are the ones who have doomed themselves to live in Hell.
23|104| The fire shall scorch their faces, and their lips therein shall be distorted in pain.
23|105| Were not My Verses/signs recited to you and you rejected them? 
23|106| They would say, "Our Lord! It was our misfortune that made us a people gone astray."
23|107| "Our Lord! Take us out of it. And if we return to evil ways as before, then we shall indeed be doing wrong."
23|108| The Lord shall say, "Get doomed therein! And speak to Me not!"
23|109| "There was indeed a group of My subjects who said, `Our Lord! We do believe. So forgive us and have mercy on us. And You are the Best Bestower of mercies.'"
23|110| "But you held them so much in ridicule that you forgot to remember Me. And you continued laughing at them!"
23|111| "Because they were patient, I have indeed rewarded them by making them (— and not you —) the winners this Day."
23|112| The Lord would ask, "How many years did you stay in the earth?"
23|113| They would say, "We stayed a day or part of a day. We are not sure. So ask those who keep count."
23|114| The Lord would say, "You did stay but a little — had you but known it."
23|115| "Did you then think that We had created you as an idle pursuit and that you shall not be returned to Us!?" 
23|116| So, exalted is Allah, the True Sovereign! There is no god but He, the Lord of the noble Throne.
23|117| And he who prays to Allah, as also to another god besides Him, does have no evidence of any such god existing. So his case rests with his Lord only. The suppressors of the Truth shall indeed not succeed!
23|118| And say, "Forgive, my Lord, and have mercy! And You are the best Bestower of mercies."
24|1| A Qur'aanic chapter that We have sent down and prescribed. And We have sent down therein clear Verses/signs that you may remember and abide by.
24|2| The one who has indulged in extramarital sexual intercourse, female or male, give either a hundred lashes. And let not compassion for them hinder you in following the Allah-prescribed way of life, if you do believe in Allah and the Hereafter. And let a group of believers witness the punishment meted out to them. to 
24|3| The fornicator/adulterer shall not marry any but a fornicatress/adulteress or a female polytheist; and the fornicatress/adulteress shall be married to none but a fornicator/adulterer or a male polytheist. And all these stand forbidden to the believers.
24|4| And give eighty lashes to those who accuse chaste women and bring not four witnesses. And accept not their testimony ever; for, these it is that corrupt the society.
24|5| Except for those who repent and ask for Allah's forgiveness after this and mend their errant ways. And Allah is indeed Forgiving, Merciful!
24|6| And those who accuse their wives and have no witnesses except themselves, every such accuser should testify four times, bearing Allah to witness, that he is certainly indeed of those who are truthful.
24|7| And, fifth, that the curse of Allah be on him if he is of those that lie.
24|8| And, to avert the punishment from her, she has to testify four times, bearing Allah to witness, that he is certainly indeed of those that lie.
24|9| And, fifth, that the wrath of Allah be on her if he is of those that are truthful.
24|10| And had it not been for Allah's favour upon you and His mercy...! And had it not been that Allah is Acceptor of repentance, Wise...!!h 
24|11| Indeed, those who came up with the canard are a group from among you. Consider it not bad for you; nay, it is good for you. For every one of them is what he has earned of the sin. And he who took the main part therein — for him is a great punishment.
24|12| If only the believing men and women had — when you heard it — displayed a positive attitude and said, "This is obviously a canard!"
24|13| If only they had produced four witnesses thereon! And since they have produced no witnesses, they are the ones who lie, under divine law.
24|14| And had it not been for Allah's grace upon you and His mercy in this world and the Hereafter, a great calamity would certainly have fallen upon you for what you openly indulged in.
24|15| When you fabricated it with your tongues and spoke with your mouths what you knew not, you thought it was a trifling matter. But with Allah it was a grave thing.
24|16| And if only you, when you heard it, had said, "It does not behove us that we should talk about it. Glory to You! This is an insidious calumny?"
24|17| Allah admonishes you against indulging in such a calumny ever again, if you do believe!
24|18| And Allah makes clear to you the Verses/signs. And Allah is Knowledgeable, Wise!
24|19| Those indeed who love circulating scandals about/among those who believe shall suffer a painful punishment in this world and the Hereafter. And Allah knows, and you do not!
24|20| And had it not been for Allah's favour upon you and His mercy...! And had it not been that Allah is Kind, Merciful...!
24|21| O you who believe! Follow not footsteps of the Satan. And whoever follows footsteps of the Satan, he does indeed then exhort doing things that are indecent and forbidden. And had it not been for Allah's favour upon you and His mercy, not one of you would have ever been pure! And Allah purifies whom He wills. And Allah hears all, knows all.
24|22| And let not those of you who are favoured with wealth and means swear against giving to the near of kin and to the poor and to those who have migrated in Allah's way. And they should forgive and forget. Do you not like that Allah forgive you? And Allah is Forgiving, Merciful!
24|23| Those who accuse chaste, unwary, believing women are indeed accursed in this world and in the Hereafter, and they shall have a grievously great punishment.
24|24| Some Day their tongues and their hands and their feet shall bear witness against them as to what they did.
24|25| On that Day, Allah will pay back to them justly and in full measure what they would deserve in accordance with their way of life on earth, and they shall know that Allah is the evident Truth.
24|26| Bad women are for bad men and bad men are for bad women. Good women are for good men and good men are for good women. The latter are absolved of what evil people say about them. For them is ordained forgiveness and noble provision.
24|27| O you who believe! Do not enter houses other than yours until you have asked permission and greeted their inmates. It is good for you that way to remain mindful of good conduct.
24|28| But if you do not find any one therein, then do not enter those houses until permission is given to you. And if you are told to go back then go back. It is proper and right that you do so. And Allah has knowledge of what you do.
24|29| No sin upon you that you enter houses — not used for living in — wherein you have some interest. And Allah knows what you do openly and what you hide.
24|30| Say to the believing men that they cast their looks down and guard their chastity. That would be conducive to their moral purity. Allah is indeed aware of what they do.
24|31| And say to the believing women that they cast their looks down and guard their chastity and display not their beauty/charm except what has to remain open thereof, and let them wear their head-coverings over their bosoms/cleavages, and not display their beauty/charm except to their husbands or their fathers, or the fathers of their husbands, or their sons, or the sons of their husbands, or their brothers, or their brothers' sons, or their sisters' sons, or their women, or those whom their right hands possess, or the male servants who are beyond sexual desire, or the children who have not attained knowledge of the private aspects of women; and let them not strike their feet so that their hidden charm may get exposed; and turn in repentance to Allah all of you, O believers, so that you attain success.
24|32| And arrange for marriages of those amongst you who are single and of those who are righteous amongst your male slaves and your female slaves. If they are poor, Allah will make them free from want by His grace. And Allah is magnanimous, knowledgeable.
24|33| And let those who cannot get married live in continence until Allah makes them free from want out of His grace. And as for those who ask for a writ of freedom from among those whom your right hands possess (slaves), give them the writ if you know them to be good and worthy. And give them of the wealth of Allah which He has given you. And do not compel your slave girls into prostitution while they desire to keep themselves chaste, in order to seek some advantage in the life of this world. And in case they are so compelled, then, indeed, Allah would be forgiving, merciful on them (the girls).
24|34| And certainly We have sent down to you Verses/signs making things clear, and example of those who have passed away before you, and admonition to those who are pious.
24|35| Allah is Light of the heavens and the earth. His Light is as if there were a niche, inside the niche, a lamp and the lamp, inside a glass. The glass, as it were, a bright star, fuelled by a blessed tree of olive, neither of east nor of west, oil of which would glow forth even when no fire touched it! Light over light! Allah guides to His Light whom He wills. And Allah makes use of similitudes for mankind. And Allah is aware of everything!to 
24|36| Glorify Allah in the mornings and the evenings in houses in which He has permitted His name to be exalted and remembered.
24|37| (Glorification of Allah in houses mentioned in the previous Verse is done by those) men whom neither trading nor business diverts from His remembrance, from offering of the ritual prayer, and from giving in charity — men who fear a Day in which the hearts and eyes shall turn around.
24|38| So that Allah may give them the best reward for what they have done, and give them more out of His grace. And Allah provides for those whom He pleases without measure.
24|39| And those who suppress the Truth — their deeds are like the mirage in a desert. The thirsty man deems it to be water until when he comes to it he finds it not! And there he finds Allah paying back to him his account in full; and Allah is quick in keeping accounts.
24|40| Or like darknesses in deep sea covered by wave over wave, above which is a cloud — darknesses one above another. When (in such a darkness) one holds out one's hand, one can hardly see it. And to whom Allah gives no light, he has no light.
24|41| Do you not see all those who are in the heavens and the earth — including the birds with their wings spread — do glorify Allah? Every single being or thing knows its mode of prayer and of glorification to Allah. And Allah knows what they do.
24|42| And to Allah belongs the absolute sovereignty over the heavens and the earth, and to Allah is the final destination.
24|43| Do you not see that Allah makes the cloud move, and then creates a bond within it, and then turns it into a mass, and you see the rain coming out from its midst?hAnd He sends down hail from mountains (of clouds) in the sky afflicting therewith whom He pleases and turning it away from whom He pleases. Flash of His lightning could be so intense as to make one blind.
24|44| Allah rotates the night and the day. Therein, certainly indeed, there is food for thought for those with insight.
24|45| And Allah has created every living creature from water.Then, of them, is that which walks on its belly, and, of them, is that which walks on two feet, and, of them, is that which walks on four. Allah creates what He pleases. Allah does indeed have power over all things.
24|46| We have certainly sent down Verses/signs making things clear, and Allah guides whom He pleases to the Right Path.
24|47| And they say, "We believe in Allah and in the Messenger and we obey." Then, after this, a section of them turns back. And these are not believers.
24|48| And when they are called to Allah and His Messenger that he may establish a rule of law among them, then a section of them turns away.
24|49| And if the truth lies on their side, they come to him obediently.
24|50| Is there in their hearts a disease, or are they in doubt, or do they fear that Allah and His Messenger will act wrongfully towards them? Nay! They themselves are the wrong-doers.
24|51| The only response of the believers — when they are invited to Allah and His Messenger that he (Messenger) may establish a rule of law among them — is to say, "We hear and we obey." And these it is that are successful.
24|52| And he who obeys Allah and His Messenger, and fears Allah, and holds Him in awe — such are the ones that attain their goals.
24|53| And they swear by Allah most solemnly that if you command them they would certainly come out (in Allah's path). Say, "Swear not! Due compliance (is the thing required). Allah is indeed aware of what you do."
24|54| Say, "Obey Allah and obey the Messenger; but if you do not, then he (Messenger) is responsible for the duty allotted to him only, and you, for what is allotted to you. And if you obey him, you are on the Right Way; and the Messenger is responsible for nothing but clear/truthful delivery of the divine Message."
24|55| Allah has promised to those of you who believe and do good deeds that He will most certainly give them the authority to rule in the earth on His behalf as He had given those before them the authority. And Allah has further promised that He will most certainly establish for them their religion which He has chosen for them, and that He will most certainly change their sense of fear with the sense of security. Let them just worship Me, and not worship any other being/thing besides Me. And whoever suppresses the Truth after this, such are the ones that transgress/rebel/pervert/profligate.
24|56| And establish the prescribedh prayer and give the Zakathand obey the Messenger, so that mercy may be shown to you.
24|57| Think not that those who suppress the Truth shall escape (from Allah) on the earth. And their abode is the Fire. And evil certainly is that destination!
24|58| O you who believe! Let those whom your right hands possess (slaves/servants) and those of you who have not attained to puberty ask permission of you three times: before the Morning Prayer, whenever you take off your clothes (for rest) at noon, and after the Evening Prayer. These are three times of privacy for you. No restriction on you or on them at other times. Some of you have to be around others. Thus does Allah make clear to you the Verses, and Allah is Knowledgeable, Wise.
24|59| And when children among you reach the age of puberty, let them seek permission as those (who had reached the age of puberty) before them sought permission. Thus does Allah makeh clear to you His Verses, and Allah is Knowledgeable, Wise.
24|60| And it is no sin for women advanced in age — who do not hope for a marriage — to put off their clothes without displaying their beauty/charm. And if they restrain themselves it is better for them. And Allah hears, knows.
24|61| There is no question of any blame on the blind, the lame, the sick, or you yourselves that you eat from your houses, or your fathers' houses or your mothers' houses, or your brothers' houses, or your sisters' houses, or your paternal uncles' houses, or your paternal aunts' houses, or your maternal uncles' houses, or your maternal aunts' houses, or houses you possess the keys of, or your friends' (houses). You incur no sin that you eat together or separately. So when you enter houses, greet one another with a blessed and good salutation from Allah. Thus does Allah make clear to you the Verses so that you understand these properly.
24|62| Those only are believers who believe in Allah and His Messenger. And when they are with him (Messenger) on a community matter they go not away until they ask him for permission. Indeed, they who ask for your permission are the ones who believe in Allah and His Messenger. So when they ask for your permission for some personal work, give them permission at your discretion and pray to Allah for their forgiveness. Indeed, Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.
24|63| Make not the Massenger's call among you to be like your call to one another. Allah indeed knows those who slip away surreptitiously from among you. So then let those who go against his counsel beware lest a trial or a painful punishment afflict them.
24|64| Beware! To Allah certainly belongs everything that is in the heavens and the earth. Surely, He knows your condition. And the Day when they will be brought back to Him, He will inform them of what they did. And Allah knows all things.
25|1| Blessed is He who has sent down the Criterion [Qur'aan] to His Devotee that he/it may serve as a warner to the worlds. 
25|2| Blessed is He to Whom belongs the the absolute sovereignty over the heavens and the earth, He Who has begotten no children and has no partner in His sovereignty. It is He Who has created every thing and it is He Who has given it its role.
25|3| And yet they have taken, besides Him, deities who create nothing and they themselves are created, and who have no power to harm or benefit themselves and who who have no power over death, life, or Resurrection.
25|4| Those who suppress the Truth say, "This is only a self- concocted lie and others have helped him in concocting it." Verily, then, they have perpetrated an injustice and a falsehood.
25|5| And they say, "Fables of the ancients! He has had written these down which then are rehearsed to him morning and evening."
25|6| Say, "HE has sent it down Who knows every secret that is in the heavens and on the earth. He is indeed Forgiving, Merciful."
25|7| And they say, "What kind of a Messenger is this who eats food and roams in the marketplaces!? Why has no angel been sent down with him to warn us?"
25|8| "Or no treasure been sent down to him, or no garden been provided to him from which to eat?" The wrongdoers further say, "You are not following but a man bewitched!"
25|9| See what kind of attributes they expect you to have. They have thus gone astray and cannot find the right way.
25|10| Blessed is He who can give you, if He wills, better things than that: gardens under which rivers flow. And He can provide palaces for you.
25|11| But they deny the Hour. We have prepared a blazing Fire for those who deny the Hour.
25|12| When it (the Fire) sees them from afar, they will hear it raging and roaring.
25|13| When they are thrown into a narrow space therein, chained together, they will plead for destruction (death, so that they become oblivious to their suffering in the Fire).
25|14| "Plead not this day for a single destruction, but plead for many!"
25|15| Ask, "Is this better, or the Paradise of immortality which the pious/righteous have been promised? It is their reward and their destination."
25|16| They shall forever have therein for them all that they desire. This is a promise frequently asked for of your Lord.
25|17| On the Day He gathers them together with those they worship besides Him, He will ask, "Did you mislead these people whom I had created to worship Me, or did they stray away by themselves?"
25|18| They will say, "Your Holiness! It was not proper for us to choose any of the awliya other than You. But You gave them and their fathers the comforts of this life so much that they forgot the Remembrance (of You and Your Message, the Qur'aan) and thus became a people doomed."
25|19| They have certainly then given the lie to all your pleas and you can neither ward off punishment nor get any help. And whoever of you has committed evil, he/she shall be made by Us to taste great punishment!
25|20| We had not sent any Messengers before you who did not eat food and roam the market- places. We test some of you with others, whether you exercise patience. And your Lord monitors all things.
25|21| And those who do not expect a meeting with Us say, "Why are angels not sent down to us or why do we not see our Lord?" They are certainly too proud of themselves and have greatly exceeded all bounds.
25|22| There will be no good tidings for the guilty on the day they see the angels. And they will cry out for an invincible partition between them and the angels!
25|23| And We shall proceed to turn all that they did into scattered dust.
25|24| The inhabitants of the Garden will have the best abode and the finest place of rest on that Day.
25|25| On a Day when the sky will split open with its clouds and the angels after angels are sent down,
25|26| Sovereignty on that Day shall return defacto and dejure to the Gracious One. And it will be a hard Day for those who suppress the Truth.
25|27| On that Day, the transgressor will bite his hands and say, "Would that I had walked the Messenger's path!"
25|28| "Oh would that I had never chosen such-and-such as my friend!"
25|29| "He made me stray away from Your Message after it had reached me. And the Satan is betrayer of mankind."
25|30| And the Messenger will say, "O my Lord! My people did indeed treat this Qur'aan as a thing abandoned."
25|31| And thus did We make to every prophet an inimical front from among the sinners; but your Lord is sufficient as Guide and Support.
25|32| Those who suppress the Truth say, "Why was the Qur'aan not sent down to him all at once?" We did send it down thus so that We imbue your mind therewith. And We have arranged it in good order.
25|33| No sooner do they come up with a problem than We bring you the truth behind and the best solution.
25|34| Those who will be dragged headlong into Hell shall have an evil place to dwell in — and they had strayed away from the Right Path.
25|35| And We did give Moses the Book, and made his brother Aaron his assistant.
25|36| We then told them both to go to the people who had denied Our signs. We then put those people to ruin!
25|37| And We drowned the people of Noah when they rejected the Messengers and We made an example of them (the people) for all mankind. And We have prepared a painful punishment for the transgressors!
25|38| For AAad, Thamood, and the people of al-Rass, and for many a generation between them.
25|39| To every one of them We gave warning examples and every one of them We put to annihilation.
25|40| And they must have certainly come upon the town/village on which had rained down an evil rain. How could they not have seen it? Yet they have no faith in the Resurrection.
25|41| Whenever they see you, they hold you not but in contempt, saying, "Is this the one Allah has sent as His Messenger?"
25|42| "Indeed, he would almost have led us away from our deities, had we not stood firmly with them!" And when they experience the punishment, they shall realize who it is that had strayed from the path.
25|43| Have you seen one who has taken one's own desire to be one'a god? Can you be a guardian over such a one?
25|44| Do you think most of them can hear or understand? They are nothing but like cattle. Nay, they are those astray from the Path.
25|45| Have you not observed how your Lord stretches the shadow? Had He pleased, He could have made it stationary. And We made the sun a guide over it.
25|46| Then We withdraw it (shadow) to Us, an easy withdrawal.
25|47| And it is He Who has made for you the night as mantle, the sleep for repose, and the day for rising.
25|48| It is He who sends the winds as heralds bearing good news of His ensuing mercy and We send down pure water from the sky.
25|49| We send down water so that We may bring life to a dead land and slake the thirst aplenty of Our creations of cattle and mankind.
25|50| And We do distribute it (rainfall) among them so that they are gratefully aware thereof, but most of mankind respond not but in ingratitude.
25|51| And if We had so willed, We would have certainly raised someone to warn, in every town/village.
25|52| Do not yield then to those who suppress the Truth, but counter them strenuously by means of this [Qur'aan].
25|53| It is He who has facilitated two seas to flow and meet — one palatable and sweet and the other salty and bitter — and set up a barrier and an invincible partition between them. 
25|54| And He it is who has created a human being from water and then made him a link in the human relationships by blood and marriage. And your Lord is all powerful.
25|55| Yet they worship besides Allah others that can neither benefit nor harm them. And the suppressor of the Truth does ever turn his back on his Lord.
25|56| And We have not sent you (Prophet Muhammad) but to give good news to those who believe in Allah and abide by His Guidance given in the Qur'aan and to warn those who believe not.
25|57| Say, "I do not ask you for anything in return for this except that anyone who so wishes should take the Right Path to his Lord."
25|58| And have trust on the Living [Allah] Who never dies, and glorify Him with His praise. And He is well conversant with the sins His subjects commit.
25|59| It is He who created the heavens and the earth, and all besides that is in and around them, in six periods of time. HE then ascended the Throne of absolute power and authority. HE is the Gracious One. Do ask any informed person about Him.
25|60| When they are told to prostrate before the Gracious One, they ask, "Who is this Gracious One? Are we to prostrate to whatever you order us?" And it increases their aversion.
25|61| He is the bestower of blessings who has set constellations in the heavens, as also a lamp (sun) and a moon that give light (for the inhabitants of this earth).
25|62| And He it is who has made the night and the day succeed each other — for the one who would ponder or be grateful.
25|63| And human beings obedient to the Gracious One are those who walk on earth with humility and when the ignorant speak to them, they say, "Peace."
25|64| And who spend the night for their Lord, lying down and standing.h 
25|65| And who say, "Our Lord! Ward off from us the punishment of Hell. Its punishment is indeed atrocious."
25|66| Indeed, it is an evil abode and an evil position to be in.
25|67| And they (human beings obedient to the Gracious One) are those who are neither spendthrift nor miserly, but keep to a position in between.
25|68| And who invoke no deity besides Allah, nor kill anyone whose killing, without due authority, Allah has prohibited, nor indulge in extramarital sexual intercourse. And whoever does this, he/she commits a sin.
25|69| He/she shall have his suffering doubled on the Day of Resurrection and shall remain humiliated therein forever.
25|70| But for those who repent, believe, and do good deeds, Allah will change their evil deeds into good ones. And Allah is forgiving, merciful.
25|71| And the one who repents and reforms, he/she then has indeed turned to Allah in repentance.
25|72| And they (human beings obedient to the Gracious One) are those who do not give false evidence, and when they pass by frivolity, they pass by with dignity.
25|73| And who, when reminded of the Verses/signs of their Lord, do not stumble upon them, deaf and blind.
25|74| And who say, "Our Lord! Give us joy in our wives and our children and make us exemplary for the righteous."
25|75| These are the ones who will be rewarded with high position because of their endurance. They will be welcomed therein with greetings and salutations of peace.
25|76| They shall live there forever — the best place to reside in and the best position to be in.
25|77| Say, "Why would my Lord care for you, if you do not pray to and invoke Him? Verily then you have rejected the Truth. So soon shall the inevitable happen!"
26|1| Ta. Sin. Mim.
26|2| These are Verses of the Book that gives clear guidance. 
26|3| Would you (Prophet Muhammad) kill yourself because they do not believe?
26|4| Had We so willed, We could have sent down to them a Message from on high, and then their necks would submissively bow to it.
26|5| And no new aspect of divinity comes to them from the Gracious One, but they turn away from it.
26|6| Then they did deny it (the Zikr) as false. But soon there will come to them the true information as to what it was that they used to scoff at!
26|7| Do they not have a look at the earth to see how We grow therein produce of every noble kind?
26|8| Therein indeed is a sign. And most of them will not believe.
26|9| And, indeed, your Lord is certainly the One Who is Omnipotent, Merciful!
26|10| And when your Lord called out to Moses: "Go to those wicked people."
26|11| "Go to the people of Pharaoh! They fear not (the inevitable consequence of being wicked)!"
26|12| Moses said, "My Lord! I do indeed fear they may not believe me,"
26|13| "And my heart is straitened and my tongue not fluent. So then send this command to (my brother) Aaron."
26|14| "And, they have a criminal charge against me, so I fear they will kill me."
26|15| Allah said, "Worry not about it! Go then to them, both of you, with Our signs/messages. We shall indeed be with you, ever listening!
26|16| And when, both of you, come before Pharaoh, tell him, `We are indeed sent by the Lord of the worlds " 
26|17| "So you let the children of Israel go with us!'"
26|18| Pharaoh said, "Did we not bring you up amongst us as a child? And did you not spend among us years of your life?"
26|19| And you did what you did, and you remain ungrateful (that we have not punished you)!"
26|20| Moses said, "I did it while I was among those who go astray." 
26|21| "And I fled from you because I feared you. And then my Lord bestowed me with a command and made me one of the Messengers."
26|22| "And is this a favour you did me — that you had enslaved the children of Israel?"
26|23| Pharaoh said: "And who is `Lord of the worlds'?"
26|24| Moses replied, "Lord of the heavens and the earth and of all that is between them, if you would but be convinced!"
26|25| Pharaoh said to those around him: "Do you hear?"
26|26| Moses continued, "Your Lord, and Lord of your forefathers!"
26|27| Pharaoh interjected, "Indeed, your `Messenger' who has been sent to you is certainly mad!"
26|28| Moses went on, "Lord of the east and the west and of all that is between the two if you would but understand!"
26|29| Pharaoh Said, "Verily, if you have any deity other than me, I shall certainly put you into prison!"
26|30| Moses said, "Even if I bring to you clear evidence?"
26|31| Pharaoh said, "Produce it, then, if you are a man of truth!"
26|32| Moses then threw down his staff, and it became a veritable serpent!
26|33| And he drew out his hand, and it appeared white to the beholders.
26|34| Pharaoh said to the chieftains around him: "Indeed, this one is certainly an expert magician."
26|35| "He wants to drive you out of your land by his black magic. What, then, do you advise?"
26|36| They said, "Defer the decision on him and his brother, and send callers to cities and towns."
26|37| "They will bring to you all expert magicians."
26|38| And so the magicians were assembled for public show at a set time on a certain day.
26|39| And the people were asked, "Are you all gathered here,"
26|40| "So that we might cheer the magicians if it is they who prevail?"
26|41| So when the magicians came, they said to Pharaoh, "Are we not indeed entitled certainly to a reward if it is we who prevail?"
26|42| Pharaoh said, "Of course! And, indeed, in that case you shall be among those who are near to me."
26|43| Moses said to them: "Cast down whatever you were to cast!"
26|44| Then they did cast down their ropes and their staffs, and said, "By Pharaoh's honour, behold, it is we certainly who shall prevail!"
26|45| And then Moses threw his staff. And lo! It swallowed up all their deceptions.
26|46| And the magicians fell down in prostration!
26|47| They said: "We believe in the Lord of the worlds!"
26|48| "The Lord of Moses and Aaron!"
26|49| Pharaoh said, "You believe him before I permit you? Indeed, he must be your master who has taught you magic! But you shall certainly come to know who the master is. I shall certainly cut off your hands and your feet on opposite sides, and shall certainly crucify you, all together!"
26|50| The magicians said, "No matter! We shall indeed return to our Lord."
26|51| "We do indeed ardently desire that our Lord forgive us our faults now that we have been among the foremost to believe!"
26|52| And We conveyed to Moses Allah's instructions, "Leave with My devotees (Children of Israel) by night. You will he pursued (by Pharaoh's army)!"
26|53| And then Pharaoh sent heralds to all cities/towns.
26|54| "These [Children of Israel] are but a small gang."
26|55| "And they have surely enraged us."
26|56| "And we are indeed a vigilant multitude."
26|57| And so We made them (Pharaoh's people) come out of gardens and springs.
26|58| And We made them (Pharaoh's people) leave their treasures and places of honour.
26|59| And [in course of time] We made the Children of Israel inheritors of such things.
26|60| Then they [Pharaoh's men] went in pursuit of them (Children of Israel) eastwards.
26|61| Then as the two groups of people (Moses' and Pharaoh's) came in sight of each other, Moses' people exclaimed: "We are indeed certainly overtaken!"
26|62| Moses said, "No! My Lord is with me. HE will guide me!"
26|63| We then inspired Moses to strike the sea with his staff. The sea thereupon parted, and each part appeared like a vast mountain.
26|64| And We drew the other party (Pharaoh's people) near thereto.
26|65| And We saved Moses and all who were with him.
26|66| And then We drowned the others.
26|67| Therein indeed was a sign. And yet most of them would not believe!
26|68| And, indeed, your Lord is certainly the One Omnipotent, Merciful!
26|69| And recite to them the story of Abraham.
26|70| When he asked his father and his people, "What is it this that you worship?"
26|71| They said, "We worship idols, and we bow down to them in devotion."
26|72| Abraham asked, "Do these hear you when you invoke them?"
26|73| "Or do they give you any benefit or any harm?"
26|74| Abraham's people said, "But we found our forefathers doing the same!"
26|75| Abraham asked, "Have you, then, ever considered what it is that you have been worshipping?"
26|76| "You and those ancient forebears of yours?"
26|77| "And, indeed, these are enemies to me, but not the Lord of the worlds."
26|78| "The Lord Who created me and Who then has guided me."
26|79| "And Who gives me food and drink."
26|80| "And, when I fall ill, Who cures me."
26|81| "And Who will cause me to die and then will bring me back to life."
26|82| "And Who, I hope, will forgive me my faults on the Day of Judgment!"
26|83| "My Lord! grant me wisdom, and put me with the righteous."
26|84| "And create a good name for me among the later generations."
26|85| "And place me among those who shall inherit the garden of bliss!"
26|86| "And forgive my father! He is indeed among those who have gone astray."
26|87| "And put me not to shame on the Day of Resurrection."
26|88| The Day on which neither wealth will be of any use, nor children.
26|89| Except for a mind free of evil with which one comes before Allah!
26|90| And the Garden (Paradise) will be brought near for those who had spent their worldly lives within the parameters laid down by Allah.
26|91| And the Hell will be laid open before those who had allowed themselves to be seduced.
26|92| And they will be asked: "Where are those you worshipped?"
26|93| "Those, other than Allah, you worshipped? Can those be of any help to you or to themselves?"
26|94| They will then be hurled into hell — they, as well as those who had seduced them.
26|95| And the army of Iblees (the Satan) - all together.
26|96| They will, blaming one another, say,
26|97| "By Allah, we were indeed certainly in clear delusion."
26|98| "When we deemed you equal to the Lord of all the worlds!"
26|99| "And they who led us astray are none but the culprits!"
26|100| "And now we have none to intercede for us."
26|101| "We have no anxious friend either."
26|102| If only we had a return [to worldly life], so we could be among the believers!"
26|103| There is indeed a sign in this, and most of them believe not!
26|104| And, indeed, your Lord — He alone — is the Omnipotent, the Merciful!
26|105| The people of Noah did not believe the Messengers.
26|106| When their brother Noah said to them, "Are you not scared of wrongful living?"
26|107| "I am indeed a trustworthy Messenger of Allah sent to you!"
26|108| "Be, then, afraid of Allah, and obey me!"
26|109| "And no reward whatever do I ask of you for it: my reward rests with none but the Lord of the worlds."
26|110| "Be afraid of Allah then, and obey me!"
26|111| They said, "Are we to believe you, when those who follow you are the most abject of people?"
26|112| He said, "And what do I know what work they do?"
26|113| "It is for none but Allah to make them account for what they do, if you could but understand this!"
26|114| "And I am not one to drive away the believers."
26|115| "I am but a plain warner."
26|116| They said, "If you desist not, O Noah, you will certainly be stoned to death!"
26|117| Noah said, "My Lord! Indeed, my people do not believe in me."
26|118| "Do settle then the matter between me and them, and save me and those of the believers who are with me!"
26|119| We then saved him and those with him in the fully-laden Ark,
26|120| And We caused the rest thereafter to drown.
26|121| There is indeed in this a sign, and most of them believe not.
26|122| And, indeed, your Lord — He alone — is the Omnipotent, the Merciful!
26|123| [The ancient tribe of] AAad did not believe the Messengers.
26|124| When their brother Hood said to them, "Are you not scared of wrongful living?"
26|125| "I am indeed a trustworthy Messenger of Allah sent to you!"
26|126| "Be afraid of Allah then, and obey me!"
26|127| "And no reward whatever do I ask of you for it: my reward rests with none but the Lord of the worlds."
26|128| "Would you wantonly build something on every elevated place?"
26|129| "And have strongly built structures to live therein forever!?"
26|130| "And when you control, you control cruelly?"
26|131| "Be afraid of Allah then, and obey me!"
26|132| "And be afraid of Him who helped you with what you know."
26|133| "Helped you with cattle and children."
26|134| "And gardens and springs."
26|135| "I do indeed fear that punishment of a dreadful Day may befall you!"
26|136| They said. "It is all the same to us whether you preach or not."
26|137| "This is nothing but practice/custom of the earlier peoples."
26|138| "And we are not going to be punished!"
26|139| And so they disbelieved him, and We destroyed them. There is indeed in this a sign, and most of them believe not.
26|140| And, indeed, your Lord — He alone — is the Omnipotent, the Merciful!
26|141| [The ancient tribe of] Thamood did not believe the Messengers.
26|142| When their brother Salih said to them: "Are you not scared of wrongful living?"
26|143| "I am indeed a trustworthy Messenger of Allah sent to you!"
26|144| "Be afraid of Allah then, and obey me!"
26|145| "And no reward whatever do I ask of you for it: my reward rests with none but the Lord of the worlds."
26|146| "Will you be left secure among things here?"
26|147| "Amidst gardens and springs?"
26|148| "And fields, and palm-trees with slender stalks?"
26|149| "And do you skillfully hew dwellings out of the mountains?"
26|150| "Be afraid of Allah then, and obey me!"
26|151| "And obey not the command of those given to excesses."
26|152| "Those who spread corruption on earth and strive not to set things right."
26|153| They said: "Thou are but one of those bewitched!"
26|154| "You are nothing but a man like us! Bring a sign if what you say is true."
26|155| He said, "This she-camel shall have a share of the source of water, and you a share, at fixed period of time."
26|156| "And do her no harm, lest punishment of a dreadful day befall you!"
26|157| And then they hamstrung her. And then they regretted!
26|158| And then the punishment befell them. There is indeed in this a sign, and most of them believed not.h 
26|159| And, indeed, your Lord — He alone — is the Omnipotent, the Merciful!
26|160| The [ancient] tribe of Lot did not believe the Messengers.
26|161| When their brother Lot said to them, "Are you not scared of wrongful living?"
26|162| "I am indeed a trustworthy Messenger of Allah sent to you!"
26|163| "Be afraid of Allah then, and obey me!"
26|164| "And no reward whatever do I ask of you for it: my reward rests with none but the Lord of the worlds."
26|165| "Do you, of all the creatures, indulge in homosexuality?"
26|166| And you shun the spouses whom your Lord has created for you? Nay, you are a transgressing people!"
26|167| They said, "Verily, O Lot, you will certainly be expelled if you desist not!"
26|168| Lot said, "I am indeed one of those who deplore your actions!"
26|169| "My Lord! Save me and my family from all that they are doing!"
26|170| Thereupon We saved him and all his entire family.
26|171| Except for an old woman, who was among those left behind.
26|172| And then We annihilated the others.
26|173| And We rained down upon them a rain. Dire then is such rain upon those warned!
26|174| There is indeed in this a sign, and most of them believed not.
26|175| And, indeed, your Lord — He alone — is the Omnipotent, the Merciful!
26|176| [The ancient] dwellers of the wood (Midian) did not believe the Messengers.
26|177| When Shu'aib said to them: "Are you not scared of wrongful living?"
26|178| "I am indeed a trustworthy Messenger of Allah sent to you!"
26|179| "Be afraid of Allah then, and obey me!"
26|180| "And no reward whatever do I ask of you for it: my reward rests with none but the Lord of the worlds."
26|181| "Give full measure, and be not among those who cause loss to others."
26|182| "And weigh with a true balance."
26|183| "And defraud not people of their things. And make no mischief on earth, spreading corruption."
26|184| "And have fear of Him who has created you, as also the generations past!"
26|185| They said, "You are but one bewitched."
26|186| "And you are but a man like us! And we do think you are a liar!"
26|187| "Drop fragments of the sky upon us, then, if what you say is the truth!"
26|188| Shu'aib said, "My Lord knows what you do!"
26|189| So they disbelieved him. And thereupon punishment gripped them on a gloomy day. And, verily, it was a punishment of a dreadful day!
26|190| There is indeed in this a sign, and most of them believed not.
26|191| And, indeed, your Lord — He alone — is the Omnipotent, the Merciful!
26|192| And, indeed, this [Qur'aan] has certainly been sent down by the Lord of the worlds.
26|193| The trustworthy Spirit (Angel Gabriel) came down with it.
26|194| Upon your mind, [O Muhammad], so that you may be among those who warn.
26|195| In the language of plain Arabic.
26|196| And, indeed, it is mentioned in the ancient Scriptures.
26|197| Is it not a sign for them that learned men from among the Children of Israel do know it?
26|198| And had We sent it down upon any non-Arab,
26|199| And had he recited it to them in his own language, they would not have believed in it.
26|200| We have likewise caused this Message to pass through the minds of those who are lost in sin.
26|201| They will not believe in it (the Message) till they see the grievous punishment.
26|202| That (punishment) will come upon them all of a sudden, without notice.
26|203| And then they will say, "Could we have some respite?"
26|204| Do they, then, wish to hasten Our punishment?
26|205| Do you see that if We do allow them to enjoy for years
26|206| And thereafter that which they were promised befalls them
26|207| Of what avail to them will all their past enjoyments be?
26|208| And never have We destroyed any community without being warned
26|209| And reminded. And We wrong not!
26|210| And the devils had not brought it (the Message) down.
26|211| And neither it is suitable to them, nor can they do it.
26|212| They are indeed certainly debarred from hearing it!
26|213| Hence invoke no god other than Allah, lest you be among those ponished!
26|214| And warn your close relatives
26|215| And lower wings of your tenderness over (be kind to) all of the believers who may follow you!
26|216| If they then disobey you, say, "I am indeed free of responsibility for what you do!"
26|217| And put your trust in the Omnipotent, the Merciful
26|218| Who sees you standing
26|219| And Who sees what goes on in your mind while you are among those who prostrate before Him.
26|220| He is indeed the One Who hears, the One Who knows!
26|221| Shall I tell you upon whom it is that the devils descend?
26|222| They descend upon all sinful turncoats.
26|223| They (the devils) pass on hearsays to them (sinful turncoats). And most of them (the devils) lie!
26|224| And the seducers follow the poets.
26|225| Do you not see that they (poets) roam about passionately in every valley?
26|226| And that they say what they do not do?
26|227| Save those who believe, do righteous deeds, and remember Allah much. And they avenge themselves only after having been wronged and to the extent they are wronged.And those who do wrong will soon come to know how evil a turn they will turn to!
27|1| Ta-seen. These are Verses of the Qur'aan. And it is a Book that makes things clear.
27|2| It contains guidance and glad tidings for the believers.
27|3| Those who establish prayer, give Zakaat, and believe in the Hereafter with conviction!
27|4| Those indeed who do not believe in the Hereafter — We have made their deeds appear good to them, and so they stumble blindly on.
27|5| It is them that the worst of punishment is reserved for. And it is they who shall be the losers in the Hereafter!
27|6| And, indeed, you (singular) are made to receive this Qur'aan from One who is Wise, Knowledgeable.
27|7| When Moses said to his family, "I do indeed see a fire. I shall bring you from there some information, or bring you a burning brand so that you warm yourselves therewith."
27|8| Then, when he came to it, he was called out and told, "Blessed is all that is in the fire and around it! And glory to Allah, Lord of the worlds!"
27|9| "O Moses! It is indeed Me, Allah — the Almighty, the Wise!"
27|10| "And throw your staff down!" Then he saw it (staff) stir as if it were a serpent. And he took to flight and did not look back! "O Moses! Fear not. The Messengers need have no fear in My Presence."
27|11| "Nor those need fear who do wrong and then after a bad deed they change for the good. for, indeed, I am Forgiving, Merciful!"
27|12| "And put your hand into your pocket: it will come out blemish-less white — [these are] among nine signs unto Pharaoh and his people. They are indeed a depraved people!"
27|13| So then when Our clear-cut signs came unto them (Pharaoh and his people), they said, "This is pure magic!"
27|14| And, though their minds were convinced of their genuineness, they wickedly and arrogantly refused to accept those as signs. And behold what happened in the end to those corrupt people !
27|15| And We did grant knowledge to David and Solomon. And they both said, "Praise to Allah! HE has favoured us above many of His believing devotees."
27|16| And Solomon inherited David. And he said, "O people! We have been taught the speech of the birds, and have been given all kinds of things. This, indeed, is certainly a manifest favour!"
27|17| And Solomon's armies — of Jinns&, of human beings, and of birds — were assembled and then they were led forth in orderly ranks before him.
27|18| The parade went on till, when they came upon a valley of ants, an ant said, "O ants! Get into your homes (holes), lest Solomon and his armies crush you unknowingly!"
27|19| Solomon then smiled broadly at her (the ant's) words, and said, "My Lord! Make me grateful for your favours which You have bestowed on me and on my parents. And make me do righteous deeds which You are pleased with. And put me in the list of Your righteous devotees!"
27|20| And he (Solomon) inspected the rank of the birds, and said, "How come I do not see the Hudhud ? Or is he among the absentees?
27|21| "I will punish it severely or slaughter it unless it brings me a convincing excuse!"
27|22| And when the bird registered its presence before long, it said, "I have covered something which you have not. And I have come to you from Sheba with reliable information!"
27|23| "I did indeed find there a woman ruling over them. And she is endowed with everything. And she has a huge throne!"
27|24| "And I found her and her people prostrating to the sun instead of to Allah! And the Satan has made their deeds look good to them, and has thus hindered them from the Right Path. And so they do not tread that Path."
27|25| And the Satan prompts them not to bow to Allah Who it is that takes out the hidden, in the heavens and on earth, and knows what you conceal and what you declare.
27|26| Allah! No god besides Him — Lord of the Mighty Throne!
27|27| Solomon said to the bird, "We shall soon see whether thou have told the truth or are one of those who lie!"
27|28| Go with this letter of mine and drop it to them! Then withdraw from them and observe how they react."
27|29| The Queen of Sheba said: "O noblemen! A significant letter has been dropped down to me."
27|30| "It is indeed from Solomon, and it indeed tells me, in the name of Allah, the Gracious, the Merciful,"
27|31| "Exalt not anything (or anybody) above Me, and come to Me in willing surrender!"
27|32| She said, "O noblemen! Give me your advice on what I should do. I would never pass an order unless you endorse it."
27|33| They said, "We are a powerful nation, capable of fighting bravely in war. And the command is yours. Consider, then, what command you would give."
27|34| She said, "Indeed, when kings invade a place of human habitation they devastate it, and humiliate its respected inhabitants. And this is how they behave."
27|35| "And so, indeed, I am going to send a gift to them, and see what the envoys bring back."
27|36| Then, when the Queen's envoy came to Solomon, the latter said, "Are you helping me with wealth? But what Allah has given me is better than what He has given you! Nay, it is you yourself that would rejoice in your gift!
27|37| "Go back to them! We shall certainly come to them with forces they will not be able to face! And we shall certainly cause them to be driven therefrom, humiliated and belittled!"
27|38| Solomon said, "O noblemen! Which of you can bring me her throne before they surrender and come to me?"
27|39| A gigantic and powerful one of the Jinns said, "I shall bring it to you before you rise from your seat. And, indeed, I have dependable ability to do it!"
27|40| The one who had knowledge acquired from the divine Record, said, "I shall bring it (Queen of Sheba's throne) to you before the twinkling of your eyes!" And when he saw it (the throne) squarely placed before him, Solomon exclaimed, "This is by the Grace of my Lord! It is to test me whether I am grateful or ungrateful. And he who is grateful is but grateful for his own sake. And as for he who is ungrateful, my Lord is indeed self-sufficient, beneficent!"
27|41| Solomon said, "Disguise her throne for her. Let us see if she recognizes it or not."
27|42| And when she arrived, she was asked, "Is this throne like yours?" She said, "It is almost the same!" [Solomon said to himself or to his noblemen,] "And the knowledge had come to us before her, and we had surrendered ourselves to Allah!"
27|43| "And what she worshipped besides Allah had kept her away from the right path. She is descended, indeed, of people who suppressed the Truth!"
27|44| She was asked to enter the royal court. And when she saw it, she thought it was a pool of water and bared her legs. Solomon said, "It is but a court paved with glass!" She said, "My Lord! I have indeed committed a wrong against myself. And I have surrendered myself, with Solomon, unto the Lord of all the worlds!"
27|45| And We did send to the ancient tribe of Thamood their brother Salih to advise them, "Worship Allah!" And they then split into two contending factions.
27|46| Salih said, "O my people! Why do you hasten for the evil to come upon you before the good? Why do you not ask for forgiveness from Allah, so that you might be treated with mercy?"
27|47| They said, "We take you and those with you as portents of evil!" Salih said, "Your portents rest with Allah. Nay, you are a people on trial!"
27|48| And there were in the city nine of a leading family. They caused corruption to spread on earth, and they would not reform.
27|49| They said, "Swear to one another by Allah that we shall surely attack him and his family by night. And then we shall say to his next of kin, `We were not witness to the destruction of his family, and we are of course telling the truth!'"
27|50| And they devised a plan, and We devised a plan. And they knew not!
27|51| Then see what all their planning came to in the end: We annihilated them and their people — all of them!
27|52| And these their houses overturned, because of the wrong they did. There is, indeed, a lesson in this for people who know.
27|53| And We saved those who believed and refrained from wrong-doing fearing Allah's wrath.
27|54| And Lot — as he asked his people, "How could you so openly indulge in the obscenity?"
27|55| "How could you really go to men instead of to women for sexual gratification? Nay, but you are a stupid people!"
27|56| His people's answer was not but that, "Expel Lot's family out of your township! They are indeed folk too pure to live with!"
27|57| We then saved him and his family, except for his wife whom We willed to be among those that stayed behind.
27|58| And We rained a rain upon them. Dire was the rain upon those warned!
27|59| Say, "The praise is for Allah, and peace on those devotees of His whom He chose!" Is Allah better or those they worship besides Him?
27|60| Is there any god worthy of worship besides Allah — Allah Who it is that has created the heavens and the earth, and sends down for you water from the skies, and then therewith We cause — it is not in your power to make those trees grow — beautiful gardens to grow? But yet they are a people who equate others with Allah!
27|61| Is there any god worthy of worship besides Allah — Allah Who it is that has made the earth stable, and has caused rivers to flow in its ravines, and has set mountains upon it, and has placed a barrier between the two seas ? Nay, most of them know not!
27|62| Is there any god worthy of worship besides Allah — Allah Who it is that responds to the one in distress when that one calls out (prays) to Him and Who removes the distress, and Who has made you His vicegerents on the earth? Seldom do you remember this!
27|63| Is there any god worthy of worship besides Allah — Allah Who it is that guides you in the midst of the darkness of land and sea, and sends the winds heralding the approach of His mercy (rains)? Exalted is Allah far above what they worship besides Him!
27|64| Is there any god worthy of worship besides Allah — Allah Who it is that initiates creation in the first instance — and then recreates it — and provides you with means of sustenance from the heavens and the earth? Say, "Produce your evidence — if what you claim is true!"
27|65| Say, "None in the heavens or on earth knows the Unseen save Allah!" And they know not when they shall be raised from the dead.
27|66| Nay, their knowledge fails them in regard to the Hereafter! Nay, they are in doubt about it. Nay, they are blind to it.
27|67| And those that suppress the truth say, "Shall we and our forefathers be truly brought back to life after we have become dust!?"
27|68| "Verily, we were promised this — we and our forefathers — in the past as well; it is nothing but fables of ancient times!"
27|69| Say, "Travel the earth and see what end the sinners met with!"
27|70| And grieve not over them, and be not in misery because of what they conspire!
27|71| And they ask, "When — if you are men of truth — is this promise to be fulfilled?"
27|72| Say, "It may well be that something of what you want hastened has already come close to you!"
27|73| And, indeed, your Lord does certainly bestow lots of favours upon mankind, but most of them are ungrateful!
27|74| And, indeed, your Lord does certainly know what their minds conceal and what they reveal!
27|75| And there is nothing hidden in the heavens or on earth, but duly and clearly mentioned in the divine Record.
27|76| This Qur'an does indeed explain to the Children of Israel most of what they differ in.
27|77| And, indeed, it certainly is guidance and mercy for all the believers.
27|78| Indeed, your Lord will judge between them by His Decree. And He is the One Omnipotent, All-knowing.
27|79| Put your trust then in Allah. You are indeed on the Truth manifest!
27|80| You cannot make the dead hear. And you cannot make the deaf to the call hear when they turn their backs and go away.
27|81| And you cannot guide the blind out of their liability. None can you make listen to you save those who believe in Our Verses/signs and then become Muslims (surrender to Allah's Will).
27|82| And when the word gets fulfilled about them, We shall bring out for them a creature from the earth, which will tell them that mankind had no real faith in Our Verses/signs. @ @ My undedrstanding of this Verse is that it applies to modern man's unabashed gobbling up of the theory of evolution. Protagonists of this theory assert that mankind evolved itself from lower forms of life through processes of natural selection and survival of the fittest. They reject the Qur'aanic assertion that a Super-intelligent, Omniscient and Omnipresent Being has consciously, deliberately or purposefully created mankind and everything else in the Universe. The thought of such a Creator is anathema for the atheists subscribing to the theory of evolution. This theory could well be the creature spoken of in this Verse, telling those who believe in it that they have no real faith in the Qur'aanic Verses/signs. In this context I invite my readers to go through my booklet Why Do I Believe In Islam.
27|83| And on that Day We shall gather from within every community a host of those who considered Our Verses false. They will then be led in rows.
27|84| And so when they shall come up before Allah, He will say, "You considered My Verses false and you have had no thorough knowledge thereon!? What were you doing!?"
27|85| And the Word shall get fulfilled about them because of the wrong they had committed, and they will not speak!
27|86| Do they not see that it is We who had made the night for them to rest therein, and the day to make them see well? In this, indeed, there certainly are signs for people who believe!
27|87| And the Day the trumpet is sounded, everyone in the heavens and on earth will be seized with fear, except such as Allah wills. And everyone will come to Him humbly.
27|88| And you will see the mountains — which you consider firm — floating about like clouds. A creation of Allah, Who has ordered all things to perfection! He is indeed aware of all that you do!
27|89| Whoever comes with good shall get a reward better even than what he/she deserves. And they will be secure from the terror of that Day.
27|90| And those who come with evil, they will be cast upon their faces into the Fire. They will be asked, "Are you not but justly requitted for what you were doing?"
27|91| "I have been commanded to worship the Lord of this City — the Lord who has made the city sacred, and to whom all things belong. And I have been commanded to be of those who surrender themselves to Him."
27|92| "And that I recite the Qur'aan." One then that follows the right path, follows it for one's own good. And to one that goes astray, say, "I am but of those who warn."
27|93| And say, "The praise is for Allah! He will soon show you His signs, and then you shall recognise them." And your Lord is not unaware of what you do.
28|1| Ta. Sin. Mim.
28|2| These are Verses of the Book that gives clear guidance. 
28|3| We narrate to you from the story of Moses and Pharaoh with truth, for people who believe.
28|4| Indeed, Pharaoh had acquired great power on earth and had divided its people into sects. He persecuted a group among them, killing their sons and sparing their women. He was indeed of those who perpetrated injustice.
28|5| And We desired to favour the downtrodden on earth, and make them leaders and make them the inheritors,
28|6| And to make them strong and stable on earth, and to show Pharaoh and Haman and their hosts the very thing they feared from them (destruction of Pharaoh and his people).
28|7| And We sent a secret communication to the mother of Moses, "Suckle him! And, when you fear for him, then put him into the river and fear not nor grieve. We shall indeed bring him back to you and shall make him one of Our Messengers."
28|8| And the family of Pharaoh picked him up to become for them a source of enmity and sorrow. Pharaoh and Haman and their hosts did indeed err!
28|9| And the wife of Pharaoh said, "He will be — for me and for you — a solace of our eyes. Kill him not! He may be of use to us, or we may adopt him as a son." And they knew not!
28|10| And Moses' mother became agitated in her heart! And she would have betrayed him had We not calmed her heart down so as for her to be of those who believe.
28|11| And she said to his sister, "Follow his (infant Moses') track." So she kept a watch on him from a distance, and they knew it not.
28|12| And We had forbidden foster-mothers for him beforehand. So she (Moses' sister) said, "May I show you a household that will rear him for you and take good care of him?"
28|13| And then We restored him to his mother that she might be comforted and not grieved and that she might know that the promise of Allah is true. But most of them know not.
28|14| And when he reached adulthood and maturity, We gave him wisdom and knowledge. And thus do We reward the good.
28|15| And he entered the city at a time when its people were in a state of slumber, and he found therein two men fighting, one of his own sect, and the other of his enemies. And he who was of his sect asked him for help against him who was of his enemies. Moses then struck him with his fist and caused his death. He said, "This is a work of the devil. He is an enemy, an open misleader."
28|16| Moses said, "My Lord! I have indeed wronged my own self, so forgive me. HE then forgave him. HE is indeed the One forgiving, merciful.
28|17| He said, "My Lord! Inasmuch as You have favoured me, I shall never again be a supporter of the guilty."
28|18| Then, next morning, as he was looking about apprehensively in the city, the same man who had sought Moses' help the day before was again crying out to him for help. Moses said to him, "You are certainly indeed a clear instigator."
28|19| And when he (Moses) intended to attack the man who was an enemy to them both, that man said, "O Moses! Would you kill me as you did kill a person yesterday? You intend nothing but to be a tyrant in the land. And you intend not to be a reformer."
28|20| And a man came running from the city suburbs. He said, "O Moses! The chiefs are conferring against you to kill you. So, get away! I am indeed a well-wisher to you."
28|21| So he went away from there, fearful and wary. He said, "My Lord! Save me from the wicked people."
28|22| And when he turned toward Midian, he said, "My Lord may guide me in the right direction."
28|23| And when he arrived at the watering place of Midian he found there a lot of men watering their animals. And he found two women, apart from the men, holding their flocks back. He asked, "What is the matter with you two?" The two said, "We cannot water our flocks till the shepherds lead theirs' away from the water. And our father is a very old man."
28|24| So he (Moses) watered their flock for them. Then he turned for rest under the shade and said, "My Lord! I am in dire need of whatever good You send down to me."
28|25| Then one of the two women came walking bashfully to him and said, "My father is inviting you so that he may repay you for watering our animals for us." Then, when Moses came to the old man and recounted his story to him, the latter said, "Fear not! You are now safe from the wicked people."
28|26| One of the two women said, "O my father! Hire him. It is indeed better to hire the strong, the trustworthy."
28|27| He said, "I would like to give one of these two daughters of mine in marriage to you on condition that you work for me for eight years. And then you may voluntarily extend your service to ten years; for, I would not make it hard for you. You shall find me of the righteous, Allah willing."
28|28| Moses said, "That is between you and me. Whichever of the two terms I fulfil, there shall be no compulsion on me to serve more. And Allah is Guarantor over what we say.
28|29| Then, when Moses had fulfilled the term, and was travelling with his family, he visualised a fire in the direction of the mountain and said to his family, "Wait here! It does indeed appear to me that there is a fire there. Perhaps I can bring you some information from there or a brand from the fire that you may warm yourselves."
28|30| Then when he arrived there, he was addressed by a voice from the right ridge of the valley in the blessed spot among the woods, "O Moses! I am indeed Allah, the Lord of the Worlds."
28|31| "Throw your staff down!" Then he saw it (staff) stir as if it were a serpent. And he took to flight and did not look back! "O Moses! Come back and fear not. You are indeed of those who are secure."
28|32| "Insert your hand into your pocket: it will come out blemish-less white, and steel yourself against fear. These are two evidential signs from your Lord for Pharaoh and his chieftains. They are indeed a depraved people!"
28|33| Moses said, "My Lord! I had killed one of their men and I fear that they will kill me."
28|34| "My brother Aaron can speak more clearly than me. Send him then with me as a suport to confirm what I would tell them. I am afraid they will disbelieve me."
28|35| Allah said, "We will strengthen your arm with your brother's. And We will create for you both a shield so that they cannot reach out to you. With Our signs, you two, and those who follow you, will be the winners."
28|36| Then as Moses came to them with Our clear signs, they said, "This is nothing but concocted magic. We had not heard of such a thing from our forefathers."
28|37| And Moses said, "My Lord knows as to who brings guidance from Him, and for whom will be the heavenly abode in the Hereafter. Indeed! The wicked shall not succeed."
28|38| And Pharaoh said, "O chieftains! I know of no god for you other than me. O Haman! Bake the mud for me and then set up for me a lofty tower in order that I may go up to Whom Moses worships. And, indeed, I think he is a liar!"
28|39| And he (Pharaoh) and his hosts had, without right, been haughty on the earth, and had thought that they would never be brought back to Us.
28|40| So We seized him and his hosts, and abandoned them in the sea. Just see what end the wicked people met with!
28|41| And We placed them as leaders inviting people to the Fire, and on the Day of Resurrection they will not be helped.
28|42| And We made a curse to follow them in this world, and on the Day of Resurrection they will be among those loathed.
28|43| And We did give the Scripture to Moses after what We had destroyed of the older generations — clear insights for mankind, and a guidance and a mercy, that they might reflect.
28|44| And you (Muhammad) were not there on the West Side when We decreed the Commandment upon Moses, and you were not among those present then.
28|45| But (between Moses' time and yours, O Muhammad!) We grew many generations, and the age prolonged over them. And you were not a dweller among the people of Midian reciting to them Our Verses, but We kept on sending other Messengers to those generations.
28|46| And you were not by the side of the Mount when We made the call. But you are now given this piece of knowledge from the Unseen as a mercy from your Lord that you may warn a people to whom no warner came before you. They may perhaps take heed.
28|47| Lest, if disaster should afflict them because of what their own hands have sent before them, they might say, "Our Lord! Why have you not sent a Messenger to us, that we might have followed your Verses and been of the believers?"
28|48| Then as the Truth came to them from Us, they said, "Why is he not given the like of what was given to Moses?" Did they not suppress the Truth in what was given to Moses before? They said, "Those are two delusions that back each other up." And they said, "We do ineed disbelieve both!"
28|49| Say, "Then bring a scripture from Allah that would give guidance clearer than these two. I shall follow it, if what you say is true."
28|50| And if they answer you not, then know that what they follow is their lusts. And who could go farther astray than he who follows his lust with no guidance from Allah? Indeed! Allah guides not the wicked people.
28|51| And verily We have caused the Word to contact them, that they may take heed. 
28|52| Those whom We had given the Scripture before it (the Qur'aan), they too come to believe in it.
28|53| And when it is recited to them, they say, "We believe in it. It is indeed the Truth from our Lord. We were of those who surrender to Allah even before it (the Qur'aan) was revealed."
28|54| These will be given their reward doubled, because they are patient and repel evil with good, and spend from what We have provided them.
28|55| And when they hear vain talk they withdraw from it and say, "To us our deeds and to you yours. Peace to you! We do not wish to behave like ignorant people."
28|56| You (O Muhammad) guide not whom you love, but Allah guides whom He wills. And He knows who the rightly guided are.h 
28|57| And they say, "If we were to follow the Guidance with you we should be exterminated from our land." Have We not established for them a secure sanctuary, produce of all kinds being brought to it as a provision from Us? But most of them know not.
28|58| And how many a civilisation We did destroy that was boastful of its means! And there are their dwellings, which have been but little inhabited after them. And We, We were the inheritors. 
28|59| And never did your Lord destroy the civilisations, till He had raised up in the birth-place of that civilisation a Messenger reciting to them Our Verses. And never did We destroy the civilisation unless the people thereof did evil things.
28|60| And anything that is given to you is for the life of this world and its charm. And that which is with Allah is better and lasting. Why do you not understand?
28|61| Is he whom We have given a good promise, which he will find fulfilled, like him whom We have given the comfort of the life of this world, then on the Day of Resurrection he will be of those brought to justice?
28|62| And on the day when He will summon them and ask, "Where are My partners whom you imagined did exist?"
28|63| Those concerning whom the Word shall have come true will say, "Our Lord! These are they whom we led astray. We led them astray because we ourselves were astray. We declare our dissociation from them to You! They did not worship us."
28|64| And they will be told, "Call those whom you worshipped besides Allah." And they will call them, but they will give no answer to them! And they will see the punishment before them. Ah, had they but been guided!
28|65| And on the Day when He will summon them and ask, "What was your response to the Messengers?"
28|66| Then, that Day, they will be blind to all that the Messengers had told them. Nor will they question one another about it!
28|67| Then he who repents and believes and does right deeds — he may be among the successful ones.
28|68| And your Lord creates what He wills; and He chooses that which is good for them. Glorified is Allah and Exalted above all that they worship besides Him!
28|69| And your Lord knows what they conceal in their minds, and what they reveal.
28|70| And He is Allah; there is none to worship other than Him. His is the praise in this, and in the other world. And His is the Command, and to Him you all will be brought back.
28|71| Say, "Do you realize: had Allah made the night continue over you without any light till the Day of Resurrection, which god other than Allah could bring you light? Will you not then listen ?"
28|72| Say, "Do you realize: had Allah made the daylight continue over you till the Day of Resurrection, which god other than Allah could bring you night to rest therein? Will you not then see?"
28|73| And by His mercy He has made for you the night wherein to rest and the day to seek some of His provisions, and to be thankful.
28|74| And on the Day when He will summon them and ask, "Where are My partners whom you imagined did exist?"
28|75| And We shall take out from every community a witness and then say, "Produce your proof." They will then know that the Truth is for Allah, and all that they invented will have abandoned them.
28|76| Korah [Qaroon] was indeed of Moses' people, but then he behaved arrogantly with them. And We had given him so much of treasure that the keys thereof would certainly have been a burden for a company of strong men. His people once told him, "Exult not! Allah does indeed not love the exultant."
28|77| "And seek the abode of the Hereafter in what Allah has given you and forget not what you have got of this world. And be you kind even as Allah has been kind to you, and seek not the spread of corruption in the earth. Allah does not indeed love those who indulge in corruption."
28|78| Korah said, "I have been given it only becuse of my knowledge." Did he not know of the generations, before him, that Allah had already destroyed, who were mightier than him in strength and greater in manpower? The sinners are not questioned about their sins (before they are destroyed here in this world).
28|79| And so he went out before his people in his pomp. Those who were desirous of the life of this world said, "Ah! Would that we had the like of what Korah has been given. He does indeed possess an exceptionally great fortune."
28|80| But those who had been given knowledge said, "Woe to you! Allah's reward is better for him who believes and does good deeds. And none but those who are patient shall get it."
28|81| Then We sank the earth with him and his house. Then he had no force to help him against Allah, nor was he of those who are helped.
28|82| And those who had coveted his (Korah's) place but yesterday exclaimed the morning after (Korah's sinking), "Ah, well! Allah gives the provision for living in ample measure to whom He wills of His slaves and restricts it to whom He wills. Had Allah not been gracious to us, He would have sunk the earth with us. Ah, well! Those who suppress the Truth shall not attain salvation.
28|83| We have prepared this Home of the Hereafter for those who desire not an exalted position — nor corruption — on the earth. And the good end is for those who are Allah-fearing and pious.
28|84| He who comes with a good deed, he will have a reward better than what his deed deserved. And he who comes with an evil deed — those who do ill-deeds will be repaid with only what their deeds deserved.
28|85| Indeed! He Who has made the Qur'aan obligatory on you will surely bring you (Muhammad) back home. Say, "My Lord knows who brings guidance and who is in delusion manifest."
28|86| And you did not expect the Book to be thrown at you, but as a mercy from your Lord. So lend no support to the suppressors of the Truth.
28|87| And let them not hinder you from Allah's Verses after those have been sent down to you. And call them to your Lord, and be not of the polytheists.
28|88| And pray not to any other god besides Allah. There is no god but Him. Everything will perish save His Countenance/Self. His is the Command, and to Him you will all be brought back.
29|1| These are some of the letters of the Arabic language that appear at the beginning of some Qur'aanic chapters. Significance of these letters is a mystery. Omniscient Allah has perhaps purposely kept it mysterious to remind mankind of the limitation of knowledge that it is bestowed with.
29|2| Do people think that they shall be left alone once they say "We believe" and that they shall not be tested?
29|3| And We did test those before them. And then Allah does certainly know those that are truthful and He does certainly know those that lie.
29|4| Or do those who do ill deeds think that they shall outsmart Us? How badly do they judge!
29|5| Let him, who is hopeful of meeting Allah, know that the term fixed by Allah for the meeting is surely coming! And He is the One wbo listens, the One who knows.
29|6| And he who strives, strives only for himself! Allah is indeed Independent of the worlds.
29|7| And those who believe and do righteous deeds, We shall certainly purge them of their bad deeds and shall certainly reward them for the good work that they did.
29|8| And We have instructed mankind to be good to one's own parents. And if the two (parents) try to make you worship besides Me anyone that you have no knowledge of, obey them not! To Me is your return, and then I shall tell you what you have been doing.
29|9| And those who believe and do righteous deeds, We shall certainly put them among the righteous.
29|10| And among the people there are some who say, "We believe in Allah." Then when they get hurt in Allah's way, they treat man-inflicted persecution as Allah's punishment. And then, if help comes from your Lord, they say, "We were indeed with you." Is not Allah well aware of what is going on in the minds of the worlds ? 
29|11| And Allah does certainly know those who believe, and He does certainly know the hypocrites.
29|12| And those who suppress the Truth say to those who believe, "Follow our path, and we shall surely bear with your errors. And they shall bear with none of their errors! They are liars, certainly indeed!"
29|13| And surely they shall bear their burdens and bear other burdens besides their own. And surely they shall be questioned on the Day of Resurrection about things they fabricated.
29|14| And We did send Noah to his people. And he lived among them for a thousand years, save fifty. Then the deluge overtook them, and they were wicked.
29|15| Then We saved him and those in the Ark, and made it a sign for the worlds.
29|16| And (We did send) Abraham (to his people) when he told them, "Worship Allah, and fear Him! That is good for you if you but knew."
29|17| "You worship mere idols instead of Allah, and you create a falsehood. Indeed, those whom you worship instead of Allah can provide you with nothing! Seek the provision therefore with Allah, worship Him, and give Him thanks. To Him it is that you shall be returned."
29|18| "And if you deny, then communities before you had also denied. And the Messenger is responsible only to deliver the divine Message clearly."
29|19| Do they not see how Allah generates creation and then regenerates it? That is indeed easy for Allah.
29|20| Say, "Travel on the earth and see how He has originated creation. And then Allah shall raise another type of existence. Indeed, Allah can do anything!"
29|21| He punishes whom He wills, and shows mercy to whom He wills. And Him you shall be turned to.
29|22| And you can get away neither on the earth nor in the heavens. And, besides Allah, there is none to be close to or to help you!
29|23| Those who suppress the signs of Allah and disbelieve in their meeting with Him, they shall despair of My mercy, and those are the ones for whom shall there be a painful punishment!
29|24| The response of his (Abraham's) people then was naught but that they said, "Kill him, or put him into fire." Then Allah saved him from the fire. Therein indeed are signs for a people who believe.
29|25| And he (Abraham) said, "You have taken mere idols, instead of Allah, as mutual objects of affection amongst you in the life of this world. Then on the Day of Resurrection you shall deny each other and you shall curse each other. And the Fire shall be your abode. And you shall have none to help you."
29|26| And Lot believed in him. And he said, "I am indeed migrating to my Lord! He is indeed the One Omnipotent, Wise."
29|27| And We bestowed on him Isaac and Jacob, and We placed among his posterity prophethood and the Book, and We granted him his reward in this World, and certainly indeed in the Hereafter he shall be among the righteous!
29|28| And Lot! When he said to his people, "You do certainly indeed commit the indecency (homosexuality) which none has committed before you in the Worlds."
29|29| "You do come to men (for sexual pleasure, instead of to women ), you waylay, and you do forbidden things in your assemblies, do you!?" Then the answer of his people was naught but that they said, "Bring Allah's punishment on us if what you say is true."
29|30| Lot said, "My Lord! Help me against these corrupt people."
29|31| And when Our Messengers (angels) came to Abraham with the glad tidings for him (of imminent birth of a son), they said, "We are going to destroy the inhabitants of that locality (to whom Lot was sent). Indeed, the inhabitants thereof have been wicked!
29|32| Abraham said, "But Lot lives therein!" The angels said, "We know who live therein. We shall certainly save him and his household except for his wife. She is to be among those left behind."
29|33| And when Our Messengers (angels) came to Lot, he was worried about them, and he felt powerless to protect them. And they said, "Fear not, nor grieve. We shall indeed save you and your household except for your wife. She is to be among those left behind.
29|34| We are indeed going to bring down upon the inhabitants of this city a scourge from the heaven, for they have rebelled against Allah's commandments.
29|35| And verily We have left thereof a manifest sign for a people who reflect.
29|36| And to Midian (people) We sent their brother, Shu'aib. He said, "O my people! Worship Allah, prepare yourselves for the Last Day, and do no harm on the earth wickedly."
29|37| And they disbelieved him! And then a violent convulsion shook them, and they lay buried in the debris of their homes.
29|38| And (the peoples of) AAad and Thamood! Verily, their destruction is apparent to you from their dwellings. The Satan made their deeds look good to them, and thus hindered them from the Right Path that was within their sight.
29|39| And Korah (Qaroon) and Pharaoh and Haman! Verily, Moses came to them with the clear signs. Yet they behaved arrogantly in the land. But they could not get ahead.
29|40| We then got hold of everyone for his crime. Of them were some on whom We sent a violent storm; and of them were some who were overtaken by a deafening blast; and of them were some with whom We sank the earth; and of them were some whom We drowned. And Allah wronged them not, but they wronged themselves!
29|41| Those taking patrons other than Allah are like the spider building a web of a house. And, certainly indeed, the frailest of all houses is the spider's house — if they but knew!
29|42| Allah does indeed know anything they invoke besides Him (to be as weak as the spider's web). And He is the One omnipotent, wise.
29|43| And We give these examples for mankind. And none, but the knowledgeable, understandh them.
29|44| Allah hath created the heavens and the earth in truth. Certainly indeed, therein is a sign for the believers.
29|45| "Recite what is revealed to you of the Book and establish the prayer !" The prayer indeedh prevents man from doing indecent and forbidden things: and surely remembrance of Allah is great. And Allah knows what you do.
29|46| And argue not with the people of the Book but in the best manner, except with those of them who are unjust and wicked. And say, "We believe in that which has been sent down to us and in that which hath been sent down to you. The One we ought to worship and the One you ought to worship are One and the Same Being. And to that Being we submit."
29|47| And just as (We had sent down Books on Prophets like Jesus and Moses earlier) We have sent down to you the Book (Qur'aan). So those to whom We have given the Book believe therein, and of these (others) too some believe therein. And none dispute Our Verses/signs save those who suppress the Truth.
29|48| And you (Prophet Muhammad) have not read any book before it (Qur'aan), nor have you written anything in your own hand. Had you been so literate, the followers of falsehood might have some reason to doubt (the divine authorship of the Qur'aan).
29|49| But it (Qur'aan) in itself is embodiment of manifest signs in the minds of those given knowledge. And none dispute Our Verses/signs save those that are wicked.
29|50| And they say, "Why are no miracles sent down upon him from his Lord?" Say, "The miracles are with Allah alone, and I am but one who gives clear warnings!"
29|51| Is it not sufficient for them that We have sent down the Book (Qur'aan) to you that is recited to them? Therein, certainly indeed, is mercy and admonition for people who believe!
29|52| Say, "It is sufficient that Allah is witness between me and you. He knows whatsoever is there in the heavens and the earth. And those who believe in falsehood and disbelieve in Allah, it is they who shall be the ones doomed!"
29|53| And they ask you to hasten the punishment. And had not there been a term appointed, the punishment would surely have come to them. And surely it shall come upon them suddenly, unawares.
29|54| They ask you to hasten the punishment. And, certainly indeed, Hell is surrounding the suppressors of Truth,
29|55| The Day when the punishment shall cover them from above them and from underneath their feet. And He shall say, "Taste what you have been doing!"
29|56| O my believing worshippers! My earth is indeed wide. So worship Me alone (and succumb to no force compelling you to worship others)!
29|57| Everyone shall taste death. Then to Us you shall all be returned.
29|58| And We shall surely settle those who believe and do righteous deeds in lofty mansions of the Garden beneath which the rivers flow. They shall live therein forever — excellent reward for those who do good deeds.
29|59| (The excellent reward is) for those who are patient and put their trust in their Lord!
29|60| And how many a creature there is that carries not its provision! Allah provides for it and for you. And He is the One Who always listens, knows.
29|61| And were you to ask them, "Who has created the heavens and the earth and made the sun and the moon subservient?" they would surely say, "Allah." How then are they deluded?
29|62| Allah gives the provision for living in ample measure to whom He wills of His subjects and restricts it to whom He wills. Allah is indeed aware of everything.
29|63| And were you to ask them, "Who sends down water from the heaven, and therewith brings the earth back to life after its death?" they would surely say, "Allah." Say, "All praise to Allah!" But most of them reflect not.
29|64| And this life of the world is nothing but pastime and play. And the home of the Hereafter — that is life indeed, if they but knew!
29|65| And when they board a vessel they pray exclusively to Allah as if they keep their way of life purely for Him. Then when He delivers them safely on the land, they pray to others besides Him!
29|66| So that they remain ungrateful despite what We have given to them, and so that they enjoy themselves. Soon they shall come to know!
29|67| Do they not see that We have made it (Makkah) into a sanctuary of peace, while men are being snatched away from around them? Do they then believe in falsehood, and turn unfrateful to Allah's favours!?
29|68| And who does a greater wrong than he who concocts a lie against Allah or rejects the truth when it comes to him? Do not the supprssors of Truth deserve an abode in Hell?
29|69| And those who strive hard for us, We shall surely show them Our paths. And Allah surely indeed is with those who perform their duties well!
30|1| These are some of the letters of the Arabic language that appear at the beginning of some Qur'aanic chapters. Significance of these letters is a mystery. Omniscient Allah has perhaps purposely kept it mysterious to remind mankind of the limitation of knowledge it is bestowed with.
30|2| The Romans have been defeated
30|3| In the nearby land. But they (the Romans), after this defeat of theirs, shall gain victory 
30|4| Within ten years! Allah's was the Command (for the defeat of the Romans) before and His is the Command (for their victory) later. And on that day the believers shall rejoice
30|5| With Allah's Help! He helps whom He wills. He is the One omnipotent, merciful!
30|6| Allah's Promise! Allah never fails to keep His Promise. But most people know not.
30|7| They know just what is apparent of the life of this world, and remain oblivious to the Hereafter.
30|8| Have they never pondered over themselves!? Allah has not created the heavens and the earth and all that is therein without purpose and without fixing a time for their end! And most people do indeed disbelieve that they are destined to meet their Lord.
30|9| Have they not travelled on the earth and seen what end those who lived before them met with? They were more powerful than these are, and they dug up the earth and built it up more than these are doing. And to them came their Messengers with clear signs. It was not Allah Who wronged them, but they wronged themselves!
30|10| Then the end of those who did evil — in that they denied the Truth of Allah's Verses/signs and ridiculed them — is evil.
30|11| Allah creates the creation from nothing. Then He recreates it. Then to Him, shall you all be returned.
30|12| And the Day the Hour is established, the criminals will stand despaired!
30|13| And none among those they worshipped besides Allah could intercede for them. And they would disown those they worshipped besides Allah.
30|14| And the Day the Hour is established, that Day they will be separated.
30|15| Then those who believed and did good deeds, they will rejoice in a Meadow of delight.
30|16| And those that suppressed the Truth, rejected Our Verses/signs, and denied the meeting in the Hereafter, those then will be presented for the Punishment.
30|17| And Glory to Allah when you retire for the night and Glory to Him when you get ready for your daily work in the morning.
30|18| And for Him is the Praise in the heavens and the earth and in the evening and when you are at noon.
30|19| He brings out the living from the dead and brings out the dead from the living. And He gives life to the earth after it had been dead. And, likewise, you shall be brought out from the dead.
30|20| And among His Signs is that He created you out of dust. And then it is that you mushroomed as human beings.
30|21| And among His Signs is that He created for you mates from yourselves, so that you might give comfort and support to them. And He created mutual affection and kindness between you. In this, indeed, are signs for people who reflect.
30|22| And among His Signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth, and the diversity of your tongues and colours. In this, indeed, are signs for those who imbibe knowledge.
30|23| And among His Signs is your slumber during the night and the day — and your quest of His Bounty. In this, indeed, are signs for people who hear and listen.
30|24| And among His Signs is that He shows you the lightning as herald of both fear and hope, sends down water from the sky, and then gives life to the earth after it was dead. In this, indeed, are signs for people who use their intellect.
30|25| And among His Signs is that the heavens and the earth stand (continue to exist as these do) by His Command. Then, as He gives out to you a single call, behold, you will all emerge from the earth.
30|26| And, to Him belong all things in the heavens and the earth. All are obedient to Him.
30|27| And He it is Who creates the creation from nothing. Then He recreates it. And it is easy for Him. And the example He gives is the best in the heavens and in the earth. He is the One omnipotent, wise.
30|28| He gives you an example from your own selves. Are your employees/slaves equal partners with you in what We have given you? Do you care for them as much as you care for yourselves? Thus do We explain Our Verses for people who use their intellect.
30|29| But those who are wicked follow their own desires without knowing (where their desires would lead them to). Who then can guide whom Allah has let go astray? And for them there is none to help!
30|30| Set your face then steadfastly for the Deen [way of life that Allah has approved for you (Verse :)]. It is in sync with Nature upon which Allah has created mankind. None can change what Allah has created! That is the established Deen, but most people know not.
30|31| (Set your face steadfastly for the Deen) turning to Him (Allah) alone. And fear Him, establish the Prayer and be not of those who worship others besides Him.
30|32| (And be not) of those who split up their Deen, and become sects — every group happy with what they have.
30|33| And when any harm affects the people, they pray to their Lord, turning to Him alone. Then no sooner He lets them taste of His Grace, than do some of them revert to worshiping others besides Him
30|34| To show their ingratitude for what We have given them! Enjoy for now! You will then soon come to know (the inevitable consequence of your ingratitude)!
30|35| Have We ever sent down to them any authority to speak for what they worship besides Allah!?
30|36| And when We let people taste something good by Our Grace they rejoice at it. But if adversity afflicts them because of their past deeds, then and there, they despair!
30|37| Have they not seen that Allah gives the provision in ample measure to whom He wills and restricts it to whom He wills? In that, indeed, are signs for people who believe.
30|38| Give then to the relative his right, and to the needy, and the traveller. This is best for those who seek Allah's pleasure. And they are the ones truly successful!
30|39| And what you give for profit so that the increase is at the cost of other people's amwaal (property, dues) then it is not a lawful increase/profit with Allah. And what you give in charity seeking Allah's pleasure — the givers of such charity are the ones who will get their return multiplied.
30|40| Allah is He Who has created you, then provided you with sustenance, then causes you to die, and then brings you back to life. Are there any of those whom you worship besides Allah who can do any of these things? Glorified and exalted is He above all those whom they worship besides Him.
30|41| Corruption has appeared in the land and the sea — because of what people did — to let them taste some consequence of what they do, so that they might return to the Right Path.
30|42| Say, "Travel on the earth and notice what happened in the end to people who lived before you. Most of them worshiped others besides Allah."
30|43| Set your face resolutely for the Deen (way of life) established (by Allah for mankind), before the Inevitable Day comes from Allah. On that Day people will segregate.
30|44| He who rejects the Truth, the responsibility for that rejection shall lie on him himself. And all those who do good deeds, they are making a good preparation for themselves.
30|45| So that He may, by His Grace, reward those who believe and do good deeds. He does not indeed love those who suppress the Truth.
30|46| And among His signs is that He sends the winds heralding good news (of rains), so that He might give you a taste of His Grace, that ships might sail at His Command, that you might seek His Favour, and that you might be grateful.
30|47| And, before you, We did send Messengers to their respective peoples. And they came to them with clear signs. Then We punished the criminals. And it was incumbent on Us to help the believers.
30|48| Allah is the One Who sends the winds. Then the interaction of the winds raises a cloud. Then He spreads the cloud across the sky as He pleases, and breaks it into fragments. Then you see the rain pouring down from within them. And when He makes the rain fall on whomsoever of His creatures He pleases, those creatures do then rejoice.
30|49| And they were indeed in despair, before it (the rain) was sent down upon them,.
30|50| Look then at these results of Allah's Mercy — how He gives life to the earth after it had been dead. Indeed, that (Mercy) surely shall give life to the Dead. And He is the One capable of doing anything.
30|51| And if We send a wind and they see it (the green earth) turn yellow (giving man its yield), verily, they still continue ungratefully to disbelieve (in Allah's Mercy).
30|52| And you cannot indeed make the dead hear, nor can you make the deaf hear the call when they turn their backs and go away.
30|53| And, nor can you advise the blind out of their straying. You can make none to hear except those who believe in Our Verses/signs and then submit.
30|54| It is Allah who created you weak, then made you strong after being weak, and then made you weak and grey-haired after being strong. HE creates as He wills. And He is the One knowing all, capable to do anything.
30|55| On the Day the Hour dawns, the criminals will swear they stayed not (in the earth) but an hour. Thus were they deluded!
30|56| And those who have been endowed with knowledge and conviction will say, "Indeed you did stay there, in accordance with Allah's Book, until the Resurrection Day. Now, this is the Resurrection Day, but which you remained unaware of."
30|57| That Day then the wicked people shall not get any benefit from their excuses/apologies, nor shall they be allowed to solicit favours.
30|58| And, verily, We have given, in this very Qur'aan, every kind of example for mankind. And even if you come to them with a miraculous sign, those who suppress the Truth would say, "You advocate nothing but falsehood."
30|59| Thus does Allah put a seal on the minds of those who wish not to learn.
30|60| Be patient then! Allah's Promise is indeed true. And let not those who lack conviction disturb your mind. 
31|1| These are among the letters, of the Arabic language, appearing at the beginning of some Qur'aanic chapters. Significance of these letters is a mystery. Omniscient Allah has perhaps purposely kept it mysterious to remind mankind of the limitation of knowledge it is bestowed with.
31|2| These are Verses of the Book of Wisdom,
31|3| Guidance and Mercy for those who are good.
31|4| Those who establish prayer, give Zakaat, and believe in the Hereafter with conviction.
31|5| Those are on guidance from their Lord, and these are the ones who are successful!
31|6| And among mankind is such a one who, without adequate knowledge, bargains for the frivolous hadeeth to lead people away from Allah's path, and holds this (Qur'aan) in ridicule.h For such a one awaits a disgraceful punishment.
31|7| And when Our Verses are recited to him, he turns back haughtily, as if he had not heard them — as if there was deafness in his ears. Give him then the bad news of a painful punishment.
31|8| Those indeed who believe and do good deeds, for them are Gardens of bliss.
31|9| They will live therein forever! Allah's promise is the Truth! And He is the One omnipotent, wise.
31|10| He created the heavens without pillars that you can see. And He cast mountains on the earth lest it should shake with you, and He dispersed on it animals of every kind. And We sent down water from the sky, and caused to grow therein pairs of every noble kind.
31|11| This is Allah's creation. Now show me that which those besides Him have created. Nay, these people who unjustly worship others besides Allah are in manifest error.
31|12| And We did give Luqman the wisdom of being grateful to Allah. And whoever is grateful, he is grateful for his own sake; and if anyone is ungrateful, then indeed Allah is Self- Sufficient, Praised.
31|13| And when Luqman said to his son by way of admonishing him, "O my son! Worship none besides Allah. Worshipping others besides Allah is certainly indeed a grave injustice."
31|14| And We have commissioned man with a duty towards his parents — his mother bears him through weakness upon weakness and she feeds him on her milk for two years — that, (as Allah directs,) "Be grateful to Me and to your parents. To Me is the final destination."
31|15| "And if they (parents) try to make you worship others with Me — others of whom you have no knowledge — obey them not, but be kind to them in this world. And follow the way of him who turns to Me! Then to Me is your return, then I shall tell you what you did."
31|16| [Continuing his admonition started in Verse above, Luqman said,] "O my son! Even if it be the weight of a grain of mustard-seed, and even though it be in a rock, or in the heaven or in the earth, Allah will bring it out. Allah is indeed meticulously Aware!"
31|17| "O my son! Establish the Prayer,enjoin good, and forbid evil. And bear patiently any affliction that you may suffer. These indeed are among acts of great courage."
31|18| "And turn not rudely away from people, nor walk the streets in pride! Indeed, Allah loves not any self-conceited boaster."
31|19| "And be modest in your walk and lower your voice. The most hateful of voices is certainly indeed the ass's bray."
31|20| See you not that Allah has made subservient to you whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth, and that He has given you His bounties (like air and water) in abundance outwardly and inwardly? And among men is such a one as argues about Allah without knowledge, without guidance, and without the leading light a divine Book.
31|21| And when they are asked to follow what Allah has revealed, they say, "Nay, we follow what we found our fathers with." Would they follow them even though the devil calls them to the punishment of the burning Fire!?
31|22| And he who submits himself to Allah and is good to others, he has taken a firm hold of a strong link. And with Allah is the end of all matters.
31|23| And let not disbelief of one who disbelieves grieve thee. To Us is their return, and then We shall inform them of what they did. Allah does indeed know what is inside their minds.
31|24| We let them enjoy a little, then We shall drive them to a severe punishment.
31|25| And if you ask them who created the heavens and the earth, they will say, "Allah." Say, "Praise be to Allah!" Nay, most of them know not.
31|26| To Allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth. Indeed, Allah is the One self- sufficient, praised.
31|27| And had all the trees in the earth been pens, and the sea, after being completely used (as ink), had seven more seas to replenish it, all these would still be insufficient to cover all of Allah's words. Allah is indeed Omnipotent, Wise.
31|28| Creation or Resurrection of you all is not but like (creation and resurrection of) a single soul. Allah does indeed listen to and see (all His creatures).
31|29| Do you not see that Allah makes the night enter the day, and He makes the day enter the night, that He has made the sun and the moon subservient — each pursues its course till an appointed time — and that Allah is Aware of what you do?
31|30| That is because Allah is the Truth, what they pray to besides Him is falsehood, and Allah is the Highest, the Greatest.
31|31| Do you not see that the ship floats on the sea by Allah's favour so that He may show you some of His signs? Certainly indeed there are signs in this for everyone who is patient, grateful.
31|32| And when a wave, like dark clouds, covers them, they pray exclusively to Allah as monotheists. Then when He brings them back safely to land, some of them become neutral (between polytheists and monotheists). And none but every treacherous, ungrateful one denies Our signs.
31|33| O people! Be mindful of your Lord and fear the Day when no father can avail his son in anything, nor can the child avail this father. Allah's promise is always indeed true. So let not the lives of this world deceive you, nor let the arch-deceiver (the Satan) deceive you about Allah.
31|34| Indeed! The knowledge of the Hour is with Allah alone, and He sends down the pouring rain, and He knows what is in the wombs. And no one knows what he will earn the next morning. And no one knows in what land he will die. Allah does indeed know everything, He is indeed aware of everything!
32|1| Alif Lam Mim
32|2| Revelation of this Book is, no doubt, from the Lord of the worlds.
32|3| Do they say He (Prophet Muhammad) has forged it? Nay! It is the Truth from your Lord to warn a people to whom no warner had come before you. They may thereby walk the Right Path.
32|4| Allah is He Who created the heavens and the earth and what is in between them in six periods of time. He then ascended the Throne of Power. You have no wali or intercessor besides Him! Will you not then take heed?
32|5| He (Allah) directs the Divine Command from the heavens to the earth. Then it will come up to Him on a Day the measure of which is a thousand years as you count.
32|6| That One is the Knower of the unseen and the seen. That One is the Omnipotent, the Merciful,
32|7| Who perfected everything He created, and He created the first man from dust.
32|8| Then He generated his progeny of an extract (sperms) from a despised liquid (semen).
32|9| Then He gave it shape and breathed into it some of His spirit. And He made ears, eyes, and minds for you. You thank but little!
32|10| And they say, "When we are lost in the earth, shall we then be there in a new creation?" Nay! They believe not in meeting their Lord.
32|11| Say, "The angel of death, who is given charge of you, will cause you to die. Then to your Lord you will be returned."
32|12| And could you but see the guilty when they hang down their heads before their Lord! "Our Lord! We have seen and heard enough. Now send us back! We will do righteous deeds. We now do certainly believe."
32|13| And had We so willed, We could have given every soul its guidance. But (as Allah declares,) "The word from Me is bound to come true that I will certainly fill Hell with the jinn and the humans together."
32|14| So taste the consequence: because you were oblivious of your appointment for this Day, We are indeed oblivious of you now! And taste the eternal punishment for what you did.
32|15| They — only they — believe in Our messages who, when they are reminded of them, fall down prostrate and glorify their Lord with His praise, and they are not proud.
32|16| They keep themselves out of their beds, praying to their Lord in fear and in hope. And they spend out of what We have given them.
32|17| And no person knows what is kept hidden for them, of delights of the eyes, as reward for what they did.
32|18| Can he then who is a believer be like him who has been a transgressor/profligate!? They cannot be equal.
32|19| And for those who believe and do good deeds, there are Gardens to live in — a hospitable resort for what they did.
32|20| And for those who transgress, the Fire is their abode! Whenever they try to get out from it, they are taken back into it. And it is said to them, "Taste the punishment of the Fire, which you disbelieved in."
32|21| And certainly We will make them taste the lower punishment before the great one so that they may turn (to the Right Path).
32|22| And who can be more unjust than he who is reminded of the Verses/signs of his Lord, but then turns away from them!? We do exact retribution from the offenders.
32|23| And We did indeed give Moses the Book — doubt not then the meeting with Him — and We made it a guide for the Children of Israel.
32|24| And We made, from among them, leaders to guide them with patience by Our command. And they were certain in their belief of Our Verses/signs.
32|25| Your Lord it is, indeed, Who will judge amongst them, on the Day of Resurrection, on matters they differed in.
32|26| How many a generation — in whose erstwhile dwelling places they now move about — have We destroyed before them? Does not this fact give guidance to them? Indeed there are signs in this. Do they not then hear (about those generations)?
32|27| Do they not see that We drive the water to the barren land, then bring out thereby an agricultural produce of which their cattle and they themselves eat? Do they not then understand what they see?
32|28| And they say, "When will this Inauguration (of the Hereafter) come, if what you say is true?"
32|29| Say, "On the Day of the Inauguration, belief of those who (now) disbelieve will not profit them, nor will they be given any respite."
32|30| So leave them alone and wait! They too are indeed waiting.
33|1| O Prophet! Fear Allah and obey not the disbelievers (suppressors of the Truth) and the hypocrites. Allah is indeed Knowledgeable, Wise.
33|2| And follow what is revealed to you from your Lord. Allah is indeed ever Aware of what you (all people) do;
33|3| And have trust in Allah! And Allah is sufficient as dispenser of affairs.
33|4| Allah has not made for any man two hearts within him. And He has not made your wives, whom you desert by Zihar (i.e. by uttering that your wives' backs are like your mothers' backs), your mothers. And He has not made your adopted sons your sons. These are just words uttered by your mouths. And Allah tells the truth and it is He Who shows the way.
33|5| Call them by names linking them to their fathers; this is the equitable thing to do by Allah's standards. And if you know not their fathers, then they are your brethren in faith and your wards. And there is no blame on you in that you make a mistake therein without any bad intention. And Allah is ever Forgiving, Merciful.
33|6| The Prophet is closer to the believers than they are to themselves. And his wives are their mothers. And the womb (blood) relations are closer one to another, in Allah's Writ, than to the other believers and the migrants, except for what good you do to your bosom friends. This is as recorded in the Book.
33|7| And when We took a covenant from the prophets and from you (O Muhammad) — and from Noah, Abraham, Moses and Jesus son of Mary — We took from them a solemn covenant.
33|8| (The covenant taken was for the purpose) that He (Allah) may question the truthful of their truth, and He has prepared for the suppressors of the Truth a painful punishment.
33|9| O you who believe! Remember Allah's favour to you when there came against you armies against whom We sent a strong wind and armies that you saw not. And Allah does ever see what you do.
33|10| When they came upon you from above you and from below you, and when the eyes swooned and the hearts rose up to the throats, and you began to have misgivings about Allah.
33|11| There the believers were put on trial and shaken with a severe shaking.
33|12| And when the hypocrites and people with sick minds said, "Allah and His Messenger have promised us nothing but delusions."
33|13| And when a section of them said, "O people of Yathrib! You cannot make a stand, so go back. And a group of them sought permission of the Prophet, saying, "Our houses are exposed." And their houses were not exposed; they just wanted to run away!
33|14| And had an entry been made upon them from behind, and then they (hypocites) were asked to defect, they would certainly have done it with little hesitation.
33|15| And they did make a pledge with Allah before, that they would not turn their backs. And a pledge with Allah is bound to be questioned about.
33|16| Say, "Fleeing will profit you not, if you flee from death, natural or violent. And even then, (when, with Allah's will, you are given respite from death for the time being,) you will not be allowed to enjoy life on this earth but a little.
33|17| Say, "Who is it that can shield you from Allah, if He intends to harm you or He intends to show you mercy?" And they will find none as a wali to them or to help them besides Allah.
33|18| Allah does know those among you who hinder others and those who say to their brethren, "Come to us!" And they hardly come to fight in a battle.
33|19| They grudge any help to you. But when fear grips them, you will see them look at you with eyes rolling, as if death has overtaken them. But when fear is gone, they lash you with sharp tongues grudging over wealth. These people are not believers, so Allah has rendered their deeds null and void. And that is easy for Allah.
33|20| They (hypocrites) think the confederates are not gone. And should the confederates come again, they would like to be in the deserts with the Bedouins asking for news about you. And were they to be with you, they would hardly fight.
33|21| Certainly you have in the Messenger of Allah an excellent example for anyone who turns to Allah and the Last Day, and remembers Allah much.
33|22| And when the believers saw the Confederates, they said, "This is what Allah and His Messenger promised us, and Allah and His Messenger spoke the truth. And it increased in them nothing but faith and submission.
33|23| Of the believers there are men who are true to the promise they made to Allah. And of them is he who has fulfilled his vow, and of them is he who is waiting (to fulfill it). And they have not changed in the least.
33|24| (Mankind is variously tested in this world) so that Allah may reward the truthful for their truth, and punish the hypocrites if He so pleases, or pardon them. Allah is indeed ever Forgiving, Merciful.
33|25| And Allah repelled the disbelievers consumed in their rage; they gained no advantage (in their armed invasion against Medina). And Allah sufficed the believers in the war. And Allah is Strong, Omnipotent.
33|26| And He sent down those of the People of the Book who backed them (the Confedrates) from their fortresses and He cast terror into their minds; some you killed and some you took captive.
33|27| And He made you heirs to their land and their dwellings and their property, and to lands on which you have not yet set foot. And Allah has power over all things.
33|28| O Prophet, tell you wives, "If you desire the life of this world and its glitter, well then, I will make an adequate provision for you and give you a gracious release."
33|29| And if you desire Allah and His Messenger and the abode of the Hereafter, then Allah has indeed prepared a great reward for the virtuous ones among you.
33|30| O wives of the Prophet! Whoever of you is guilty of manifestly improper conduct, double is the punishment for her. And this is easy for Allah.
33|31| And whoever of you (Prophet's wives) is devoted to Allah and His Messenger and performs good deeds, We shall reward her twice, and We have prepared for her a generous provision.
33|32| O wives of the Prophet! You are not like any other woman. If you fear Allah, be not soft in speech, lest he in whose heart is a disease be moved by desire. And speak in a normal, appropriate, matter-of-fact manner.
33|33| And stay at home and display not the display of the ignorance of yore. And establish prayer, give charity, and obey Allah and His Messenger. Allah only desires to rid you of anything bad and unclean, O people of the (Prophet's) household, and to cleanse you thoroughly.
33|34| And remember what is recited in your houses of the Verses of Allah and the Wisdom. Allah is indeed ever Meticulous, Aware.
33|35| Indeed, the men who submit and the women who submit, and the men who believe and the women who believe, and the men devoted to Allah and the women devoted to Allah, and the truthful men and the truthful women, and the men exercising patience and the women exercising patience, and the humble men and the humble women, and the men who give sadaqah and the women who give sadaqah, and the men who fast and the women who fast, and the men who guard their chastity and the women who guard, and the men who remember Allah much and the women who remember — Allah is prepared to forgive them and grant them a great reward.
33|36| And it behoves not a believing man or a believing woman, when Allah — and His Messenger — has decided an affair, to exercise a choice in their matter. And whoever revolts against Allah and His Messenger, he surely and clearly goes astray.
33|37| And when you said to him whom Allah and you had shown favour to, "Keep your wife to yourself and fear Allah!" And you concealed in your heart what Allah would bring to light. And you feared men, and Allah has a greater right that you should fear Him! So when Zaid completed necessary divorce formalities from her (Zaid's wife), We gave her in marriage to you, so that there should be no difficulty for the believers about the wives of their adopted sons, when they (adopted sons) have completed necessary divorce formalities from them (their wives). And Allah's decree does ever get implemented. 
33|38| There can be nothing forbidden for the Prophet in what Allah has ordained for him. Such has been the way of Allah with those who have gone before. And Allah's decree is a thing destined.
33|39| [And such shall be the way of Allah with] those who convey Messages of Allah and fear Him, and fear none but Allah. And Allah is Sufficient to keep accounts.
33|40| Muhammad is not father to any of you men, but he is Messenger of Allah and Seal of the Prophets. And Allah does know all things.
33|41| O you who believe! Remember Allah much and often.
33|42| And glorify Him morning and evening.
33|43| He it is Who blesses you — and so do His angels — that He may bring you out of darkness into light. And He is ever Merciful to the believers.
33|44| Their salutation on the day they meet Him will be, "Peace!" And He has prepared for them a noble reward.
33|45| O Prophet! We have indeed sent you as a witness, and to convey good news (to the people) and to warn (them).
33|46| And as one who invites people to Allah with His permission, and as a lighted lamp.
33|47| And give the believers the good news that they shall have a great favour from Allah.
33|48| And obey not those who suppress the Truth and obey not the hypocrites, and tolerate the annoyance they cause you, and trust Allah. And Allah is sufficient as dispenser of affairs.
33|49| O you who believe! When you marry believing women and then divorce them before you touch them, you have in their case no waiting period which you should observe. However make a good provision for them and set them free in a fair manner.
33|50| O Prophet! We have made lawful to you your wives whom you have given their dowries, and those whom your right hand possesses out of those whom Allah has given you as prisoners of war, and the daughters of your paternal uncles and the daughters of your paternal aunts, and the daughters of your maternal uncles and the daughters of your maternal aunts who migrated with you; and a believing woman, if she gives herself to the Prophet, if the Prophet desires to marry her. This is a special provision for you only, not for the (other) believers. We do know what We have ordained for them concerning their wives and concerning those whom their right hands possess. We give this clarification in order that no blame may lie on you. Andh Allah is ever Forgiving, Merciful.
33|51| You (Prophet) may defer the turn of any you please of them (Prophet's wives), and take to you any you please. And you may wish for any of those you had put off — no blame on you. They are thus more likely to calm down and not grieve, and be pleased, all of them, with what you give them. And Allah knows what is in your minds. And Allah is Knowledgeable, Kind.
33|52| No more wives are allowed to you after this. Nor are you allowed to exchange them (existing wives) for other wives, though the latters' beauty be pleasing to you, except those whom your right hand possesses (slaves). And Allah is Watchful over everything.
33|53| O you who believe! Enter not the houses of the Prophet unless invited there for a meal, but then go not there too early as to wait for the meal to be ready. But enter at the time you are invited, and as soon as you have finished your meals, disperse! And linger not for a customary talk. This does indeed cause inconvenience to the Prophet, but he is too embarrassed to tell you. And Allah is not embarrassed to express the truth. And when you ask for anything from them (ladies of the Prophet's household), ask of them from behind a curtain. This would be better for the purity of your hearts and of theirs. And it behoves you not to cause inconvnience to the Messenger of Allah, nor to marry his wives after him. This is indeed a matter of great significance with Allah.
33|54| Whether you do a thing openly or do it in secrecy, Allah does in any case know everything.
33|55| No blame on them (ladies of Prophet's household) in respect of their fathers, their sons, their brothers, their brothers' sons, their sisters' sons, their own women, or of what their right hands possess (slaves).And O ladies! Fear Allah and obey Him. Allah is indeed Witness over all things.
33|56| Indeed, Allah and His angels bless the Prophet. O you who believe! Bless him and greet him nicely.
33|57| Allah has cursed those who do indeed displease Allah and His Messenger — cursed them in this world and the Hereafter. And He has prepared for them a disgracful punishment.
33|58| And those who harm believing men and believing women unjustly, they become guilty of slander and manifest sin.
33|59| O Prophet! Tell your wives and your daughters and the women of believers to put on their outer-garments over their bodies in such a way that they are recognised and not molested.h And Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.
33|60| If the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease and those who spread rumours and trouble in Madinah desist not, We shall certainly urge you on against them. And then they shall not be your neighbours therein but for a little while.
33|61| Accursed, they will be seized and slain wherever found.
33|62| That was the way Allah dealt with those who have gone before. And you will find no change in Allah's way.
33|63| People ask you about the Hour (the time when the present world will end and the Hereafter begin). Say, "Information about it is only with Allah. And what do you know, the Hour may be nigh?"
33|64| Allah has indeed cursed the suppressors of Truth and prepared for them a burning Fire.
33|65| They will abide therein forever. They will find neither a wali nor anyone to help.
33|66| That day when their faces are turned about in the Fire, they will say, "Woe to us! Would that we had obeyed Allah and obeyed the Messenger!"
33|67| And they will say, "Our Lord! We only obeyed our bosses and our seniors. And they led us astray from the right path."
33|68| "Our Lord! Give them a double punishment and give them a severe curse."
33|69| O you who believe! Be not like those who offended Moses, but Allah cleared him of what they said. And he had an honourable standing with Allah.
33|70| O you who believe! Fear Allah and speak in appropriate and straight (unambiguous and to the point) words.
33|71| He (Allah) will improve your deeds for you, and forgive you your sins. And whoever obeys Allah and His Messenger, he/she does certainly achieve a great success.
33|72| We did indeed offer the trust to the heavens and the earth and the mountains, but they were unwilling to bear its burden and were apprehensive of it. And man bore that burden! He has indeed been unjust and ignorant.
33|73| That Allah may punish the hypocrites, men and women, and the polytheists, men and women. And Allah will turn mercifully to the believing men and the believing women. And Allah is Forgiving, Merciful. 
34|1| Praise to Allah! To Him belongs whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth. And to Him belongs praise in the Hereafter! And He is the One wise, aware.
34|2| He knows what goes down into the earth and what comes out of it, and what comes down from the heavens and what goes up there. And He is the Merciful, the Forgiving.
34|3| And those who suppress the Truth say, "The Hour (the time when the present world will end and the Hereafter begin) is not going to come to us ever." Say, "Yes, by my Lord, the Knower of the unseen! It is certainly going to come to you." No mass (weight) particle is hidden from Him, either in the heavens or in the earth. And nor is there anything less than that nor greater, but clearly recorded.
34|4| (The Hour is indeed going to come) in order that He (Allah) may reward those who believe and do good deeds. For them there is forgiveness and a noble provision.
34|5| And for those who strive hard to defeat the purpose of Our Messages, there is punishment of a painful scourge.
34|6| And those who have been given knowledge see that what is revealed to you from your Lord is the Truth, and that it guides towards the path of the Omnipotent, the Praised One.
34|7| And those who suppress the Truth say, "Shall we show you a man who informs you that, when you are completely shred into tiny pieces, you will even then be created anew!?"
34|8| "Has he forged a lie against Allah or has he gone mad?" Nay! Those who believe not in the Hereafter are suffering a far-reaching delusion.
34|9| See they not what is before them and what is behind them of the heaven and the earth? If We so will, We can cause the earth to swallow them or bring down upon them a chunk of the heavens. There is indeed a sign in this for every obedient human turning in repentance to Allah.
34|10| And We certainly granted David favours from Us. "O mountains and the birds! Sing Allah's praises with him (David)." And We softened the iron for him.
34|11| "Make armour (with the softened iron), and measure its links correctly. And do good deeds. I (Allah) do indeed see what you do."
34|12| And for Solomon (We made) the wind (subservient). It sailed a distance of a month's journey in the morning and a month's journey in the evening. And We made a fountain of molten brass to flow for him. And of the jinn there were those who worked under him by his Lord's command. And whoever from among them failed to act upon Our command, We made him taste the punishment of burning.
34|13| They made for him what he pleased — of prayer halls and statues, and bowls like water reservoirs and fixed cooking-pots. "Do your work thankfully, O people of David!" And few among My human subjects are grateful.
34|14| And when We decreed death on him (Solomon), nothing made them aware of his death but a creature of the earth that ate away the stick he was leaning on. So when he fell down, it made the jinn aware that, if they had knowledge of the unseen, they would not have continued to suffer in humiliation.
34|15| Certainly there was a sign for Sheba in their abode: two gardens, on the right and on the left. Eat of your Lord's provision and give thanks to Him. A good land and a Forgiving Lord!
34|16| But they turned away (from the Right Path). Then We sent upon them an inundating flood. And in place of their two gardens, We gave them two gardens yielding bitter fruit and growing tamarisk and some stunted Sidr. 
34|17| We punished them thus because they suppressed the Truth. And We punish none but those who suppress the Truth.
34|18| And between them and the towns which We had blessed with our bounties, We had placed other townships within sight of one another to facilitate secure journeys therein, by night and by day.
34|19| But then they said, "Our Lord! Make the stages of our journeys longer." And they wronged themselves! And We reduced them to just a tale among numerous other tales, and scattered them completely. Therein indeed are signs for anyone who is patient and grateful.
34|20| And the devil did certainly find his opinion concerning them come true. And they followed him, except for a group of the believers.
34|21| And he (Satan) holds no authoritative power over them, but that for Us his (satanic) influence distinguishes him who believes in the Hereafter from him who is in doubt concerning it. And your Lord monitors everything.
34|22| Say, "Call upon those whom you consider gods besides Allah; they control not even the weight particle in the heavens or in the earth, nor have they any partnership in either creation. And He has no assistant from among them.
34|23| And intercession is of no avail with Him, except from him whom He permits. Until when fear is removed from their hearts, they (seekers of intercession) ask (those whom they considered to be their intercessors), "What is it that your Lord said?" They say, "The Truth. And He is the Most High, the Great." 
34|24| Say, "Who provides for you from the heavens and the earth?" Say, "Allah! And indeed either of us — we or you — are on right guidance or in manifest error."h 
34|25| Say, "You will not be asked what we may be guilty of, nor shall we be asked of what you do."
34|26| Say, "Our Lord will gather us together. Then He will judge between us on the basis of truth. And He is the Best Judge, the Best One to know."
34|27| Say, "Show me those whom you worship besides Him. No! But it is Allah, the Omnipotent, the Wise, alone Who is worthy of worship."
34|28| And We have not sent you but as a bearer of good news and as a warner to the entire mankind, but most of mankind knows not.
34|29| And they ask, "When is this promise going to be fulfilled, if what you say is true?"
34|30| Say, "The fulfillment of the promise for you is on a Day which you cannot postpone nor prepone even by a moment."
34|31| And those who suppress the Truth say, "We do not believe in this Qur'aan, nor in that which has preceded it." And if you could but see the wrongdoers, when they are made to stand before their Lord, blaming one another! Those deemed to be weak say to those who were proud, "Had it not been for you, we would have been believers!"
34|32| The proud ones say to those deemed weak, "Did we turn you away from the guidance after it had come to you!? Nay, you yourselves were guilty."
34|33| And those deemed weak say to those who had been proud, "Nay, it was your night-and- day schemings to prod us to be ungrateful to Allah and set up other gods besides Him." And they keep their remorse to themselves when they see the punishment. And We put shackles on the necks of those who suppress the Truth. Are they getting back anything but for what they did?
34|34| And We sent not anyone to warn a township but the well-to-do in it said, "We do indeed disbelieve what you are sent with."
34|35| And they said, "We have abundance of wealth and children, and we are not going to be punished!"
34|36| Say, "My Lord does indeed amplify and straiten provisions for whomsoever He wills, but most of mankind knows this not."
34|37| And it is not your wealth, nor your children, that bring you close to Us; but (the piety of) one who believes and does good deeds. Such ones are entitled to double reward for what they do. And they are secure in their high positions.
34|38| And those who strive to work against Our Verses/signs, those will be brought for punishment.
34|39| Say, "Surely my Lord gives the provision for living in ample measure — and restricts it — to whom He wills of His subjects. And whatsoever you spend, He compensates therefor. And He is the Best Provider."
34|40| And the Day He will gather them all together, and then ask the angels, "Did they worship you?"
34|41| They [the angels] will say, "Glory to You! You are our Wali — not they! Nay, they worshipped the jinn; in them, most of them believed."
34|42| So that Day you will not be able to benefit or harm one another. And We will say to those who were wicked, "Taste punishment by the Fire, which you used to deny!"
34|43| And when Our clear Verses are recited to them, they say, "This is not but a man who wants to turn you away from that which your fathers worshipped." And they say, "It is nothing but a concocted lie!" And those who suppressed the Truth say of the Truth when it comes to them, "This is nothing but magic manifest!"
34|44| And We had not given them any Books to read, nor did We send them, before you, a warner.
34|45| And those before them rejected the Truth. And these here now have not yet attained a tenth of what We gave them, and yet they (those before) rejected My Messengers! And how severe in effect was My forsaking them!!
34|46| Say, "I exhort you only to one thing: that you stand up for Allah in twos and alone, then ponder! There is no madness in your companion (Muhammad). He is but one to warn you of a severe punishment."
34|47| Say, "Whatever reward I ask of you, it is only for you yourselves. It is for Allah to give me my reward. And He is a Witness over all things."
34|48| Say, "My Lord, Knower of the unseen, does indeed project the Truth."
34|49| Say, "The Truth has come, and falsehood neither originates creation, nor reproduces it."
34|50| Say, "If I err, I err only to my own detriment. And if I am right, it is because of what my Lord reveals to me. He does indeed listen, and He is indeed close."
34|51| And if you could see them get terrified! But then there would be no escape; and they would be easily caught.
34|52| And they would say, "We do believe in it." And how could they attain salvation from a place out of bounds from the place (earth) where they could attain to it?
34|53| And they did disbelieve in it before. And they threw stones at the unseen from a place too distant.
34|54| And a barrier would be placed between them and that which they desire, as was done with those of their kind before. The sceptics would indeed be ever in doubt.
35|1| The praise is for Allah, Who originated the heavens and the earth, Who made the angels as messengers flying on wings, two, three, and four. He increases in creation what He wills. Allah is indeed Capable of doing anything.
35|2| Whatever of mercy Allah opens for mankind, there is none to wit old it. And what He wit olds none can send it thereafter. And He is Omnipotent, the Wise One.
35|3| O Mankind! Recall Allah's favours upon you. Is there any creator besides Allah who provides for you from the heavens and the earth? There is none worthy of worship but He. How then are you fooled by falsehood?
35|4| And if they reject you, Messengers before you were rejected too. And to Allah return all matters.
35|5| O mankind! Allah's promise is indeed true. So let not the lives of this world deceive you, nor let the arch-deceiver (the Satan) deceive you about Allah.
35|6| The devil is indeed your enemy, so take him for an enemy. He only invites his followers to be companions of the burning Fire.
35|7| Those who suppress the Truth, for them is a severe punishment. And those who believe and do good deeds, for them is forgiveness and a great reward.
35|8| Does he, whose evil deed is made to look enticing to him, consider it good!? Now, indeed, Allah lets go astray whom He wills and guides to the Right Path whom He wills. So let not yourself (Prophet) get affected with anxiety for them. Allah does indeed know what they do.
35|9| And Allah it is Who sends the winds to raise a cloud. Then We drive it on to a dead land, and therewith give life to the earth after it had been dead. Likewise will the Resurrection happen!
35|10| If any do seek power and glory, then to Allah belongs all power and glory! To Him do words of purity rise, and He does exalt the good deed. And those who plan evil, for them there shall be a severe punishment! And their plan will perish.
35|11| And Allah created you from dust, then from fertilized ovum, and then He made male and female pairs of you. And no female bears, or delivers, except with His knowledge. And no one is granted a long life, or a shortened one, but it is all recorded in a book. This is indeed easy for Allah.
35|12| And the two seas are not alike: one sweet, thirst-queching, pleasant to drink; and the other salty, bitter. And from both you eat fresh flesh and bring out jewels which you wear. And you see the ships in the sea cut through its water so that you might seek His bounty and be thankful.
35|13| Allah makes the night enter the day, and He makes the day enter the night. And He has made the sun and the moon subservient, each pursuing its course till an appointed time. That is Allah, your Lord; His is the kingdom! And those whom you pray to besides Him own not even so much as skin of a date-stone.
35|14| If you pray to them, they hear not your call; and if they hear, they cannot answer you. And on the day of Resurrection they will deny you worshipped them besides Allah. And none can give you information like the One All-Aware!
35|15| O mankind! It is you who are in need of Allah. And Allah is the Self-Sufficient One, the Praised One.
35|16| If He so wills, He can destroy you and bring a new creation.
35|17| And this is not at all beyond Allah's power.
35|18| And no bearer of burdens shall bear another's burden. And if any body weighed down by a burden calls attention to its heavy load, nothing of it will be carried by another, even though the latter be near of kin. You can warn only those who fear their Lord without seeing Him, and have established the Prayer. And whoever has purified himself, purifies only for his own good. And to Allah is the final destination.
35|19| And the blind and the one who is able to see are not alike.
35|20| Nor are the darkness and the light alike.
35|21| Nor are the shade and the heat alike.
35|22| And the living and the dead are not alike. Allah does indeed make one hear whom He wills. And you cannot make those ones hear who are in the graves. 
35|23| You (Prophet Muhammad) are but a warner!
35|24| We have indeed sent you with the Truth as a bearer of good news and a warner. And not a people, but a warner had been among them!
35|25| And if they reject you, those before them did also reject! Their Messengers came to them with clear signs, and with scriptures, and with the illuminating Book.
35|26| Then I seized those who suppressed the Truth. And how severe in effect was My forsaking them!!
35|27| Do you not see that Allah sends down water from the clouds, and then We bring out therewith fruits of various hues and kinds? And in the mountains are streaks, white and red of various shades and very black.
35|28| And, similarly, there are mankind, beasts and cattle of various hues and colours. Only those of His subjects fear Allah who possess knowledge. Allah is indeed Omnipotent, Forgiving.
35|29| Those indeed who have recited the Book of Allah, established the Prayer and spent secretly and openly out of what We have given them, look forward to a bargain that never fails.
35|30| So that He may pay them back their rewards fully and give them more out of His grace. He is indeed Forgiving, Appreciative.
35|31| And that which We have revealed to you of the Book, that is the Truth, confirming that which is before it. Allah is indeed Aware, Observer of His subjects.
35|32| And then We have given the Book in inheritance to those whom We have chosen from among Our subjects. And of them is he who wrongs himself, and of them is he who takes a middle course, and of them is he who is foremost in deeds of goodness by Allah's permission. That is the great favour.
35|33| Gardens of perpetuity they enter into, to be adorned therein with bracelets of gold and pearls. And their dress therein is silken.
35|34| And they say, "The praise is for Allah, Who has taken away the sorrow from us! Our Lord is indeed certainly Forgiving, Appreciative."
35|35| "Who by His grace has settled us in a house abiding forever. Neither any calamity nor any fatigue afflicts us therein."
35|36| And those who suppress the Truth, for them is Hell-fire. It does not finish them that they die there, (but they continue to suffer without dying) and the punishment thereof is not lightened for them. We thus do retribute every ingrate.
35|37| And therein they wail, "Our Lord! Take us out. We will do good deeds — other than what we used to do!" "Did We not give you a long life so that he, who would, could do it? And there came to you the warner! So suffer now; for, wicked persons have no one to help them."
35|38| Allah is indeed the Knower of the unseen in the heavens and the earth. He does inded know the secrets of the minds.
35|39| It is He Who has made you His representatives on the earth. So whoever suppresses the Truth, suppresses it to his own detriment. And their suppression increases the suppressors in nothing but hatred with their Lord. And their suppression increases the suppressors in nothing but loss.
35|40| Say, "Have you seen your gods whom you pray to besides Allah? Show me what sort of earth they have created! Or have they any share in the heavens? Or, have We given them a Book a clear edict whereof they follow?" Nay! The wicked people hold out promises to one another only to deceive.
35|41| Indeed, Allah upholds the heavens and the earth lest they degenerate. And if they degenerate, none can uphold them after He lets them degenrate. He is indeed Forbearing, Forgiving.
35|42| And they swore their strongest oaths, by Allah, that if a warner came to them, they would be better guided than any of the communities. And when a warner did come to them, it only increased their aversion (to right guidance).
35|43| Displaying arrogance on earth and planning evil. And the evil plan affects none but the planners themselves. Do they then wait for nothing but the way the ancients were dealt with? But you will find neither change nor deviation in Allah's way.
35|44| Do they not travel on earth and see what end those before them met with? And those before them were stronger in power than they! And Allah is not such that anything in the heavens or the earth could frustrate Him. He is indeed Knowledgeable, Powerful.
35|45| And were Allah to get hold of people for punishments they earn, He would not leave a single creature living! But He gives them time till an appointed term. And when their terms end, then, of course, Allah does have the overall picture of His subjects. h 
36|1| These are among the letters, of the Arabic language, appearing at the beginning of some Qur'aanic chapters. Significance of these letters is a mystery. Omniscient Allah has perhaps purposely kept it mysterious to remind mankind of the limitation of knowledge it is bestowed with.
36|2| By the Qur'aan, full of wisdom!
36|3| You (Prophet Muhammad) are indeed one of the Messengers (of Allah for mankind).
36|4| [Who (the Messengers) are] on Straight Path.
36|5| (The Qur'aan is) sent down by the Omnipotent, the Merciful.
36|6| So that you (Prophet Muhammad) may warn a people whose fathers were not warned, and are therefore unaware.
36|7| Divine verdict has already been passed against most of them, so they believe not.
36|8| We have indeed placed on their necks chains reaching up to the chins, so that they have their heads held up.
36|9| And We have set a barrier in front of them and a barrier behind. Then We have so covered them up that they see not.
36|10| And whether you warn them or not, it is all the same to them; they believe not.
36|11| You can warn only him who follows the Zikr (Qur'aan) and fears the Gracious One without actually seeing Him. Give him then the good news of forgiveness and generous reward.
36|12| We do indeed bring the dead to life. And We do write down what they send ahead and what they leave behind. And We record everything in a clear document.
36|13| And recount to them the story of the town-people, when the Messengers came to the town.
36|14| When We sent to them two Messengers, they rejected them both. Then We aided them with a third. And they said, "We have indeed been sent to you."
36|15| They (the town-people) said, "You are none but mortals like us. And, the Gracious One has sent nothing! You are none but liars."
36|16| They (the Messengers) said, "Our Lord knows that we are indeed sent to you as His Messengers."
36|17| "And our responsibility is only to deliver the divine Message clearly."
36|18| They (the town-people) said, "We do indeed consider you to be portents of evil. If you desist not, we will surely stone you, and a painful punishment from us will certainly afflict you."
36|19| They said, "Your evil portents be with you. Do you consider it evil that you are reminded of your duty to Allah!? Nay, you are a people transgressing all bounds."
36|20| And from the remote part of the city there came a man running. He said, "O my people! Follow the Messengers."
36|21| "Follow those who ask of you no reward! And the Messengers are rightly guided."
36|22| "And what reason have I that I should not worship Him Who created me?! And to Him you will be returned."
36|23| "Shall I take to worshipping any god besides Him — gods whose intercession, if the Gracious One should desire to afflict me with harm, will avail me naught, and who can save me not?"
36|24| "I shall then indeed be in clear error."
36|25| "I do indeed believe in your Lord, so give me a hearing."
36|26| It was said, "Enter the Garden." He said, "Would that my people knew"
36|27| "How my Lord has forgiven me and made me one among those honoured!"
36|28| And We did not send down upon his people any army from heaven, after him, nor did We need send any.
36|29| It was just a single deafening blast, and then they were silenced by death!
36|30| Alas for the subjects! Never does a Messenger come to them but they mock him.
36|31| Do they not see how many generations We did destroy before them — generations that return to them not?
36|32| And all of them, certainly indeed, will be brought before Us together.
36|33| And a sign to them is the dead earth. We make it alive, and bring out from it grain of which they eat.
36|34| And We have made therein gardens of date-palms and grapes and We have made some springs to flow therein.
36|35| That they may eat of the fruit thereof — fruit that their hands have not made. Will they not then be thankful?
36|36| Glory to Him Who created pairs of all things — pairs of what the earth grows, pairs of their own kind, and pairs of what they know not!
36|37| And a sign to them is the night: We take out the day therefrom and then they are those in darkness.
36|38| And the sun moves on in the way (orbit) fixed for it. That is a course laid down by the Omnipotent, the Knowledgeable.
36|39| And the moon: We have laid down phases for it till it returns in shape (curved) to an old dry palm-stalk.
36|40| Neither is it possible for the sun to overtake the moon (for their paths are different), nor can the night take the place of the day. And all float on in orbit.
36|41| And a sign to them is that We bore their race in the laden ship (Noah's Ark).
36|42| And We have created for them the like thereof, whereon they ride.
36|43| And if We so will, We may drown them, then there would be no one to respond to their cries for help, nor can they be rescued.
36|44| (They cannot be rescued) except by mercy and provision from Us for a given time.
36|45| And then it would be said to them, "Take heed of what is ahead of you and what is behind you, so that mercy is shown to you."
36|46| And there comes to them no Verse of the Verses of their Lord but they turn away from it.
36|47| And when it is said to them, "Spend out of what Allah has given you," those who disbelieve say to those who believe, "Shall we feed him whom, if Allah wills, He could feed? You are not but clearly in error."
36|48| And they say, "When will this promise (of the Last Day happening) come to pass, if what you say is true?"
36|49| They await but a single deafening blast, which will overwhelm them while they squabble.
36|50| Then they will not be able to make a bequest, nor return to their families.
36|51| And when the trumpet is blown, to their Lord they will rush from their graves.
36|52| They will say, "O woe to us! Who has raised us up from our graves? This is what the Gracious One had promised! And the Messengers did tell the truth.
36|53| It will but be a single dafening blast, after which they all shall be brought before Us.
36|54| That Day then none shall be wronged even a bit; and you shall not be recompensed aught but for what you did.
36|55| The inhabitants of the Garden (Paradise) shall indeed on that Day be merrily occupied.
36|56| They and their wives shall be in shaded places, reclining on couches.
36|57| They shall have fruits therein, and they shall have whatever they desire.
36|58| Peace shall be the greeting from the Merciful Lord.
36|59| And stand aside this Day, O guilty ones!
36|60| Did I not send guidance to you, O children of Adam, that you should not worship the Satan? He is indeed an open enemy to you!
36|61| And that you worship Me. This is the Straight Path.
36|62| And he (Satan) did certainly lead many a generation from among you astray. Could you not then understand?
36|63| This is the Hell you were being warned of.
36|64| Suffer it this Day since you suppressed the Truth.
36|65| This Day We seal their mouths and their hands will speak to Us, and their feet will bear witness as to what they earned.
36|66| And had We so willed, We would have covered their eyes. Then, how would they see to get to the (Straight) Path? 
36|67| And had We so willed, We would have degraded them in their position, then they would be able neither to proceed, nor turn back.
36|68| And one whom We give a long life, We cause a reversal of creation in that one. Do they not understand?
36|69| And We have not taught him (Prophet Muhammad) poetry, nor does it befit him. This (Qur'aan) is nothing but a clear Narrative and Reading.
36|70| (The Qur'aan is meant) to warn him who is alive, and to expose those that suppress the Truth therein.
36|71| Do they not see that We have created — of things Our hands have wrought — cattle for them, so they become their masters?
36|72| And We have made the cattle subservient to them, so some of them they ride, and some they eat.
36|73| And for them therein there are other benefits, and they get milk therefrom to drink. Will they not then be grateful?
36|74| And they take gods besides Allah hoping to be helped.
36|75| They (gods other than Allah) are incapable of helping them, and yet they (the polytheists) consider them (the gods) a host at their beck and call!
36|76| So let not what they say grieve you. We do indeed know what they conceal and what they proclaim.
36|77| Does not man see that We have created him from a little thing of fertilized ovum? And, lo, he has become an open adversary!
36|78| And he (man) compares us to material things and forgets his own creation. He says, "Who will bring the bones to life, when they are rotten?"
36|79| Say, "He will bring life back to them, Who had brought them into existence in the first place. And He knows the entire creation."
36|80| "He Who makes fire for you out of the green tree, the fire with which then you kindle."
36|81| Is not He Who created the heavens and the earth capable of creating the like thereof? Yes, of course! And He is the Creator, fully aware of all things.
36|82| When He intends anything, His command to it is just to say, "Be", and it is!
36|83| Glory then to Him in Whose hand is the sovereignty over all things! And to Him is your return.
37|1| By those that line up in rows
37|2| And then charge fiercely (at the enemy)
37|3| Reciting Allah's Greatness (Allaho-akbar)!
37|4| Indeed! There is only One Entity Whom you should worship.
37|5| (And the One Whom you should worship is the) Lord of the heavens and the earth and what is in between, and Lord of the easts! 
37|6| We have indeed adorned the sky of this world with the glitter of the stars.
37|7| And We have made it (the sky of this world) a safeguard against every defiant devil.
37|8| They cannot listen to the deliberations of the Highest Assembly up there. And they are repelled from every side.
37|9| They (the defiant devils) are driven off. And for them is perpetual punishment.
37|10| In the exceptional case of a devil snatching away any secret, a piercing flame trails him.
37|11| Ask them then whether what they have created was more difficult or what We have created. We have indeed created them of clinging clay.
37|12| Nay! You wonder, while they mock.
37|13| And when reminded, they take no heed.
37|14| And when they see a (miraculous) sign (like Moses' staff turning into serpent), they mock at it.
37|15| And say, "This is nothing but obvious magic."
37|16| "When we are dead and have become dust and bones, shall we then be raised to life again!?"
37|17| "We or our fore-fathers?
37|18| Say, "Yes! And you will be humble."
37|19| And it will but be one big shout, and then they will see.
37|20| And they will say, "O woe to us! This is the Day of Judgment."
37|21| This is the Day of Distinction (of those going to Paradise from those going to Hell), which you used to deny.
37|22| Gather all those who wronged (themselves and others) and their associates, and what they worshipped
37|23| Besides Allah, and then lead them up the way to Hell.
37|24| And stop them there to be questioned,
37|25| "What is the matter with you that you help not one another?"
37|26| Nay! That day they will be submissive.
37|27| And they will confront one another questioningly.
37|28| Saying, "You did indeed use to come to us from the right side (exercise control over us)."
37|29| The others will say, "Nay! You (yourselves) were not believers."
37|30| "And we had no authority over you, but you (yourselves) were a transgressing people."
37|31| "And the word of our Lord has come true over us: we do indeed have to taste it."
37|32| "We led you astray, for we ourselves had gone astray."
37|33| So, that Day they will share the punishment.
37|34| Thus do We deal with the criminals.
37|35| They had indeed behaved arrogantly, when they were told, "There is no god but Allah!"
37|36| And they had said, "Shall we abandon our gods for the sake of a mad poet?"
37|37| Nay, he has come with the Truth and confirms what the Messengers (had come with before).
37|38| You shall indeed taste the painful punishment.
37|39| And you shall be paid back nothing but for what you did.
37|40| Save those who worship Allah alone devotedly.
37|41| For them is sustenance as expected
37|42| Of fruits. And they are honoured,
37|43| In Gardens of bliss,
37|44| On couches, facing one another.
37|45| A bowl of pure original drink will be made to go around them,
37|46| White in colour, delicious in taste.
37|47| There will be nothing destructive in it, nor will they get intoxicated therewith.
37|48| And with them will there be those with restraining looks from beautiful eyes.
37|49| As if they were eggs, carefully shielded.
37|50| Some of them will then accost others inquisitively.
37|51| One of them will say, "I used to have a companion."
37|52| "Who asked, `Are you indeed of those who accept?'
37|53| `When we are dead and have become dust and bones, shall we then be brought to justice?'"
37|54| Another (person in Paradise) will say, "Will you have a look?"
37|55| Then he looked down and saw him (companion on earth of the man in Paradise) in the ignominy of Hell.
37|56| He will say, "By Allah! You had almost ruined me."
37|57| "And had it not been for the largesse of my Lord, I should have been among those brought there!"
37|58| "Are we to have no death,
37|59| Except for our previous death!? And are we not to be punished!?"
37|60| "This indeed is the highest success!!"
37|61| For the like of this, then, let the people do their work.
37|62| Is this better as hospitable reception or Zaqqum, the tree of Hell?
37|63| We have indeed made it [Zaqqum] a calamity for the wicked people.
37|64| It is a tree that springs up at the bottom of Hell.
37|65| Its shoots repulsive as devils' heads.
37|66| Then indeed they will eat therefrom and fill their bellies therewith.
37|67| Then indeed for them thereupon will there be a drink made of boiling water. a
37|68| Then indeed their return shall be to the Hell.
37|69| They indeed had found their fathers astray
37|70| So they hasten to follow in their (fathers') footsteps. 
37|71| And most of the ancient peoples did go astray before them,
37|72| And We did send warners among them.
37|73| Then see what end those warned met with!
37|74| Except for those who devotedly worship Allah alone.
37|75| And Noah did certainly call out to Us, and how excellent was our response!
37|76| And We saved him and the people with him from the great grief.
37|77| And made his offspring the only survivors.
37|78| And left on him [the salutation] among the later generations:
37|79| "Peace on Noah among the worlds !"
37|80| Thus indeed do We reward the good people.
37|81| He was indeed one of Our believing worshippers.
37|82| We then drowned the others.
37|83| And, indeed, Abraham was of his ilk.
37|84| When he came to his Lord with a sound mind.
37|85| When he said to his father and his people, "What is it that you worship?"
37|86| "Do you desire to perpetrate the lie that there are gods besides Allah?"
37|87| "What do you then think about the Lord of all the worlds?"
37|88| He then cast a glance at the stars.
37|89| And said, "I am sick indeed!"
37|90| So they turned away from him.
37|91| Then he secretly turned to their gods and asked them, "Don't you eat?"
37|92| "What is the matter with you that you do not speak?"
37|93| Then, unseen by anyone, he turned upon them, hitting them with his right hand.
37|94| Then they (the people) came rushing to him.
37|95| He (Abraham) asked, "Do you worship that which you (yourselves) carve out!?"
37|96| "And Allah has created you and your work." 
37|97| They (the people) said, "Cast him (Abraham) into the flaming fire from a structure specially built for him."
37|98| And they devised a plan against him, but We brought them down.
37|99| And he (Abraham) said, "I do indeed betake myself to my Lord — He will guide me."
37|100| "My Lord, grant me a righteous son."
37|101| So We gave him the good news of a gentle and kind son.
37|102| And then when he (son) grew up to be able to work with him, he (Abraham) said, "O my son! I have seen in a dream that I sacrifice you. Now consider how you see it." He (son) said, "O my father! Act upon what is commanded to you. Allah willing, you will find me patient."
37|103| And then when they had both submitted to Allah's Will, and he (Abraham) had laid him (son) upon his forehead,
37|104| And We called out to him, "O Abraham!"
37|105| "You have certainly fulfilled the obligation laid upon you in the vision. We do thus reward the good people."
37|106| "This is indeed the trial manifest."
37|107| And We ransomed him (Abraham) with a great sacrifice, 
37|108| And left on him [the salutation] among the later generations:
37|109| "Peace upon Abraham!"
37|110| We do thus reward the good people.
37|111| He was indeed one of Our believing worshippers.
37|112| And We gave him the good news of (his son) Isaac, (who would also be) a prophet from among the righteous people.
37|113| And We bestowed blessings on him and on Isaac. And of their offspring some have been good, but some, evidently unjust to themselves.
37|114| And We did certainly confer a favour on Moses and Aaron.
37|115| And We saved them both and their people from the great grief.
37|116| And We helped them, and then they were the ones with the upper hand.
37|117| And We gave them both the Book (Torah) that made things clear.
37|118| And We guided them on the Straight Path.
37|119| And left on them both [the salutation] among the later generations:
37|120| "Peace upon Moses and Aaron!"
37|121| Thus do We indeed reward the good people.
37|122| They both were indeed among Our believing subjects.
37|123| And Elias (Elijah) was indeed among those sent as Messengers.
37|124| When he asked his people, "Are you not scared of wrongful living?"
37|125| "Do you pray to Ba'l (idol worshipped by Elias' people) and forsake the Best of the creators — "
37|126| " — Allah, your Lord and the Lord of your forefathers?"
37|127| But they rejected him (Elias), so they shall indeed certainly be presented (for punishment before the Lord),
37|128| Excpt for those who worship Allah alone devotedly.
37|129| And We left on him [the salutation] among the later generations:
37|130| "Peace upon Elias!"
37|131| We do indeed thus reward the good people.
37|132| He was indeed among Our believing subjects.
37|133| And Lot was certainly indeed one of those sent as Allah's Messengers.
37|134| When We saved him and his family, all —
37|135| Except for an old woman who was left among those who remained behind.
37|136| Then We destroyed the others [— other than those saved].
37|137| And you do indeed pass by them in the mornings
37|138| And at night. Do you not then understand?
37|139| And Jonah was certainly indeed one of those sent as Allah's Messengers.
37|140| When he ran away to the laden ship,
37|141| And then he (Jonas) embarked the ship with others but was one of those thrown overboard (into the sea). 
37|142| And then the big fish swallowed him and he was himself to blame.
37|143| But had he not indeed been of those who glorify (Allah),
37|144| He would have remained in its belly till the Day people are resurrected.
37|145| Then We flung him on to the open shore, and he was sick.
37|146| And We caused a gourd vine to grow up over him.
37|147| And We sent him to a constituency of a hundred thousand or more.
37|148| And they believed, so We let them enjoy life for a while.
37|149| Now ask them (your people, O Muhammad) whether your Lord has daughters and they would like to have sons for themselves!?
37|150| Did We create the angels as females, and did they witness their creation?
37|151| Are they not just telling some of the lies they have themselves concocted?
37|152| And (they say), "Allah has children." And they certainly are liars.
37|153| Has He preferred to have daughters over sons?
37|154| What is the matter with you? How poorly do you judge!
37|155| Would you not yet take heed?
37|156| Or, do you have any clear authority?
37|157| Then produce your document, if what you say is true!
37|158| And they assume a relationship between Him and the jinn. And the jinn do certainly know that they will be brought up for judgment.
37|159| Allah is far more glorious than how they describe Him!
37|160| Except for those who devotedly worship Allah alone.
37|161| So you indeed and what you worship,
37|162| Are incapable of tempting anyone against Him,
37|163| Save him who is destined to burn in the flaming Fire.
37|164| And there is none of us (Angels) but has an assigned place,
37|165| And we are indeed those ranged in ranks.
37|166| And we do indeed certainly glorify Him.
37|167| And they did indeed use to say:
37|168| "If only we had a scripture from the ancestors,"
37|169| "We would have devotedly worshipped Allah alone."
37|170| And so they now disbelieve in it (the Qur'aan), and so they will soon come to know.
37|171| And Our word has certainly already gone forth to those of Our subjects sent as the Messengers,
37|172| That they indeed are surely those who shall be helped,
37|173| And, indeed, Ours will be the triumphant army.
37|174| So turn away from them for a while,
37|175| And observe them, they too will observe.
37|176| Would they want Our punishment hastened?
37|177| It will be a bad day for those who wait for the punishment, as it would descend in their yard.
37|178| And turn away from them for a while,
37|179| And observe, they too will observe.
37|180| Your Lord, the Lord of Majesty, is far more glorified than how they describe Him!
37|181| And peace on those sent as Messengers!
37|182| And praise to Allah, the Lord of the worlds! 
38|1| Sad. By this Qur'an, that contains all that one should remember and all that matters!
38|2| But, verily, the suppressors of the Truth are lost in false pride, and deeply out of tune with Reality.
38|3| How many a generation have We destroyed before them! They (the earlier generations) prayed to Us when it was too late for them to escape!
38|4| And people deem it strange that a person from among themselves should have come to warn them! And the sppressors of the Truth say, "This one is but a lying magician!"
38|5| "Has he converted all deities into one single God? This is indeed a strange thing!"
38|6| And the leaders among them egged them on, "Go and persevere with your deities. This (what Muhammad is propounding) is indeed a thing designed!"
38|7| "We have not heard of this in any recent society! This is nothing but fabrication!"
38|8| "Is it upon him — from amongst us all — that the divine Scripture has been sent down!?" Nay! It is My Scripture that they doubt. Nay! They have not tasted the punishment I give.
38|9| Or, do they have the treasures of your Lord's Mercy — the Lord Omnipotent, the Bestower of Grace!?
38|10| Or, do they possess the absolute sovereignty over the heavens and the earth and all that is in between!? Let them then ascend in vehicles!
38|11| The confederate forces are bound to suffer defeat there. 
38|12| Before them, Noah's people, and the tribe of AAad, and Pharaoh of the many tent-pegs (i.e. with means and power), denied the Truth,
38|13| And so did the tribe of Thamood, and the people of Lot, and the dwellers of the wood [Midian]: those were the peoples allied against the Truth.
38|14| Not one among them but denied the Messengers. So they deserved My penalty.
38|15| And these people (of this age) need wait for no more than one single blast (to be annihilated).
38|16| And they (the polytheists) say (mockingly), "Our Lord! Hasten on to us our share before the Day of Reckoning!"
38|17| Bear patiently what they (the polytheists) say, and remember Our devotee David, a man of strength. He was indeed of those who always turned to Us.
38|18| We did indeed cause the mountains to join him (David) in extolling Our Glory at sunset and at sunrise,
38|19| And the birds in their assemblies: they all would always turn to Him.
38|20| And We strengthened his (David's) kingdom, and bestowed upon him wisdom and decisiveness in speech.
38|21| And has the information of the litigants come to your knowledge when they climbed over the walls of (King David's) private chamber?
38|22| When they confronted David, he shrank back in fear of them. They said, "Fear not! We are two litigants. One of us has wronged the other. So judge between us with justice, and deviate not from what is right, and show both of us the right path."
38|23| "This man here is my brother. He has ninety-nine ewes, whereas I have one ewe. And he asks me to hand over to him even the one I have. And he prevailed over me in the discourse we had."
38|24| David said (to the complainant), "He has certainly wronged you by demanding that your ewe be added to his ewes! And indeed do many associates — except those who believe in Allah and do righteous deeds — wrong one another; but how few are those exceptions!" And David at once realized that We had tested him (by presenting to him the case of the ewes)! And so he asked his Lord to forgive him, and bowed down, and turned to Him in repentance.h 
38|25| And We forgave him (David) that [the impropriety that he had committed]. And, indeed, he will certainly be among those near to us — the best place to return to!
38|26| "O David! We have indeed made you a vicegerent on earth. Establish, then, a just rule among the people, and follow not vain desire, lest it lead you astray from Allah's Path. Those who go astray from Allah's Path shall indeed suffer severe punishment for having forgotten the Day of Reckoning!"
38|27| AND We have not created the heaven and the earth and all that is in between in vain. That is what those who suppress the Truth think. Woe then from the Fire unto all those who suppress the Truth!
38|28| Would We treat those who believe and do righteous deeds like those who spread corruption on the earth!? Would We treat those who are Allah-fearing like those that are wicked!?
38|29| Blessed is the Book We have revealed to you, [O Muhammad,] so that people may ponder over its Verses, and that those who are endowed with insight may pass on their understanding to others.
38|30| And We bestowed Solomon — an excellent devotee — [as a son] to David. He would indeed always turn to Us.
38|31| As, towards the close of day, well-bred horses were brought before him (Solomon),
38|32| He (Solomon) said, "I have indeed come to love the good things in life as these remind me of my Lord (Who has created them)!" And when they (the horses) were out of sight under the veil of darkness (of the night),
38|33| (Solomon ordered,) "Bring them (the horses) back to me!" And then he would [lovingly] stroke their legs and their necks.
38|34| And We did certainly put Solomon on trial by placing upon his throne a [lifeless] body; and thereupon he turned in repentance to Us.
38|35| He (Solomon) prayed, "O my Lord! Forgive me my sins, and bestow upon me a kingdom which may not suit anyone after me. You are indeed the bestower of gifts!"
38|36| We then made the wind subservient to him, so that it blew gently at his behest in the direction he willed.
38|37| And (We made) the devils (work for him) in every kind of construction activity and in diving.
38|38| And there were others too (who worked for him while) linked together in fetters.
38|39| [And We told him,] "This is Our special Grant; whether you help others with it or not, no account will be taken!"
38|40| And, indeed, he (Solomon) will certainly be among those near to us — the best place to return to!
38|41| And recall when Our devotee Job prayed to his Lord, "The Satan has indeed afflicted me with illness and suffering!"
38|42| [He was told,] "Stamp your foot!" [Water springs out from the ground.] "This is cool water to wash with and to drink!"
38|43| And We restored to him his family and as many more with them, as an act of grace from Us, and as a source of inspiration to all who are endowed with insight.
38|44| [And We told him,] "Now take a handful of herbs and strike therewith, and you shall not break your oath!" We did indeed find him patient in adversity — an excellent devotee, who would always turn to Us!
38|45| And recall Our servants Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, who were all endowed with inner strength and vision:
38|46| We did indeed purify them by means of the purity of the remembrance of the life to come.
38|47| And they were certainly indeed, in Our sight, among the selected best of humankind!
38|48| And recall Ishmael and Elisha, and Zulkifl : every one of them was among the best of humankind!
38|49| This [Qur'aan] is a Reminder/Narrative [of all that leads mankind to Paradise and all that leads them to Hell]. And, certainly indeed, the most beauteous of all goals awaits those who are pious and Allah-fearing.
38|50| The goals are gardens of perpetual bliss with gates kept open for them [the pious and Allah-fearing].
38|51| They will be comfortable and at ease therein, frequently calling for fruits and drinks.
38|52| And they will have with them companions of modest gaze.
38|53| This is what you are promised for the Day of Reckoning:
38|54| This, certainly indeed, shall be Our inexhaustible provision!
38|55| This [provision would of course be there as promised!] And, certainly indeed, the most evil of all goals awaits those who transgress the bounds of what is right.
38|56| Hell! They will suffer therein. And how vile a resting-place!
38|57| This, [then, is for them.] So let them taste it: boiling water (to drink) and a pus-like thing (to eat!)
38|58| And other torments in pairs of similar nature [— similar to those mentioned in the preceding Verse].
38|59| This crowd of people who went headlong with you into sin — no welcome to them either! They shall indeed suffer the Fire!
38|60| They [the seduced] will say [to the seducers], "Nay, but it is you who are not welcome! You have brought this upon us: and it is a vile state to be in!"
38|61| They will say, "Our Lord! Increase the punishment in the Fire twofold for those who brought this upon us!"
38|62| And they will say, "How come we do not see men whom we counted among the evil?"
38|63| "We used to hold them in ridicule! Or is it that our eyes have missed them?"
38|64| That, indeed, will in truth be the mutual wrangling among the people of the Fire!
38|65| Say [O Muhammad], "I am only a warner! And there is none worthy of worship other than Allah, the One and Only, the Almighty."
38|66| "The Lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is in between, the Omnipotent, the Ultimate Forgiver!"
38|67| Say: "This is a Message of the greatest importance!"
38|68| "[And] you turn away from it!"
38|69| "I could have had no knowledge of the angels up there when they argued [against the creation of man]."
38|70| "[I could have no knowledge of it] if it had not been revealed to me [by Allah's permission.] I am but a plain warner."
38|71| When your Lord said to the angels, "I am indeed about to create a human being out of clay."
38|72| "And when I have completed his form and breathed into him of My spirit, lie down before him in prostration!"
38|73| The angels then prostrated all of them together.
38|74| [All] except Iblees, who became arrogant, and [thus] became one of those who suppress the Truth.
38|75| Allah said, "O Iblees! What has prevented you from prostrating before what I have created with My hands? Are you proud or are you of those who think of themselves as high and mighty!?"
38|76| Iblees replied, "I am better than he. You have created me out of fire [energy], and You have created him out of clay [matter]."
38|77| Allah said, "Get out from here; for, indeed, you are expelled!"
38|78| "And My curse shall be on you till the Judgment Day!"
38|79| Iblees said, "My Lord! Give me respite then till the Day of Resurrection!"
38|80| Allah Ta'ala said, "So shall you indeed be among those given respite"
38|81| "For a period of time the duration of which is fixed."
38|82| Iblees said, "Then I swear by Your Honour that I shall certainly seduce them all,"
38|83| "All except those subjects of Yours who are sincerely devoted to You!"
38|84| Allah Ta'ala said, "The Truth, then — and in Truth do I state:"
38|85| "Certainly will I fill Hell with you and with all those who shall follow you among them!"
38|86| Say [O Prophet], "I ask of you no reward for this [Qur'aan]. And I am not pretentious."
38|87| "This [Qur'aan] is nothing but that which all human beings need to constantly refer to for rightful decisions and actions in their respective worlds."
38|88| "And you will certainly come to know its [Qur'aan's] Message [of the greatest importance] after some time! "
39|1| Revelation of the Book is from Allah, the Omnipotent, the Wise.
39|2| We have revealed the Book to you [Prophet Muhammad] in Truth, indeed! Worship Allah, then, consecrating your lifestyle exclusively for Him.
39|3| Is it not for Allah that the pure way of life is!? And those who have taken awliya besides Allah (say), "We worship them not but that they may bring us nearer to Allah." Allah will indeed decide among them concerning what they differ in. Allah does indeed not guide anyone who is a lying suppressor of the Truth.
39|4| Had Allah wanted to have a son, He could have chosen anyone He willed out of those whom He created. Glorified is He! He is Allah: the One and Only, the Almighty.
39|5| He created the heavens and the earth; and it was His privilege to create them. He wraps the day over the night and wraps the night over the day. And He has subjected the sun and the moon, each to run its course until an appointed time. Is He not the Omnipotent, the Ultimate Forgiver!?
39|6| He (Allah) created you from a single being (Adam), and from that single being He made its mate. And He sent down for you eight cattle in pairs.ah He creates you in your mothersԠwombs, giving you one form after another inside three layers of darkness. That is Allah, your Lord. His is the sovereignty over all things. There is none worthy of worship other than Him. So what has made you turn away?
39|7| If you suppress the Truth, then indeed Allah stands in no need of you. And He likes not that His subjects should suppress the Truth. And if you are grateful, He likes that for you. None shall bear anotherճ burden. Then to your Lord is your return and He will tell you what you had been doing. He is indeed well aware of what lies hidden in your minds.
39|8| When any affliction affects man, he cries out to his Lord, turning to Him alone. Then when his Lord bestows His favour upon him, he forgets what he had cried out to Him for before, and sets up rivals to Allah that they may lead others astray from His Path. Say, (O Prophet), "Enjoy your suppression of the Truth for a while. Indeed, you will be among the inmates of the Fire."
39|9| Or [take the example of] one who remembers Allah assiduously during parts of the night, prostrating and standing, fears the Hereafter, and seeks His Lord's mercy [and] ask, "Are those who know [like that one] equal to those who do not know?" Only those endowed with insight take heed.
39|10| Say, "O my fellow subjects of Allah who believe, fear your Lord! A good reward awaits those who are good in this world. And Allah's earth is spacious. Indeed those who persevere shall be granted their reward without measure beyond what is due to them."
39|11| Say, "I am indeed commanded to worship Allah, consecrating my lifestyle exclusively to Him."
39|12| "And I am commanded to be the first of those who surrender to Him."
39|13| Say, "I do indeed fear the punishment of a dreadful Day if I disobey my Lord,."
39|14| Say, "Allah shall I worship, consecrating my lifestyle exclusively to Him."
39|15| "You worship whomsoever you please, then, apart from Him." Say, "Those, indeed, shall be the losers who will have lost their own selves and their kith and kin on the Day of Resurrection! Is that not obviously the real loss?"
39|16| For them, sheets of fire above them and sheets beneath them! This is what Allah warns His subjects against. "Fear me then, O you subjects of Mine!"
39|17| And those who eschew worshipping false gods and return penitently to Allah — good news for them! (O Prophet!) Give good news to My subjects.
39|18| Those who pay heed to the Word [Qur'aan] and follow the the good guidance thereof. Those are the ones whom Allah has guided. And those are the ones endowed with insight.
39|19| What about the one on whom the sentence of punishment is decreed — can you save the one already in the Fire?"
39|20| But for those who fear their Lord there shall be chambers built over chambers beneath which rivers flow. Allahճ promise — and never does Allah fail to fulfill His promise!
39|21| Do you not see that Allah sent down water from the sky, then made it flow on earth as resources of water, and then with it He brings out vegetation of various hues. Then this vegetation withers, and you see it turn yellow, and then He reduces it to rubble? Indeed there is a lesson in this for those endowed with insight.
39|22| Is one then whose head Allah has opened for Islam and who is guided by the light from his Lord (be likened to) those — woe to them — whose minds are hardened against any remembrance of Allah. Those are the ones who have obviously gone astray.
39|23| Allah has sent down the best hadeeth [Qur'aan], a Book with oft-repeated passages resembling one another. Thereat shiver the skins of those that fear their Lord! And then their skins and their minds become receptive to Allahճ remembrance. That is Allahճ Guidance! He guides therewith whosoever He wills. And one whom Allah lets go astray has none to guide him.
39|24| How about the one who has to face the severe punishment on the Day of Resurrection? Wrong-doers [like that one] shall be told, "Taste what you earned." acwe. Kaththaba allatheena min qablihim faatahumu alAAathabu min haythu la yashAAuroona
39|25| The peoples that lived before them denied the Truth. Then the punishment came upon them from where they knew not!
39|26| And Allah made them taste disgrace in the life of this world, and certainly the punishment of the Hereafter will be much more grievous. If only they knew!
39|27| And We have certainly quoted for mankind from every kind of situations [they may face] in this Qurաn for them to remember and relate from.
39|28| An Arabic Qurաn, without crookedness, for them to take heed from.
39|29| Allah quotes an example: a man shared by several contending masters, and another submitting to one man. Can the two be alike? All praise to Allah! But most of them know not.
39|30| You (Prophet Muhammad) are mortal and so are they!
39|31| Then [after death] all of you will be contesting before your Lord on the Day of Resurrection.
39|32| Who, then, can be more wicked than he who lied against Allah and denied the Truth when it came to him? Is not in Hell an abode for those who suppress the Truth?
39|33| And one who came with the Truth, and one who confirmed it as true — such are the ones who practice piety.
39|34| For them there shall be, with their Lord, whatever they desire. That is the reward for good people.
39|35| [The reward of the good people is] such that Allah remits their bad deeds and compensates them well for their good deeds.
39|36| Is Allah not sufficient for His subject? They frighten you of others besides Him. And there is none to guide the one whom Allah lets go astray.
39|37| And one whom Allah guides, none can lead that one astray. Is not Allah Omnipotent, with power to give a fitting retribution?
39|38| And if you ask them `Who created the heavens and the earth?' they will surely reply `Allah.' Tell them, `What do you think, then, of those whom you pray to instead of Allah? If Allah should will to harm me, will those remove the harm inflicted by Him? Or if Allah should will to be merciful to me, will they be able to wit old His Mercy from me?' Say, "Allah is sufficient for me. In Him should put their trust — all those who do trust!"
39|39| Tell them, "O my people! Do what you do, as hard as you may, I too will do what I should. You shall soon know."
39|40| "[You shall soon know] who suffers a disgracing punishment and whom the everlasting punishment is due upon."
39|41| We have sent down the Book upon you [Prophet Muhammad] with the Truth for all mankind. So one who takes guidance therefrom, one does so to one's own benefit. And one, who goes astray therefrom, shall hurt only one's own self by straying. You are not a manager of their affairs.
39|42| It is Allah Who takes away the souls of people at their death; and in their sleep, of those that have not died. Then He retains the souls of those against whom He had decreed death and returns those of others till an appointed time. In that indeed are signs for people who reflect.
39|43| Or have they taken intercessors other than Allah? Say, "Can they intercede even if they have no power and do not even understand?"
39|44| Say, "All intercession lies with Allah. His is the absolute sovereignty over the heavens and the earth. And to Him will all of you be returned."
39|45| And when Allah alone is mentioned, minds of those who do not believe in the Hereafter shrink away with aversion. And when others are mentioned besides Allah, they are filled with joy!
39|46| Say, "O Allah, the Maker of the heavens and the earth, the Knower of the unseen and the seen! You are the One to judge among Your subjects in matters they have been differing in."
39|47| Had the wrong-doers at their disposal the treasures of the earth in their entirety and as much besides, they would gladly offer it on the Day of Resurrection to redeem themselves from the harrowing punishment. For, there will appear to them from Allah something (sinister) they had never even imagined.
39|48| The evil that they earn will be apparent to them, and that which they scoffed at shall besiege them.
39|49| When an affliction affects man, he prays to Us. Then when We bestow upon him a favour from Us, he says, "I have been given this because of my knowledge." Nay! This favour is a test; but most of them know not.
39|50| The people before them had said the same, but their earnings were of no avail to them.
39|51| And the evil they earned hit them. The wrongdoers among these now will also be hit by the evil they earn. They will not escape.
39|52| Do they not know that Allah gives the provision in ample measure to whom He wills and restricts it to whom He wills? Therein are signs for those that believe.
39|53| Say, "O my fellow subjects of Allah — those who have committed excesses against themselves! Despair not of Allah's Mercy. Allah does indeed forgive all sins; He is indeed the One forgiving, merciful."
39|54| "Turn to your Lord and submit to Him before the punishment comes to you. Thereafter, you will receive no help."
39|55| "Follow the good admonition that has been sent down for you from your Lord before the punishment catches you unawares."
39|56| Lest anyone should say, "Oh! I am so sorry for neglecting my duty towards Allah and for being among those that scoffed."
39|57| Or should anyone say, "If only Allah had guided me, I should have been among the pious."
39|58| Or should anyone say on seeing the (gravity of the) punishment, "O that I could have another chance, and then be among those who do good deeds!"
39|59| Yes (you had your chances)! My signs did come to you but you rejected them. And you behaved arrogantly and were among those who suppressed the Truth.
39|60| And on the Day of Resurrection you shall see the faces, of those who had lied against Allah, blackened! Is not the (proper) abode, for arrogant people, in Hell?
39|61| And Allah will save the Allah-fearing on account of their success in resisting the evil. No harm shall touch them nor shall they grieve.
39|62| Allah is the Creator of everything. And He is the Manager of affairs for everything. 
39|63| He (Allah) has the keys of the heavens and the earth. And those who suppress Allahճ signs — they will be the doomed ones.
39|64| Say, "O you ignorant people! Do you tell me to worship anyone other than Allah!?"
39|65| And, most certainly, it was revealed to you and to all Prophets before you that if you worship anyone besides Allah, your deeds will certainly be worthless and you will certainly be among the doomed ones.
39|66| So then worship Allah alone and be among those that are grateful.
39|67| And they have not given Allah the Honour that is due to Him! On the Day of Resurrection the entire earth will be in His grasp, and the heavens shall be folded up in His Right Hand. Glorified and Exalted is He from all that they worship besides Him.a
39|68| And the Trumpet shall be blown and all who are in the heavens and the earth shall fall down dead save those whom Allah wills. Thereafter the Trumpet shall be blown again, and then all of them will be up on their feet, looking all around.
39|69| And the earth shall shine with the light of its Lord, the Book (of deeds) shall be produced, the Prophets and all witnesses shall be brought, cases among them shall be justly decided, and they shall not be wronged!
39|70| And everyone shall be paid in full for all that he/she did. And Allah knows what they do.
39|71| And the suppressors of Truth shall be led in groups towards Hell until when they arrive there, its gates shall be opened. And its keepers shall ask them, "Did Messengers from among yourselves not come to you, reciting Verses/signs of your Lord to you and warning you of your meeting on this Day?" They will say, "Yes, they did come!" But the sentence of punishment was bound to be executed against the suppressors of Truth.
39|72| They will be told, "Enter the gates of Hell to abide eternally therein!" Evil then is the abode of those that are arrogant.
39|73| And those who feared their Lord shall be led in groups towards Paradise until when they arrive there, its gates shall be opened. And its keepers shall say to them, "Peace upon you; you did well! So enter it (Paradise) to abide eternally therein."
39|74| And they will say, "The praise is for Allah Who has made His promise to us come true, and Who gave us the earth to inherit. We may now dwell in Paradise wherever we please." Excellent is the reward of those who did good deeds!
39|75| And you shall see the angels thronging around the Throne, glorifying their Lord with His praise. Cases among them will be justly decided. And it will be said, "The praise is for Allah, the Lord of the worlds."
40|1| These are among letters of the Arabic language that appear at the beginning of some Qur'aanic chapters. Significance of these letters is a mystery. Omniscient Allah has perhaps purposely kept it mysterious to remind mankind of the limitation of knowledge it is bestowed with.
40|2| Sending down of the Book (Qur'aan) is from Allah, the Omnipotent, the Knowledgeable.
40|3| Forgiver of the sin and Acceptor of the repentance, severe in giving punishment, limitless in reach. None is worthy of worship other than He. To Him is the final destination.
40|4| No one calls Allah's Verses in question, but those who suppress the Truth! Hence, let not their activity among the populace deceive you.
40|5| People of Noah, before them, denied the Truth. And the tribes, after them, did the same. And every people tried hard to engage their Messenger in false arguments and smother the Truth thereby. But then I caught hold of them! And how did I punish them!!
40|6| And thus was the word of your Lord concerning those who suppressed the Truth fulfilled — that they would be inmates of the Fire.
40|7| Those that bear the Throne, and are around It, hymn the praise of their Lord and do believe in the praise they hymn. And they pray for forgiveness for those who believe, "Our Lord! You comprehend all things in mercy and knowledge. Do forgive those who repent and follow Your way, and save them from the punishment of Hell."
40|8| "Our Lord! And admit them to the Gardens of Eden which You have promised them, and admit thereinto such of their fathers and their wives and their descendants as mend their ways. You are indeed the One Omnipotent, Wise."
40|9| "And save them from bad deeds! And one whom You have saved from bad deeds, that one, verily, You have taken into mercy that day. That is the highest success."
40|10| An announcement is indeed made to those who had suppressed the Truth, "Allah's abhorrence is certainly more terrible than your abhorrence one of another, when you were called towards belief but you declined!"
40|11| They say, "Our Lord! Twice have You kept us in a dead state, and twice have You given us life. Now that we do confess to our sins, is there any way out?"
40|12| "You are in this plight because, when only Allah was invoked, you would suppress your belief, but when someone besides Him was invoked, you would demonstrate your belief. The command then is only with Allah, Who is the One, and only, High and Great."
40|13| He it is Who shows you His signs, and sends down for you provision from the sky. And none pays attention save one who turns to Him in repentance.
40|14| So pray to Allah, making your way of life exclusively for Him, and even if the suppressors of Truth be averse.
40|15| Exalter of the Ranks, Lord of the Throne (Seat of absolute authority)! He transmits the Spirit of His command upon whom He wills of His subjects to warn people of the Day of Meeting.
40|16| The Day they emerge (from the graves), nothing of them being hidden from Allah! Whose is the Sovereignty that day? Allah's — the One, the Almighty!
40|17| This day everyone is rewarded what one had earned; no wrong, this day! Allah indeed is swift at accounts.
40|18| And warn them of the Approaching (Judgment) Day, when the hearts will be choking at the throats, when shall there be no friend for the wrong-doers, nor shall any intercessor be heeded.
40|19| He knows the traitor of the eyes, as well as that which the heads (minds) hide.
40|20| Allah's decision is based on truth, and those whom they pray to besides Him decide nothing. Allah is indeed the One Who listens, sees.
40|21| Have they not travelled on the earth to see what happened to those who lived before them? Those were stronger than these in power and influence on the earth. Yet Allah seized them for their sins, and none could defend them from Allah.
40|22| That was because their Messengers did bring them clear evidences (of Allah's Sovereignty) but they suppressed those evidences and Allah caught hold of them. He is indeed strong, severe in punishment.
40|23| And We did send Moses with Our signs and a clear warrant
40|24| Towards Pharaoh and Haman and Korah, but they called Moses a lying sorcerer!
40|25| Then as he (Moses) brought them the Truth from Us, they ordered, "Kill the sons of those who believe with him, and spare their women." And the plot of those who suppress the Truth cannot but be faulty.
40|26| And Pharaoh said, "Leave killing of Moses to me, and let him pray to his Lord. I do indeed fear that he will change your way of life or that he will cause anarchy to spread in the land.
40|27| And Moses said, "I do indeed seek refuge in my Lord and your Lord from every arrogant person who believes not in the Day of Account-taking."
40|28| And a believing man of Pharaoh's family, who concealed his faith, said, "Would you kill a man because he says, `My Lord is Allah,' and has brought you clear evidences from your Lord? If he is lying, he will himself suffer therefor; and if he is truthful, then something of what he warns you of will strike you. Allah does indeed guide not one who is a lying transgressor."
40|29| "O my people! Today, you have the ruling authority, you having the upper land. But who would save us from the wrath of Allah should it come to us?" Pharaoh said, "I do but show you what I see, and I do but guide you to wise way."
40|30| And a believer said, "O my people! I do indeed fear for you a day like that faced by the confederates."
40|31| "Like what happened to Noah's folk, and AAad and Thamood, and those that lived after them, and Allah wills no injustice for His subjects."
40|32| "And, O my people, I do indeed fear for you a Day of (general) Summons to all (dead) people [when they shall all rise alive and gather together for Allah to pronounce His judgment on everyone and everything]."
40|33| A Day when you will turn to flee, having none to defend you from Allah. And there is none to guide one whom Allah sends astray.
40|34| And verily Joseph had come to you earlier with clear signs, yet you ceased not to be in doubt concerning what he had come to you with; till, when he died, you said, "Allah will not raise any Messenger after him." Thus does Allah let a doubting transgressor go astray.
40|35| [Allah lets] those [go astray] who quarrel over Allah's Verses/signs without having any authority — a greatly hateful behaviour in the sight of Allah and in the sight of those who believe. Allah thus does set a seal [of abhorrence] on arrogant mind of every tyrant.
40|36| And Pharaoh said, "O Haman! Build for me a tower that I may get to the means."
40|37| "The means of access to the heavens to rise up to the Entity Moses worships, though indeed I consider him a liar." Thus did the evil in what Pharaoh did seem good to him, and he was debarred from the path of righteousness. And Pharaoh's plan was bound to come to naught.
40|38| And the man who believed said, "O my people! Follow me. I will show you the way of right conduct."
40|39| "O my people! Life of this world is but a temporary provision, and the Hereafter — that is the permanent home."
40|40| Whoever does an ill-deed, he will not be repaid but by the like thereof. And everyone, male or female, doing a righteous deed and believing, will enter the Garden to be provided with therein without measure.
40|41| And (the believing man from among Pharaoh's people continued,) "O my people! What is the matter with me that I call you to salvation while you call me to the Fire!?"
40|42| "You call me to suppress my belief in the Oneness of Allah and to worship others besides Him — others of whom I have no knowledge! And I call you to the Omnipotent, the Forgiver."
40|43| "There is no doubt that the thing you call me to has no claim to being of any substance in this world or in the Hereafter, that our return will be to Allah, and that the transgressors will be the inmates of the Fire."
40|44| "And you will remember what I say to you. I entrust my cause to Allah. Allah does indeed see all that His subjects do."
40|45| Allah then protected him from the evils of what they plotted. And the scourge of punishment encompassed Pharaoh's people.
40|46| The Fire — they (Pharaoh's people) were warned about it morning and evening. And the day the Hour (the time when the present world will end and the Hereafter begin) arrives (it will be said,) "Put Pharaoh's people to the most severe punishment."
40|47| And when they quarrel in the Fire, the weak ask the proud, "We were just your followers. Would you therefore relieve us of a portion of the Fire?"
40|48| The proud say, "We are all together in this. Allah has already pronounced the Judgment on His subjects."h 
40|49| And those in the Fire plead with the guards of Hell, "Entreat your Lord that He gives us this day some relief from the punishment."
40|50| They [the guards] say, "Did not your Messengers come to you with clear evidences?" They [those in the Fire] say, "Yes, they did." The guards say, "Then you yourself make the prayer to Allah! And the prayer of those that suppress the Truth is but in vain."
40|51| We do indeed help Our Messengers, and those who believe, in the life of the world and on the Day the witnesses arise.
40|52| The Day when the excuse of the wrong-doers shall avail them not. And for them is the curse, and for them the ill abode.
40|53| And We did give Moses the guidance, and We made the Children of Israel inherit the Book.
40|54| [The Book was] guide and message for men of understanding.
40|55| Do have patience then! Allah's promise is indeed true. And ask for forgiveness of your sin, and hymn the praise of your Lord in the evening and in the early morning.
40|56| Those indeed who raise disputes concerning Allah's Verses without any divine authority having come to them, there is nothing in their minds but greatness which they will never attain. So take refuge in Allah. He — He alone — indeed is the One to hear, see.
40|57| Creation of the heavens and the earth is certainly greater than creation of mankind. However, most people know not.
40|58| And the blind man and one who is able to see are not equal, neither are those who believe and do good works equal to the evil one. Little do you reflect!
40|59| The Hour is certainly coming, no doubt thereof! However, most people believe not.
40|60| And your Lord has said, "Pray to Me and I will respond to you. Those indeed who are too proud to worship Me — those will enter Hell humiliated."
40|61| It is Allah Who has made night for you to rest therein, and He has made day for you to see well therein. Allah is indeed most gracious on mankind, yet most people give no thanks.
40|62| That (Gracious One) is Allah, your Lord, the Creator of all things! There is none worthy of worship but He. How then are you fooled by falsehood?
40|63| Thus are they fooled who reject Allah's Verses!
40|64| It is Allah Who made the earth a dwelling-place for you and the sky, a generator of means to provide sustenance. And He shaped you and perfected your shapes, and has provided you with good things. That is Allah, your Lord. Blessed then is Allah, the Lord of the worlds !
40|65| He is the ever-living One. None is worthy of worship but He. So pray to Him, keeping your way of life exclusively for Him. Praise to Allah, the Lord of the Worlds!
40|66| Say, "I am indeed forbidden to worship those whom you pray to besides Allah since clear evidences have come to me from my Lord, and I am commanded to submit to the Lord of the worlds."
40|67| It is He Who created you from dust, then from a tiny seed of fertilized ovum, then from a clinging leech-like clot of blood. He then brings you out as a child, then facilitates you to attain to full strength and then to become old — though some among you die before — so that you reach an appointed term, and so that you understand (sentence continued to next Verse)
40|68| (That) it is He Who gives life and causes death. When He ordains a thing, He just tells it, "Be" and it is!
40|69| Have you not seen those who dispute Allah's Verses/signs, how they are deviated? 
40|70| Those who deny the Bookand that wherewith We sent Our Messengers. But they will come to know the Truth,
40|71| When they are dragged by chains, with iron collars around their necks.
40|72| Through boiling waters. Then they are burned in the Fire.
40|73| Then they are asked, "Where are all those whom you worshipped"
40|74| "(Worshipped) besides Allah?" They reply, "They have failed us; but what we used to pray to besides Allah before had no legitimacy to pray to at all!" Thus does Allah send astray those that suppress the Truth.
40|75| (They are told,), "You are in this sorry plight because you used to exult on earth without right, and because you used to be insolent."
40|76| "Enter now the gates of Hell, to dwell therein. Evil then is the abode of the arrogant."
40|77| Do have patience then! Allah's promise is indeed true. And whether we let you see something of what We promise them, or We cause you to die, still to Us they will be brought back.
40|78| And We did send Messengers before you. We have told you about some of them, and We have not told you about the others. And it was not given to any Messenger that he should bring a (miraculous) sign save by Allah's leave. Then as Allah's decree comes, every matter is judged in accordance with the Truth, and the followers of falsehood will then be lost.
40|79| It is Allah Who has made cattle for you to ride on some of them — and you eat some of them.
40|80| And you have in them (cattle) benefits — and to satisfy by their means a need in your minds, you are carried upon them, as upon the ship.
40|81| And He continues to show you His signs. Which, then, of the signs of Allah do you deny?
40|82| Have they not travelled on earth to see what happened to those before them? Those were more in number than them, and stronger in power and influence on the earth. But what they earned availed them not!
40|83| And when their Messengers brought them clear evidences (of divine Presence) they exulted in the knowledge they themselves had. And the thing they mocked at besieged them.
40|84| Then, as they saw the severity of Our punishment, they said, "We believe in Allah, the One and Only, and reject all those whom we had worshipped besides Him."
40|85| But their believing after seeing the severity of our punishment will be of no avail to them. This has always been Allah's law for His subjects. And then the suppressors of Truth will be doomed.
41|1| Ha Mim
41|2| [This is] sent down from the Gracious, the Merciful,
41|3| [It is] a Book with its Verses well explained, [and it is] a recitation in Arabic for people with knowledge.
41|4| Heralding good news and giving warnings. And most of them turn away and listen not.
41|5| And they say, "Our minds are immune to what you call us to, our ears are deaf thereto, and there is a barrier between us and you. So you act your way, we do indeed act our way."
41|6| Say, "Although I am a man like you, it is revealed to me that the Entity worthy of worship by all of you is One and only One. So take the straight path to Him, and ask for gorgiveness of Him. And woe to all those who worship others besides Allah."
41|7| "Those that do not give the Zakaat, and do not believe in the Hereafter."
41|8| Those indeed that believe and do righteous deeds, those will have an uninterrupted reward.
41|9| Say, "Do you really deny Him Who created the earth in two spans of time, and set up equals to Him — Him, the Lord of all the worlds!?"
41|10| "And, in four spans of time, He placed firm mountains rising above its surface, blessed it with plenty and growth, and ingrained within itself its provisions, sufficient for all needs. "
41|11| "Then He turned to the heaven, and it was all smoke. And He said to it and to the earth, `Come you both, willingly or unwillingly!' They both said, `We do willingly come.'"
41|12| Then He decreed it to become seven heavens in two spans of time, and ingrained in every heaven its function. And We adorned the nearest heaven with lamps (stars), and set it up as a guard (to protect the earth and life thereon). This is how the One Omnipotent, All-knowing has decreed.
41|13| If even then they turn away, tell them, "I forewarn you of a thunderbolt like the one that struck (the ancient people of) AAad and Thamood."
41|14| When the Messengers came to them or to those who lived before or after them asking them not to worship any one but Allah, they all said, "If our Lord had so pleased He would certainly have sent the angels down. So we do indeed reject what you are sent with."
41|15| So as regards AAad, they unjustly turned arrogant on earth, and said, "Are there any people stronger than us?" Did they not see that Allah Who created them was far greater in power than they? Yet they arrogantly denied Our signs!
41|16| Then We let loose on them a blowing wind for several calamitous days to make them taste a disgraceful punishment here in this world. And the punishment in the Hereafter will be far more disgraceful! And they will have none to help them.
41|17| And as regards Thamood, We did give them guidance, but they loved blindness over guidance! Then the thunderbolt of a humiliating punishment seized them because of what they earned.
41|18| And We saved those who believed and were pious.
41|19| And the Day Allah's enemies are gathered at the Fire and are then set in rows.
41|20| By the time they reach it (Fire), their ears and eyes and skins would have testified to what they had done.
41|21| And they ask their skins, "Why did you testify against us?" They reply, "Allah — who gave all things the power of speech — made us speak. It is He who created you the first time, and to Him you will return."
41|22| You could never prevent your ears or eyes or skins from testifying against you. And you thought that Allah was mostly unaware of what you did!
41|23| It is this false notion you had of your Lord that ruined you, and you find yourselves among those doomed!
41|24| Whether they patiently bear their suffering or not, they shall continue to abide is Hell! And if they beg for favour, they shall not be among the recepients thereof.
41|25| And We had assigned to them companions who made their present and their past look good to them. And the fate that had once befallen the communities of jinns and men before them befell upon them. They were indeed doomed!
41|26| And those that suppress the Truth say, "Do not listen to this Qur'an, and insert frivolities in it, so that you may prevail over the believers."
41|27| We shall make all those who suppress the Truth taste the severe punishment, and pay them back for the evil that they had perpetrated.
41|28| This — the Hell — is the requital for Allah's enemies. They will have therein their eternal home, as punishment for arrogantly denying Our signs.
41|29| Those who had suppressed the Truth will say, "O Lord! Show us those among the jinns and human beings who had led us astray that we may trample them under our feet to render them among the lowliest of creatures."
41|30| Those indeed who say `Allah is Our Lord' and then remain steadfast, the angels come down to them saying, "Fear not, nor regret, but rejoice in the glad news of Paradise that has been promised to you!"
41|31| "We are your close friends in this life and in the Hereafter. And in the Hereafter, you will get whatever you desire, and you will have therein whatsoever you ask for"
41|32| "As gift from the One forgiving, merciful."
41|33| And who speaks better than one who calls to God, does things righteously, and says, "I am indeed among those who submit to Allah?"
41|34| And good and evil are not alike. Repel evil with what is good. Then one, between whom and you there was enmity, will be like a close friend.
41|35| And it is granted to none but those who exercise patience. And it is granted to none but those with a great endowment.
41|36| And if a mischief from the Satan affects you, seek refuge in Allah. HE is indeed the One who hears, knows.
41|37| And some signs of His are the night, the day, the sun and the moon. Prostrate not to the sun and the moon, and prostrate to Allah who created them, if you do truly worship Him.
41|38| But if they [Allah's subjects] are too arrogant to worship Him, then those that are close to your Lord do never get weary of singing His praises night and day.
41|39| And it is among His signs that the barren earth you see begins to stir and sprout when We send down rain upon it. He who gives it life will indeed also give life to the dead. He indeed has power over everything.
41|40| Those that effect distortion in Our Verses — they indeed are not hidden from Us! Who then is better: he who will be cast into Hell, or he who will come out safe on the Day of Resurrection? Do whatever you want; He does indeed see whatever you do.
41|41| Those that suppress the Reminder (Qur'aan) when it has come to them! It is certainly indeed a powerful Book.
41|42| Falsehood can enter it neither overtly nor covertly. It is a revelation sent down from One, wise and praiseworthy.
41|43| You have been told nothing but what was told to other Messengers before you. Your Lord is certainly indeed full of forgiveness, but also capable of giving severe punishment.
41|44| And had We made it a Qur'aan in a non-Arab tongue, they would surely have said, "Why are its Verses not explained clearly — non-Arabic into Arabic?" Say, "It is guidance and cure for those who believe; and for those who do not believe, their ears are deaf thereto and their eyes blind. They are those to whom one calls from a place far away."
41|45| And We did give Moses the Book; but differences were created therein. And had the Word of your Lord not preceded it, matters would have been settled then and there among them. They are deeply in doubt and suspicion about it.
41|46| If one does a good deed, one does it for oneself. And if one does a bad deed, one bears its consequence oneself. And your Lord is not cruel to His subjects.
41|47| To Him goes back the knowledge of the Hour (the time when the present world will end and the Hereafter begin). No fruit comes out of its spathe, no female conceives or gives birth, but with His knowledge. And that Day He will call them out, "Where are those whom you worshipped besides Me?" They will answer, "We confess to You none of us has seen them!"
41|48| And those they prayed to before, will desert them. And they will realise there is no place for them to escape to.
41|49| Man never tires of praying for good. And if evil befalls him he gives up all hope.
41|50| And if We let him have a taste of Our mercy after some distress had afflicted him, he says, "It was my due. I do not think the Hour will ever happen. And even if I am sent back to my Lord, there will surely still be the best for me with Him." We shall tell those who suppress the Truth what they used to do, and make them suffer severe punishment.
41|51| And when We shower Our favours upon man he keeps himself arrogantly aloof. And when anything bad happens to him, he prays a great deal.
41|52| Say, "Do you see if this is from Allah and you deny it, would there be anyone more astray than he who is in such extreme rebellion?"
41|53| We will show Our signs to them in the wide world outside and within themselves, until it becomes clear to them that it (Qur'aan) is the truth. Is it not sufficient that your Lord is Witness over all things?
41|54| Beware! They are indeed in doubt concerning their meeting their Lord. Beware! He does indeed encompass all things.
42|1| Ha-meem 
42|2| AAayn-seen-qaf
42|3| THUS has Allah, the Omnipotent, the Wise, revealed to you, and to those before you:
42|4| To Him belong all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth. And He is the One exalted, great.
42|5| The heavens almost burst asunder from above them; and the angels sing their Lord's praise, and ask forgiveness for all on earth. Beware! Allah is indeed the One forgiving, merciful!
42|6| And those that take awliya other than Allah, He is watching them; and you (Prophet) are not a manager/dispenser of their affairs.
42|7| And thus do We reveal to you (Prophet Muhammad) Qur'aan in the Arabic tongue in order that you may warn the Mother (Makkah) of all cities and all those who dwell around it. And warn them of the Day of the Gathering [Resurrection Day] — no doubt at all that the Day is going to come — when some shall find themselves in paradise, and some in the blazing fire.
42|8| And had Allah so willed, He could surely have made them all one single community. However, He admits to His mercy whom He wills! And those that transgress limits set by Allah shall have no wali and none to help them.
42|9| Have they taken awliya other than Him? But Allah is the Wali. And it is He Who brings the dead to life. And it is He Who has the power to do anything.
42|10| And the resolution of your differences on any matter rests with Allah. [Say,] "Such is Allah, my Lord! In Him have I placed my trust, and to Him do I always turn!"
42|11| The Originator of the heavens and the earth! He has made for you mates of your own kind — just as He has made mates among the animals — to multiply you thereby. There is nothing like Him, and He is the One Who hears all, sees all.
42|12| He has the keys of the heavens and the earth. He provides abundantly to whom He wills, and restrictively to whom He wills. He does indeed know everything.
42|13| Ordained for you, for the right conduct of life, that which He had enjoined upon Noah — and which We revealed to you [Prophet Muhammad] — and that which We had enjoined upon Abraham, Moses, and Jesus: Stand firmly by the Allah-ordained way of life, and break not your unity therein. What you call them to, appears a tall order to those who worship others besides Allah. Allah calls to Himself whom He wills, and guides to Himself one who turns to Him.
42|14| And they did not break up their unity, but only after they had received knowledge — out of mutual jealousy. And had it not been for a decree already issued from your Lord for a set term, their matter would indeed have been decided then and there. And those indeed who have inherited the Book after them are in grave doubt and suspicion about it. 
42|15| To this [Qur'aan], then, you invite [all mankind], and persistently follow the course as prescribed [by Allah]. And follow not their vain desires. And say, "I believe in whatever Writ Allah has sent down. And I am commanded to deal justly with problems amongst you. Allah is our Lord and He is your Lord as well. We are responsible for our deeds, and you, for yours. There is no contentious issue between us and you. Allah will bring us all together. And to Him is the final destination."
42|16| And those that would quarrel about Allah after the response He has been accorded, all their contentions are null and void in the sight of their Lord. And upon them will fall [His] wrath, and for them is severe suffering in store.
42|17| It is Allah Who has sent down the Book with the truth and the balance [wherewith to conduct one's life on principles of justice]. And who knows, the Hour (the time when the present world will end and the Hereafter begin) may well be near!
42|18| Those who do not believe in it ask for hastening it. And those who believe, fear it and know it to be the truth. Beware! Those who entertain doubts about the Hour have certainly indeed gone far astray!
42|19| Allah is most kind to His subjects. He provides for them as much as He wills. And He is most strong, the Omnipotent!
42|20| One who is desirous of a harvest in the Hereafter, We shall grant an increase in that one's harvest there. And one who is desirous a harvest in this world, We give him something thereof, And he will have no share in the blessings of the Hereafter.
42|21| Do they have gods, other than Allah, which enjoin upon them a religious law that Allah has not prescribed!? Had it not been for divine decree on the final judgment, their matter would indeed have been decided [in this world itself]. And, indeed, painful punishment awaits the wicked people.
42|22| You will see the wicked people fearful of what they have earned, and the evil effects of what they had earned falling back upon them, themselves. And [you will see] those who had believed and had done righteous deeds living among the flowering meadows of the gardens of Paradise. They shall have what they want, with their Lord. That is the greatest favour [a human being can achieve.]
42|23| That favour is what Allah gives the glad tiding of, to such of His subjects as believe and do righteous deeds. Say, "No reward do I ask of you for this [Message] other than the love of the near and dear ones." And one who does anything good We increase for him the goodness thereof. Allah is indeed forgiving, appreciative of gratitude.
42|24| Do they say, "He [Muhammad] has concocted a falsehood against Allah"? But then, had Allah so willed, He could have sealed your heart. And Allah blots out all falsehood, and makes the truth prevail by His words. He is indeed aware of what goes on is in the minds [of human beings].
42|25| And it is He Who accepts repentance from His subjects, pardons bad deeds, and it is He Who knows all that you do.
42|26| And He responds to those who believe and do righteous deeds, and He gives them more out of His Grace. And a rigorous punishment awaits those that suppress the Truth.
42|27| And had Allah given provisions in abundance to His subjects, they would commit transgressions on earth. And so He bestows provisions, in due measure, as He wills. He is indeed fully aware of [the needs of] His subjects.
42|28| And it is He who sends down heavy rain after people have despaired of it, and He spreads His Mercy thereby. He is the Wali, to whom all praise is due.
42|29| And among His signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth, and of the living creatures He has caused to flourish in them both. And He has the power to gather them together whenever He wills.
42|30| And whatever calamity befalls you, it is becuse of what your own hands have earned. And much He pardons.
42|31| And you cannot do anything to frustrate Him on earth. And you have none to be your walih other than Allah, and none to help you.
42|32| And among His signs are the ships like some signboards [raised] in the sea.
42|33| If He so wills, He makes the wind still. And then they [ships] lie motionless on the sea's surface. In this indeed are signs for all who are patient and grateful.
42|34| Or He destroys them because of the evil they have earned. And much He pardons.
42|35| And let those who dispute Our messages know that there is no place for them to escape to.
42|36| So whatever you are given is but a [temporary] provision for life in this world. And that which is with Allah is better and lasting for those who believe and in their Lord place their trust.
42|37| And [that which is with Allah is better and lasting] for those who shun the greater sins and indecencies, and who, when in anger, readily forgive.
42|38| And [that which is with Allah is better and lasting] for those who have responded to their Lord and have established regular prayer. And their affairs are conducted by mutual consultation. And they spend out of what We have provided to them.
42|39| And [that which is with Allah is better and lasting] for those who defend themselves against tyranny.
42|40| And harm may be requited by an equal harm. But, then, the reward of one who forgives and reconciles rests with Allah. He [Allah] does indeed not love wicked persons.
42|41| And, certainly, no blame whatever attaches to anyone who defends oneself after having been wronged.
42|42| Blameworthy are but those who oppress people and unjustly commit transgression on earth: for them, a painful punishment!
42|43| And, certainly indeed, it is among the most resolute of acts for anyone to be patient and forgiving.
42|44| And he whom Allah lets go astray has no wali thereafter. And so you will see the evildoers [on Judgment Day] exclaim as soon as they behold the punishment, "Is there any way back?"
42|45| And you will see them brought up for the punishment, humbled in disgrace, looking around with a furtive glance. And those who had believed will say, "Indeed, the doomed ones are those that have doomed themselves and their families on the Day of Resurrection." Beware! The evildoers will suffer an eternal punishment.
42|46| And they will have no awliya to help them besides Allah! And he whom Allah lets go astray shall find no way out.
42|47| Respond to your Lord before a Day — on which there will be no turning back — comes, at Allah's behest. That Day you will have no place of refuge, and neither will you be able to resort to any denial.
42|48| Then if they respond not, We have not sent you [Prophet] to be their keeper. Your responsibility is but to deliver Allah's Message to the people correctly. And when We give man a taste of Our grace, he exults in it. And if misfortune befalls them as a result of what they have done, then, behold, man becomes ungrateful!
42|49| Allah's is the absolute sovereignty over the heavens and the earth. He creates what He wills. He gives female offspring to whom He wills, and male offspring to whom He wills.
42|50| Or, He [Allah] gives a mixed, male and female, offspring, and makes whom He wills barren. He does indeed know everything, can do anything.
42|51| And man cannot receive an address by Allah otherwise than through inspiration, or from behind a veil, or through a Messenger [angel] revealing a divine Message by His [Allah's] leave. He is indeed Exalted, Wise!
42|52| And, likewise, have We revealed to you [Prophet Muhammad] a soul of a message, at Our behest! You did not know what the divine Writ is, or what belief means. Nonetheless, We have caused this Message [We have revealed to you] to be a light, whereby We guide whom We will of Our subjects. And, you do certainly guide people to the Straight Path.
42|53| [The Straight] Path of Allah, to whom all that is in the heavens and all that is on earth belongs. Verily, with Allah is the end of all matters!
43|1| Ha-mim
43|2| By the Book that makes things clear!
43|3| We have made it a Qur'an [reading material] in Arabic, so that you understand.
43|4| And it is indeed in the Mother Book with Us, certainly [with contents] of the highest order and wisdom.
43|5| Should We then keep the divine Message away from you altogether as you are a people steeped in transgression? 
43|6| And how many of the prophets did We send amongst the ancient peoples!?
43|7| And no prophet did ever come to them but they mocked at him.
43|8| And We destroyed those that were stronger in power than these. And gone were the likes of the ancient peoples!
43|9| And were you to question them, `Who created the heavens and the earth?' they would surely reply, `the Omnipotent, the All-knowing did surely create them.'
43|10| The One Who has made the earth spread out for you, and has made therein ways for you to travel by.
43|11| And the One Who sends down rain from the sky in due measure. And We raise to life therewith a land that is dead. You too will be raised likewise (when you are dead).
43|12| And the One Who has created all things in pairs, and has made ships and cattle for you to ride on.
43|13| So that you may mount on their backs, and then remember your Lord's favour, while so mounted, and say, "Glory to Him Who has made these subservient to us, and we could never have done this by ourselves."
43|14| "And to our Lord, indeed, must we turn back!"
43|15| And they created partners for Him from amongst His subjects! Man is certainly indeed openly ungrateful [to his Lord].
43|16| Has He taken daughters out of what He himself creates, and chosen sons for you!?
43|17| And when news is given to anyone of them of the birth of one [daughter] like what he allots [in a display of pernicious audacity] to the Gracious One, his face becomes darkened with suppressed anger!
43|18| [The man given the news of a daughter born to him thinks, "Am I now saddled with an offspring] to be brought up in jewellery?" And he lapses into a dilemma [whether to keep the child alive or kill her. Refer Verses :, ].
43|19| And they make angels, who themselves are subjects of the Gracious One, into females. Did they witness their creation? Their evidence will be recorded, and they will be questioned!
43|20| And they say, "Had the Gracious One so willed, we should not have worshipped them (deities)!" They have no knowledge thereof. Indeed, they do nothing but lie!
43|21| Had We given them a Writ before this, to which they are holding fast?h 
43|22| But they say, "We did find our fathers following certain community rites, and we do indeed follow in their footsteps."
43|23| And, just the same way, We did never send a Warner before you to any people, but the affluent among them said, "We did find our fathers following certain community rites, and we do indeed emulate them."
43|24| He [the Warner] said, "How could you emulate them even when I brought you better guidance than that which you found your fathers following?" They said, "We do indeed deny that you are sent with any divine message at all!"
43|25| We then penalised them. And see what end the liars met with!
43|26| And when Abraham said to his father and his people, "I do indeed have nothing to do with what you worship."
43|27| "(I do worship none) but Him Who made me, and He will certainly guide me."
43|28| And He [Allah] made it [what Abraham said] an enduring statement among those who came after him, that they may turn back [to Allah].
43|29| Nevertheless, I did give means of livelihood to these and to their fathers, until the Truth came to them, and a Messenger manifest.
43|30| And when the Truth came to them, they said, "This is deceptive magic, and we do indeed reject it!"
43|31| And they say, "Why is not this Qur'aan sent down to some leading man in either of the two cities?"
43|32| Is it they who apportion the Mercy of your Lord? It is We Who apportion among them their livelihood in the life of this world! And We raise some of them above others in rank, so that some may take service from others. And the Mercy of your Lord is better than the worldly wealth they amass.
43|33| And were it not that mankind might all go the same (evil) way, We would provide, for everyone that becomes ungrateful towards the Gracious One, silver roofs — and staircases by which to go up — for their houses.
43|34| And for their houses doors, and couches on which they could recline,
43|35| And adornments of gold. And all these are nothing but conveniences of the present life. And the Hereafter, with your Lord, is for the Righteous.
43|36| If anyone turns away from remembrance of the Gracious One, We appoint for him a devil to be a companion to him.
43|37| And the devils do certainly indeed hinder them from the Path, and they think they are being guided aright!
43|38| Ultimately, when (such a one that turns away from Allah) comes to Us, he says (to the devil appointed as his companion), "Would that I and you were as far apart as the two Easts are!" And a wretched companion is that devil!
43|39| And the Day of Resurrection shall have nothing good for you when you have been wicked. Instead, you shall join others in getting punished!
43|40| Can you then make the deaf to hear, or show the way to the blind or to one gone far astray?
43|41| Even if We take you away, We shall not fail to exact retribution from them.
43|42| Or We shall show you what We have promised them; for, indeed, they are completely under our control.
43|43| So hold fast to the Revelation sent down to you. You are indeed on the Straight Path.
43|44| And it (the Qur'an) is certainly indeed the divine Message for you and for your people. And soon shall you (all) be brought to account.
43|45| And ask our Messengers whom We sent before you, "Did We appoint any deities, other than the Gracious One, to be worshipped?
43|46| And We did send Moses, with Our Signs, to Pharaoh and his Chiefs: He [Moses] said, "I am a Messenger of the Lord of the Worlds."
43|47| Then when he came to them with Our Signs, they ridiculed those Signs.
43|48| And We showed them not any Sign but that which was better than the one preceding. And We seized them with Punishment, so that they turn to Us.
43|49| And they said, "O you magician! Invoke thy Lord for us since He has a covenant with you. We shall certainly be of those guided."
43|50| Then as We relieved them of the punishing calamity, they broke their word!
43|51| And Pharaoh issued a proclamation among his people, saying, "O my people! Are not the dominion of Egypt mine and these streams flowing underneath? Do you not then see all this?"
43|52| "Am I not better than this man (Moses), who is so contemptible and cannot express himself clearly?"
43|53| "Then why are not gold bracelets bestowed upon him, or the angels accompanying him?"
43|54| Thus did he [Pharaoh] trick his people into obeying him! They were indeed a people depraved.
43|55| Then as they incurred our displeasure, We exacted retribution from them, and drowned them all.
43|56| And We made them part of past history and example for later peoples.
43|57| When (Jesus) the son of Mary is mentioned by way of an example, your people protest!
43|58| And they say, "Are our gods better, or he [Jesus]?" They mention him to you not but by way of argument. Yes, they are a contentious people.
43|59| He [Jesus] was no more than a worshipper of Allah. We granted Our favour to him, and We made him an example for the Children of Israel.
43|60| And had We so willed, We could certainly have made angels, instead of you, to be our representatives on the earth.
43|61| And this [divine revelation] indeed is definite knowledge of the Hour (the time when the present world will end and the Hereafter begin). Have no doubt then about it, and follow Me. This is the Straight Path.
43|62| And let the Satan hinder you not [from the Straight Path]. Indeed, he is an open enemy to you!
43|63| And when Jesus came with clear Signs, he said, "Verily, I have come to you with divine revelation spelling out Wisdom, and in order to make clear to you some of the (points) on which you differ. So fear Allah, and obey me."
43|64| "Allah is indeed my Lord as also yours! So worship Him. This is the Straight Path."
43|65| Then the sects had differences among themselves. Woe then to the wicked ones from the punishment of a painful Day!
43|66| Are they waiting for the Hour to come upon them unawares, all of a sudden?
43|67| Friends on that day will be foes, one to another, the Righteous excepted.
43|68| O those who worship me! You shall have no fear that Day, nor shall you grieve.
43|69| Those that have believed in Our Verses/Signs and submitted to Allah's Will.
43|70| Enter the Garden, you and your wives, rejoicing.
43|71| Dishes and goblets of gold will be passed round to them. And they will have there all that they desire, all that looked pleasing to their eyes. And you shall abide therein for ever.
43|72| And this will be the Garden you shall be heirs to for your deeds (in worldly life).
43|73| You shall have fruits therein in abundance, to eat from.
43|74| The sinners will indeed dwell under punishment in Hell.
43|75| The severity of punishment will not be lightened from them, and they will be overwhelmed with despair there.
43|76| And We did them no wrong; but they wronged themselves.
43|77| They will cry, "O Malik [guarding angel of Hell]! Would that your Lord put an end to us!" He [the guard] will say, "But indeed, you are here to stay."
43|78| Verily, We have brought the Truth to you; but most of you have a hatred for Truth.
43|79| Do they decide what to do? Then We decide what to do. 
43|80| Or do they think that We hear not their secrecies and their secret talks? Yes, We do! And Our messengers [angels] are with them, recording.
43|81| Say, "If the Gracious One had a son, I would be the first to worship him."
43|82| The Lord of the heavens and the earth, the Lord of the Throne — He is free from things they attribute to him!
43|83| So let them continue to be engaged in their vain talks and games until they meet the Day promised to them.
43|84| And He is the One worthy of worship in the heaven and worthy of worship on the earth! And He is full of Wisdom and Knowledge.
43|85| And blessed is He to Whom belongs the absolute sovereignty over the heavens and the earth, and of all in between them. And with Him is the Knowledge of the Hour (the time when the present world will end and the Hereafter begin). And to Him shall you be brought back!
43|86| And those whom they invoke besides Allah have no power of intercession, except for one who bears witness to the Truth. And they know (they have no power)!
43|87| And if you ask them who created them, they will surely say, `Allah!' How then are they deluded (from His Guidance)?
43|88| And (their delusion induces the Prophet to) exclaim, "O my Lord! These people will never believe."
43|89| Leave them alone then, and say "Peace!" Soon shall they know!
44|1| Ha-mim
44|2| [Angels swear:] By the Book clear [Qur'aan]!
44|3| We have indeed sent it [the Qur'aan] down on a blessed night. We had indeed been warning [mankind]!
44|4| That night, every decree of wisdom is distinctly defined.
44|5| Decree from Us — We were the Messengers indeed!
44|6| A mercy from your Lord — He hears all, knows all!
44|7| He is the Lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is in between, if you do certainly believe.
44|8| No deity other than Him — He who gives life and death! Your Lord and Lord of your forefathers!
44|9| But, they play with their doubts.
44|10| Wait then for the Day when smoke appears in the sky
44|11| [And] envelopes the people, [who cry out,] "Painful punishment this!"
44|12| "Our Lord! Relieve us from this punishment; we do indeed believe in You!"
44|13| Was not there for them the Zikr [Qur'aan]? And surely a Messenger duly and clearly authorized had come to them therewith!
44|14| But then they had turned away from him saying he was a crazy man, just repeating what he had learnt from others!
44|15| Were We to ease the torment for a while, you would return to worshipping others besides Allah!
44|16| On the Day We get hold with the severest grip [Day of Judgment], We will certainly exact retribution.
44|17| And We did put the people of Pharaoh on trial, before them. And there came to them a noble Messenger!
44|18| [The Messenger said to them,] "Hand over to me Allah's worshippers [Children of Israel]. I am a trustworthy Messenger sent to you."
44|19| And the Messenger further said, "Do not set you yourselves above Allah. I have indeed come to you with clear authority.
44|20| And I do indeed seek refuge with my Lord — and your Lord — lest you stone me [to death].
44|21| If you do not believe in me, then do let me go!
44|22| He then prayed to his Lord, "These are sinful people."
44|23| [Allah said,] "Move out in the night with My devotees. You shall indeed be pursued."
44|24| "Leave the sea and be calm! Pharaoh's army is destined to be drowned."
44|25| How many gardens and fountains did they leave behind!
44|26| And [how many] fields and places nice!
44|27| And comfortable life which they enjoyed!
44|28| And such other things! And We handed over all that to another people.
44|29| Neither the heaven nor the earth wept for them! And they were given no respite.
44|30| And We did save the Children of Israel from the humiliating torture.
44|31| [Torture -] at the hands of Pharaoh! He was foremost among those who exceeded all bounds.
44|32| And We chose them — We knew whom to choose — above all other people.
44|33| And We gave them signs in which there was a clear test.
44|34| Indeed, there are those who do say,
44|35| "There is nothing beyond our first death! And we shall not be raised to life again." 
44|36| "If what you say is true, then bring back our forefathers!"
44|37| Are they better than the people of Tubba [an ancient tribe] and those who came before them? We destroyed those earlier peoples, because they were sinners!
44|38| We did not create the heavens and the earth and all that lies in between them just for playing therewith!
44|39| We did not create them but with a purpose ! Yet most of them know this not.
44|40| Indeed, Day of the Decision is the appointed time for them all.
44|41| Day when friend shall be of no avail to friend, and they shall not be given any help!
44|42| [No help] except to those whom Allah shows mercy. Indeed, He is the One Omnipotent, Merciful.
44|43| Indeed, the Zaqqum tree 
44|44| [Zaqqum tree] shall be food of the sinful.
44|45| [Food of the sinful would be] like molten brass boiling in their bellies,
44|46| Like the boiling of hot water!
44|47| [Allah will command angels,] "Seize him and drag him into the thick of the Hell Fire."
44|48| "Then pour over his head boiling water as punishment."
44|49| "Taste it! You did indeed consider yourself powerful and honourable!"
44|50| "This indeed is what you had doubts about."
44|51| The pious shall be in a secure place.
44|52| Among gardens and springs!
44|53| Dressed in silk and brocade, and facing one another!
44|54| Thus shall it be! And We shall give them Houris with lovely eyes as companions.
44|55| In an atmosphere of peace and security therein, they will ask for every kind of fruit.
44|56| They will not taste death therein like the one they earlier had. Allah will save them from the torment of Hell.
44|57| [Saving people from Hell and granting them entry into Paradise would be] a favour from your Lord. That will be the highest success.
44|58| We have indeed then made this Qur'aan easy in your own language so that they [your people] may listen and pay attention.
44|59| So you wait and watch [what happens to them]; they too are waiting and watching [what happens to you.]
45|1| These are among the mysterious letters, of the Arabic language, appearing at the beginning of some Qur'aanic chapters.
45|2| Revelation of the Book is from Allah, the Omnipotent, and Wise.
45|3| Indeed, in the heavens and the earth there are Signs for those who believe!
45|4| And in your creation and in animals Allah proliferates, there are Signs for people certain of their belief in Him.
45|5| And in the succession of night and day, and in the provision that Allah sends down from the sky wherewith He gives life to the earth after it had been dead, and in the winds changing their directions, there are Signs for people who make use of their intelligence. 
45|6| These are Allahճ Verses being recited to you [O Muhammad] in Truth. In what Hadeeth after Allah and His Verses will they, then, believe?
45|7| Woe to every sinful liar.
45|8| He hears Allahճ Verses recited to him, and then arrogantly persists [in being a sinful liar] as though he had not heard it. Tell him, then, he shall suffer a painful punishment.
45|9| When he comes to know something from Our Verses, he makes a fun of it. For such there shall be a humiliating punishment.
45|10| There is Hell beyond, for them. Their worldly earnings, or those whom they took as awliya besides Allah, shall avail them not! And for them, there is a great punishment.
45|11| This (Qur'aan) is guidance. For those who suppress the truth of the Verses of their Lord, there shall be punishment of a painful scourge.
45|12| Allah it is Who has made the sea subservient to you so that ships may sail in it at His command and you may seek of His Favour and give thanks to Him.
45|13| And He has made things in the heavens and all that is in the earth, subservient to you. Indeed, there are Signs in this for those who reflect.
45|14| Tell those who believe to forgive those who do not look forward to the Divine Times (Hereafter) for Allah Himself to requite them for their deeds. 
45|15| He who does a good deed does so for his own good; and he who commits a bad deed, will himself suffer its consequence. All of you will then [after you have done your deeds here, good or bad] be sent back to your Lord.
45|16| Indeed We did bestow upon the Children of Israel the Book, political power and Prophethood. And We provided them with good things and exalted them above the worlds.h 
45|17| And We gave them clear directions on what to do. Then they differed not until after knowledge had come to them out of spite, one against another. On the Day of Resurrection, Allah will indeed judge among them in what they differed.
45|18| Then We have set you, (O Prophet), on a certain course of action. So follow that course, and not desires of those who know not.
45|19| They will indeed be of no avail to you against Allah. And indeed the wrong-doers are friends one to another, whereas Allah is the wali to those who fear Him.
45|20| These (Qur'aanic Verses) are insights for mankind, and guidance and mercy for people certain of their belief in Allah.
45|21| Do those who do bad things think that We shall make them equal, in their lives and in their deaths, to those who believe and do good deeds? Vile is their judgement!
45|22| Allah created the heavens and the earth in Truth to requit every person for his/her deeds. And none shall be wronged.
45|23| Have you then seen a person who has taken his desire for his god, and then Allah, knowing this, caused him to go astray, put a seal on his hearing and his heart, and cast a veil over his sight? Who is there then to guide him after Allah? Will you not then ponder over this?
45|24| And they say, "There is nothing other than our present worldly life. We die and we live here; and it is the passage of time that destroys us, nothing else." And they have no knowledge about this; they are indulging in nothing but conjecture!
45|25| And when Our Clear Verses are recited to them, their only contention is, "Bring back to us our fathers if what you say is true."
45|26| Say, "It is Allah Who gives you life and then causes you to die, and then bring all of you together on the Day of Resurrection, a Day wherein there is no doubt. Yet, most people know not."
45|27| And Allahճ is the absolute sovereignty over the heavens and the earth! And the Day the Hour (of Resurrection) comes to pass, the followers of falsehood shall be in doom.
45|28| And you shall see every people on their knees. Every people will be summoned to come forth and see their Record and will be told, "Today you shall be given your dues for what you did."
45|29| "This, Our Record, speaks the truth about you. We did indeed record all that you did."
45|30| Those then who believe and do righteous deeds — their Lord shall admit them to His Mercy. That is the success manifest!
45|31| And those that suppressed the Truth shall be told, "Were My Verses not recited to you? But then you were a proud and sinful people!"
45|32| And when told, "Allahճ promise is true indeed! And the Hour (the time when the present world will end and the Hereafter begin) — there is no doubt therein." you said, "We do not know what the Hour is. We are just guessing and are not at all certain."
45|33| And the evil of what they do will be apparent to them, and that which they scoff at will besiege them.
45|34| And it will be said, "We forget you today as you forgot your appointment this Day. The Fire shall now be your abode, and none shall come to help you."
45|35| "That is because you held Allahճ Verses/Signs in ridicule and the worldly life deluded you." That Day then they shall not be taken out of that (unenviable) state of theirs nor shall they be allowed to solicit favours.
45|36| All praise is due then to Allah, the Lord of the heavens, the Lord of the earth, the Lord of the entire Universe.
45|37| And all greatness in the heavens and the earth is His! He is the One Omnipotent, Wise.
46|1| Ha-mim
46|2| The Book [Qur'aan] is a revelation from Allah the Omnipotent, Wise.
46|3| We created not the heavens and the earth and all that is in between them save with truthful purpose, and for a term appointed. And those who suppress the Truth heed not the warning they are given.
46|4| Say, "Have you considered those that you invoke besides Allah? Show me what part of the earth they have created! Or have they any share in the heavens? Bring me a divine book preceding this one (Qur'aan), or some shred of knowledge in support, if what you say is true."
46|5| And who is gone further astray than those who pray, instead of Allah, to such as hear not their prayer till the Day of Resurrection, and are unaware of their prayer. 
46|6| And when mankind is gathered (on the Judgment Day, those whom they prayed to, besides Allah,) will become their enemies, and will deny they were worshipped by them.
46|7| And when Our clear Verses are recited to them, those who suppress the Truth say of the Truth when it reaches them, "This is nothing but magic."
46|8| Or do they say you [Muhammad] fabricated it [Qur'aan]? Say, "If I have fabricated it, you do have no power to support me against Allah. He is aware of what [lies] you utter concerning it. He is enough as a witness between me and you. And He is the One, Forgiving, Merciful."
46|9| Say, "I am not the first one among the Messengers. And I know not what will be done with me or with you. I do but follow what is revealed to me, and I am but a plain warner."
46|10| Say, "Do you consider what could happen to you if it [Qur'aan] is from Allah and you suppress your belief in it, and a witness from among the Children of Israel testifies to the like thereof [Torah] and then believes, and you are too proud!?" Allah does indeed not guide the people that are wicked!
46|11| And those who refuse to believe say of those who believe, "Had it [the Qur'aanic revelations] been (any) good, they would not have preceded us to it." And since they would not be guided by it, they say, "This is an ancient lie."h 
46|12| And, before it, the Book revealed to Moses [Torah] was leading guide and mercy. And this Book [Qur'aan], confirming [the guidance given in Torah], is in the Arabic language to warn those who wrong others and themselves and to bring good tidings for the righteous people.
46|13| Those indeed who say `Allah is Our Lord' and then remain steadfast, they shall have no fear then, nor shall they grieve!"
46|14| They shall be inhabitants of the Garden (Paradise), living eternal lives therein as rewards for their deeds.
46|15| And We have commended to man to be kind to parents. His mother bears him in pain and in pain does she deliver him. And the bearing and feeding of him till he is weaned away from mother's milk takes thirty months. Then as he attains to full strength and reaches forty years of age, he says, "My Lord! Inspire me to be thankful for the favour You have bestowed on me and on my parents, and to do righteous deeds that would please You. And make me righteous in the matter of my offspring. I do indeed turn to You in repentance, and indeed I am of those who submit.
46|16| Such are the ones from whom We accept the good of what they do, and overlook the bad. They shall be among the inhabitants of the Garden (Paradise) — a true promise given to them.
46|17| And he who says to his parents, "Fie upon you both! Do you tell me that I shall be brought out (to life again) and generations before me have passed away!?" And the two cry to Allah for help and say, "Woe to you! Believe! Allah's promise is indeed true." But he says, "These are nothing but fables of the ancient people!"
46|18| Such are the ones among peoples of the jinn and mankind, which have passed away before them, on whom the divine Word has proved true. They indeed are the doomed ones.
46|19| And for all there will be ranks on the basis of what they do, so that He may justly compensate them for their deeds. And they will not be wronged.
46|20| And the Day those who suppress the Truth are exposed to the Fire: "You squandered your good things in your worldly life to enjoy its pleasures. So this Day you are made to suffer the humiliating punishment because you were unjustly arrogant on the earth, and because you committed transgression."
46|21| And relate the story of the brother of AAad when he warned his people in the sand dunes — and warners did come and go before and after him — saying, "Worship none but Allah. I am indeed afraid punishment of an awesome Day may befall you."
46|22| They said, "Have you come to turn us away from our gods? Then bring upon us what you warn us of, if you are of the truthful ones."
46|23| He (Allah's Messenger) said, "The knowledge [of everything, including the future] is only with Allah! I convey to you what I have been sent with, but I do see you are a people behaving ignorantly."
46|24| Then, when they saw it as a dense cloud coming toward their valleys, they said, "Here is a cloud bringing us rain. But it is what you sought to hasten — a wind wherein is painful torment.
46|25| [A wind] destroying all things by its Lord's command! And by morning, nothing could be seen save their dwellings. We do thus `reward' the sinful people.
46|26| And We did certainly empower them with what We have not empowered you, and We had assigned to them ears and eyes and hearts. But then their ears and eyes and hearts availed those naught since they denied Allah's Verses/signs. And what they scoffed at surrounded them.
46|27| And We did certainly destroy habitations around you, and We had displayed to them Our Verses/signs, so that they might return to the Right Path.
46|28| Then why did those, whom they had taken as means — besides Allah — of approach to divinity, not help them? Nay! But they shunned them. And it was all their lie and forgery.
46|29| And when We directed toward you (Muhammad) a party of the jinn, who wished to hear the Qur'aan! And when they attended it [Qur'aan reading session], they said, "Listen!" And, when it was finished, they turned back to their people to warn them.
46|30| They said, "O our people! We have heard a Book revealed after Moses, confirming that which was in it, guiding to the Truth and to a Straight Path."
46|31| "O our people! Respond to Allah's caller and believe in Him. He will forgive you some of your sins and save you from a painful punishment."
46|32| And he who responds not to Allah's caller, he can noway escape [from Him] on the earth. And he has no awliya besides Him. Such people are in clear delusion.
46|33| Do they not see that it is Allah Who has created the heavens and the earth, Who is not tired by the process of their creation, and Who is Able to give life to the dead? Yes indeed, He is capable of doing anything!
46|34| And the Day when the suppressors of the Truth are brought up to the Fire! "Is not this real?" They say, "Yes, by our Lord, it is!" The Lord says, "Then taste the punishment; for, you had refused to believe!"
46|35| Then have patience (O Muhammad) just as those endowed with determination among the Messengers (of old) had patience! And be not in haste concerning them. The Day they see what they are promised (it will so appear to them) as though they had stayed but an hour of daytime. A culmination! Shall any be destroyed [then] save the transgressing rebels?
47|1| Those that suppress the Truth and cause hindrance in Allah's Path — He will let all their deeds go waste.
47|2| And those who beieve and do righteous deeds and believe in what have been divinely sent down upon Muhammad — and that (what has been sent down) is the Truth from their Lord — He will efface their bad deeds, and He will set their condition right.
47|3| It is so because those who suppress the Truth pursue falsehood, and those who beieve pursue the Truth from their Lord. In this way does Allah give to mankind the similitudes of their lives!
47|4| Then when you confront in war those who suppress the Truth, smite their necks until you subdue them, and then take them securely into custody [as prisoners of war]. Thereafter [you may set them free,] either as an act of grace or against ransom, so that the burden of war is lifted. But thus it is — and had Allah so willed, He could indeed punish them Himself — so as to test you [all] by means of one another. And those that are killed in Allah's Path — He will never let their deeds go waste.
47|5| He will guide them, and set their condition right.
47|6| And He will admit them to the Garden [Paradise] as already described to them.
47|7| O you who believe! If you help Allah, He will help you, and He will consolidate your position.
47|8| And those that suppress the Truth — they are bound to face destruction, and Allah will let all their deeds go waste:
47|9| That is so because they hate what Allah has sent down. And He then causes their deeds to come to naught!
47|10| Have they not then travelled about on the earth and beheld what happened in the end to those who lived before their time? Allah brought about annihilation on them! And for those that suppress the truth, [He can bring about annihilations] like thereof!
47|11| That is because Allah is the Patron of all those who believe, whereas they who suppress the Truth have no Patron.
47|12| Allah will indeed admit all those who believe and do righteous deeds into gardens underneath which rivers flow. And those who suppress the Truth shall have — they may enjoy their life [in this world] and eat as cattle eat — the Fire [of the hereafter] for their abode.
47|13| And how many a city greater in power than this city [Makkah] of yours which has driven you out, [O Muhammad,] have We destroyed, and then nobody came to help them!
47|14| Is, then, he who stands on clear evidence from his Lord like one to whom one's bad deeds seem good? And people of the latter category follow but their own lusts!
47|15| [Consider] example of the Garden [Paradise] which the pious are promised. Therein are rivers of unpolluted water, and rivers of milk with unaltering taste, and rivers of wine delicious to drink, and rivers of purified honey. And therein they [the pious] shall enjoy all the fruits and forgiveness from their Lord. Can such pious persons be likened to persons who are to abide in the Fire and be given boiling water to drink that would cut off their intestines? 
47|16| And among them are those who [apparently] listen to you, [O Muhammad,] and then, as soon as they leave you, say despisingly to those endowed with knowledge, "What is it that he [Muhammad] has said?" It is such as these whose hearts Allah has sealed; and they have followed but their own lusts.
47|17| And those that seek guidance — He improves them in guidance and gives them their piety.
47|18| Are they, then, waiting for the Hour (the time when the present world will end and the Hereafter begin) to come upon them of a sudden? Portends of it have verily come! And what will mention of these [portends] avail them, once it [the Hour] has come upon them?
47|19| Know, then, that there is none worthy of worship but Alah. And ask forgiveness for your sins, [O Muhammad,] and for [the sins of] all other believing men and women. And Allah does know all your movements as well as your abodes.
47|20| And those who beieve say "Would that divine revelation [as desired by us] is sent down!" But now that an unambiguous revelation about war has been sent down, you [Muhammad] can see those, in whose hearts is a disease, looking at you with the look of one who is about to faint for fear of death! Far better for them woud be [continued to next Verse]
47|21| [Far better for them woud be] obedience and a word of gratitude! Now that the matter is settled — [by the revelation concerning war] — it would certainly be for their good to remain true to Alah.
47|22| "If you turn away, would you, then, spread corruption on earth, and cut asunder your ties of kinship!?"
47|23| Those are the ones whom Allah has cursed! So He made them deaf and blinded their sight.
47|24| Why do they not, then, ponder over this Qur'aan? Or are there locks upon their minds to keep it [Qur'aan] out?
47|25| Indeed, those [hypocrites] who turn on their backs after guidance that has been clearly given to them — the Satan prods them on, and he aids and abets them!
47|26| Because, they [hypocrites] say to those [unbelievers] who abhor what Allah has revealed, "We will obey you in some matters." And Allah is aware of their secrets.
47|27| What then woud be their condition when, while the angels cause them to die, they strike at their faces and at their backs!?
47|28| Because, they pursue what angers Allah and shun what pleases Him. And so He has made their deeds worthless.
47|29| Or do those, in whose hearts is a disease, think that Allah would never bring their crookedness to light?
47|30| And had We so willed, We could have shown them clearly to you, so that you would know them by their visible distinguishing marks. And you should certainly recognize them by tone of speech. And Allah knows what you all do.
47|31| And We certainly shall try you all to distinguish those of you who strive hard in Our cause and are patient in adversity. And We shall put to test all your assertions.
47|32| Indeed, they who suppress the Truth and cause hindrance in Alah's path, and cut themselves off from the Messenger after guidance clearly given to them — they can in no way harm Allah! And He will render all their deeds worthess.
47|33| O those who believe! Obey Allah, and obey the Messenger, and render not your deeds null and void!
47|34| Indeed, they who suppress the Truth and cause hindrance in Alah's path, and then die as suppressors of the Truth — Allah will not grant them forgiveness!
47|35| Be not then weak and call for peace while you have the upper hand. Allah is with you, and He will not leave you unrewarded for your deeds.
47|36| The life of this world is but sport and pastime. And if you believe in and fear Allah, He will repay you handsomely without asking you to part with your material possessions therefor.
47|37| Were He to ask and press for it [your material possessions], you would show your miserliness, and so Allah would bring your crookedness to light.
47|38| Here you are! It is you who are called upon to spend in Allah's Path. But then among you are those who are miserly! And one is miserly but towards one's own self. And Allah is the One self-sufficient, and you are the ones needy! And if you turn away [from Him], He will cause other people to take your place, and they will not be like you!
48|1| We have indeed granted you a clear victory. 
48|2| [The victory was granted] in order that Allah may forgive you your past and future sins and complete His favour upon you and guide you to a straight path.
48|3| And [in order] that Allah might give you [Muhammad] powerful help.
48|4| It is He who sends down tranquillity into the minds of the believers, to add faith to their faith. And to Allah belong all forces of the heavens and the earth. And Allah is Aware, Wise!
48|5| [Tranquillity is bestowed on beievers' minds] so that He might admit the believing men and believing women into Gardens, through which rivers flow, to dwell therein forever, and so that He might cleanse them of their evils. And that is, with Allah, the highest success!
48|6| And so that He might punish the hypocrites, men and women, and the polytheists, men and women, who imagine evil things about Allah. Evil time shall come upon them. And Allah is very angry with them. And He has cursed them and has prepared Hell for them. And an evil destination it is!
48|7| And to Allah belong all forces of the heavens and the earth. And Allah is Omnipotent, Wise.
48|8| We have indeed sent you [Muhammad] as a witness, as a bearer of good tidings, and as a warner.
48|9| [We have sent Muhammad as such] so that you [people] may believe in Allah and His Messenger, and may assist Him, respect His Majesty, and glorify Him morning and evening.
48|10| Indeed, all who pledge their allegiance to you [Prophet Muhammad] pledge their allegiance to Allah! Allah's hand is over their hands. Hence, he who breaks his oath breaks it only to his own detriment. Whereas he who remains true to what he has pledged to Allah — he shall have a great reward bestowed upon him.
48|11| Those bedouins [nomadic Arabs staying in small oases in the desert and not in cities like Makkah and Medina] who remained behind [and did not accompany the Prophet in his mission] will say to you [Prophet], "Our properties and our families kept us engrossed, so seek Allah's forgiveness for us." They will say with their tongues what is not in their minds. Say, "Who then can intervene in the least on your behalf with Allah, if He wills to inflict any harm on you, or to give you any benefit? Allah is but well aware of all that you do."
48|12| "You but thought that the Messenger and the believers would never return to their families. And you were pleased, in your minds, with this thought. And you conceived an evil thought, and you became a people doomed!"
48|13| And those who believe not in Allah and His Messenger — We have indeed prepared a blazing Fire for those who suppress the Truth!
48|14| To Allah belongs the absolute sovereignty over the heavens and the earth. He forgives whom He wills, and punishes whom He wills. And Allah is forgiving and merciful.
48|15| When you [believers] set off to gather spoils of war, those that stayed behind [during war] will say, "Let us follow you." They want to change Allah's word, but tell them, "You shall not follow us. Allah has ordained so about you in advance." Then they will say, "You are jealous of us." But little do they understand!
48|16| Tell the bedouins who stayed behind, "You shall be summoned to fight against a militarily strong people, unless they submit. Then if you obey, Allah will grant you a good reward, but if you turn away as you did before, He will inflict on you a painful punishment."
48|17| No blame on the blind, or on the lame or the sick. And he who obeys Allah and His Messenger, Allah will admit him to Gardens through which rivers flow. And he who turns away, he shall be inflicted with painful punishment!
48|18| Allah was surely pleased with the believers when they swore allegiance to you [Prophet] under the tree! HE knew what was in their minds and so He made calmness descend on them and rewarded them with a victory that was to come in near future.
48|19| And [Allah rewarded them] with many future spoils of war to gather. And Allah is Omnipotent, Wise.
48|20| Allah has promised you many future gains [spoils of war] to gather, and He has hastened to you this one. And He has restrained the hands of people from harming you, so that it may be a sign for the believers, and so that He may guide you to a straight path.
48|21| And there are others [gains] which are still beyond your grasp, [but] which Allah has brought under His compass [for you]. And Allah is capable of doing anything.
48|22| If those who suppress the Truth were to fight you, they would certainly turn their backs. And then they would find neither a wali nor anyone else to help!
48|23| That was Allah's practice that prevailed in the past; and you shall find no change in Allah's practice!
48|24| And He it is who wit eld their hands from you, and your hands from them in the valley of Makkah, after giving you victory over them. Allah does see what you do.
48|25| They were those who suppressed the Truth, hindered you from going to the Sacred Mosque and prevented your offering from reaching its place of sacrifice. And [Allah would have commanded you to fight them] had it not been for the believing men and believing women [in Makkah] whom you might unwittingly have trodden down, and on whose account you might have, unknowingly, become guilty. [Allah wit eld your hands from the suppressors of Truth] so that He may bring whoever He will into His mercy. If they [the believers] had been clearly separated [from the non-believers], We would have punished those who have suppressed the Truth with a painful punishment.
48|26| While those who suppress the Truth made it, in their minds, a matter of pride — the pride of the days of ignorance — Allah sent down a sense of calmness and tranquillity from Him on to His Messenger and the believers and made them adhere to the principle of piety. And they were entitled to it [piety] and were worthy of it. And Allah has knowledge of all things.
48|27| Allah was of course right in showing His Messenger a truthful vision. Allah willing, you will most certainly enter the Sacred Mosque in safety and without fear, with heads shaven or with hair cut short. Allah knew what you did not! So He has given you this victory before that one. 
48|28| He is the One who has sent His Messenger with the guidance and the true way of life [Islam], so that He may have it prevail over all [other] ways of life. And Allah suffices as a witness! 
48|29| Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah. Those who are with him are firm and strict with those who suppress the truth, but compassionate towards one another. You see them bowing and prostrating to seek favours from Allah and His pleasure. Their distinguishing marks — the results of their [frequent] prostrations — are on their faces. They are likened in the Torah and in the Gospel to a seed which sends out its shoot and then strengthens it. It then becomes thick, and stands firm on its own stem, delighting the farmers. [Allah has so developed the character of believers] to enrage, through them, those who suppress the Truth. Allah has promised forgiveness and a great reward to those of them who believe and do good deeds.
49|1| O you who believe! Do not push yourself forward in the presence of Allah and his Messenger, and fear Allah. Allah does indeed hear all, know all.
49|2| O you who believe! Raise not your voices above the Prophet's voice, nor speak loudly to him as you speak loudly to one another, lest your deeds become unwittingly worthless.
49|3| Those indeed who lower their voices before Allah's Messenger — they are those whose minds Allah has tested for piety. For them there is forgiveness and a great reward.
49|4| Those indeed who call out to you [Prophet] from outside the private chambers — most of them have no sense!
49|5| And had they been patient till you [Muhammad] come out to them, it would have been better for them. And Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.
49|6| O you who believe! Should a depraved person bring you news, examine it critically, lest you harm a people in ignorance, and then be sorry for what you did.
49|7| And beware! Allah's Messenger is amongst you. Were he to obey you in most matters, you would surely be in trouble. But Allah has endeared the faith to you and has made it seem good in your minds. And He has made hateful to you suppression of the Truth and transgression and disobedience. Those are the ones rightly guided!
49|8| A favour from Allah and a bounty! And Allah is Omniscient, Wise.
49|9| And if two parties of the believers quarrel, make peace between them. Then if one of them does wrong to the other, fight that one which does wrong, till it returns to Allah's command. Then, if it returns, make peace between them with justice and act equitably. Allah does indeed love those that are equitable.
49|10| The believers are but brethren. So make peace among your brothers! And fear Allah so that mercy is showered upon you.
49|11| O you who believe! Let not one community laugh at another, lest the latter be better than the former. Nor let women laugh at other women, lest the latter be better than the former. Insult not your own people, or call one another by nick-names. It is bad to be called by a name indicating transgressions against divine law after attaining to faith. And one that turns not in repentance — such are the wicked ones!
49|12| O you who believe! Avoid most of speculation! Speculation in some cases indeed is sin. And spy not on one another, nor let some of you backbite on others. Would any of you like to eat the flesh of his dead brother? You would abhor it! And fear Allah! Allah is indeed Acceptor of repentance, Merciful.
49|13| O mankind! Verily We have created you from one man and one woman, and made you into nations and tribes in order that you may know one another. The noblest of you with Allah is indeed the one most pious of you. Allah is indeed Omniscient, Well-informed.
49|14| The Bedouin [nomadic] Arabs say, "We do believe." Say, "You believe not, but you should say, `We submit' and the faith has not yet entered your minds! And if you obey Allah and His Messenger, He will not deprive you of any benefits accruing from your deeds. Allah is indeed Forgiving, Merciful.
49|15| The believers are only those who believe in Allah and His Messenger. Then they doubt not, and struggle hard with their wealth and their lives in the way of Allah. Those are they who are the true believers.
49|16| Say, "Would you teach Allah what your religion is!? And Allah knows whatever there is in the heavens and whatever there is in the earth. And Allah knows all things."
49|17| They think that by becoming Muslims they have done a favour to you. Say, "You have done no favour to me by becoming Muslims! Allah, on the other hand, has done you a favour by guiding you to the faith, if you would but speak the truth."
49|18| Allah does indeed know the secrets of the heavens and the earth. And Allah sees all that you do! 
50|1| Qaf. By the Glorious Qur'aan, [We swear its authenticity]!
50|2| But they wonder that there has come to them a Warner [from Allah] from among themselves. So the suppressors of the Truth say, "This is a strange thing!"
50|3| "What! When we die and have become dust, (shall we rise again to life?) That is a return far [from being ever possible]!"
50|4| We do know what the earth takes away from them. And with Us is a record protected!
50|5| But they deny the Truth when it comes to them. And so they are in a confused state of mind.
50|6| Do they not look at the sky above them — how We have made it and adorned it, and see that there are no cracks in it?
50|7| And We have spread out the earth and cast mountains into it. And We have caused every kind of beautiful spouse of herbage grow in it.
50|8| To be observed and commemorated by every devotee turning to Allah.
50|9| And We send down from the sky rain as a blessing, and We produce therewith gardens and seed for the harvest
50|10| And tall palm-trees, with shoots of fruit-stalks, piled one over another
50|11| A provision for (Allah's) subjects. And We give life therewith [with rain] to land that is dead. Thus will the coming out of the dead from their graves [Resurrection] be.
50|12| [Resurrection] was denied before them by the People of Noah, the Companions of the Rass, and the Thamood,
50|13| And of AAad, of Pharaoh, the brethren of Lot,
50|14| The Companions of the Wood, and the People of Tubba' (an ancient tribe) — all of them rejected the Messengers, and My warning (to them) was duly fulfilled.
50|15| Were We then weary with the first Creation that they should be in such a confused state of mind about a new Creation!?
50|16| And We did create man, and We know the promptings of his own self. And We are closer to him than any bodily channel having access into his brain.
50|17| When the two frequently confronting voices, one located on the right and one on the left, confront each other
50|18| He utters not a word but is there a sentinel by him, ready [to record it]!
50|19| And the pangs of death will bring the Truth home to him. "This was the thing you kept away from!"
50|20| And then the Trumpet is blown — there then is the Day promised!
50|21| And every soul comes forth accompanied by a driver and a witness.
50|22| "You were careless about this. Now that We have taken off your cover from you, strong is your eyesight this Day!"
50|23| And his Companion [witness] says, "It's ready here — what in my hand is [man's record]!"
50|24| "Throw into Hell every stubborn suppressor of evidence proving existence of Allah [with attributes as given in the Qur'aan]!"
50|25| "Who was forbidding what was good, transgressing all bounds, and casting doubts and suspicions."
50|26| "Who had set up other god/s besides Allah! So throw him into the severe punishment."
50|27| His Companion says, "Our Lord! I did not make him transgress, but he was (himself) gone far astray."
50|28| He [Allah] says, "Quarrel not in My Presence; and I did send you the warning in advance."
50|29| "No alteration in the Word with Me, and I am never unjust to My subjects."
50|30| That Day We ask Hell, "Are you full?" And it asks, "Are there any more?"
50|31| And the Garden [of Paradise] is brought near for the pious and righteous, and it is no longer a distant objective [for them.]
50|32| "This is what you were promised. [And this is what was promised] to every one who turned (to Allah in sincere repentance) and protected (himself against satanic influence.)
50|33| Who feared the Gracious One without physically seeing Him with worldly eyes, and has come with a mind turned in devotion (to Him).
50|34| "Enter therein [in Paradise] in Peace and Security; this is time of eternal life!"
50|35| There is for them therein all that they desire. And [there is besides] much more with Us.
50|36| And how many a generation before them, stronger in power than they, did We destroy! They had wandered through the lands in search of a place of escape!!
50|37| Certainly indeed in this is a lesson to learn for any who has an understanding mind or who lends an insightful ear.
50|38| We created the heavens and the earth and all things in between in six periods of time. And weariness did not even touch Us!
50|39| Have patience, then, over what they say, and glorify your Lord with praise, before the rising of the sun and before its setting.
50|40| And glorify Him during parts of the night, and post prostrations!
50|41| And listen the Day when the Caller calls out from a place quite near, —
50|42| The Day when they hear a real mighty Blast — that is the Day of Resurrection!
50|43| It is indeed We Who give life and cause death; and to Us is the final destination.
50|44| That Day the earth swiftly separates from them. That gathering — it is easy for Us!
50|45| We know what they say! And you are not to be coercive on them. So admonish with the Qur'an such as fear My Warning!
51|1| By the scattering [winds] that scatter [dust particles]
51|2| Then bear a load [of tiny water globues condensing around the dust particles]
51|3| Then sail smoothly along
51|4| And then execute given task of apportioning [rainfall].
51|5| What you are being promised is certainy indeed true,
51|6| And the Judgement Day shall certainly indeed happen!
51|7| By the heaven full of perfectly defined pathways 
51|8| You do certainly indeed differ in what you say [about the Qur'aan]!
51|9| Those are deluded from it [Qur'aan] who are deluded from the Truth.
51|10| Doomed are those who just guess!
51|11| Those that are submerged in carelessness about Truth and Reaity.
51|12| They ask, "When will the Judgement Day be?"
51|13| It will be the Day when they shall be made to suffer on the Fire.
51|14| "Taste the suffering you deserve! This is what you had sought to hasten."
51|15| The pious and Allah-fearing shall indeed be in the midst of gardens and fountains.
51|16| They accept what their Lord gives them. They did indeed do good work before (in the life of the world.)
51|17| They slept but little at night
51|18| And they asked for forgiveness in the wee hours before dawn.
51|19| And they considered it their duty to keep something aside in their property for the needy and the destitute.
51|20| And in the earth are there many signs for those who are certain in their belief
51|21| And in your own persons too! Do you not see?h 
51|22| And in the heaven is your provision and also what you are being promised.
51|23| By the Lord of the heaven and the earth, then, this is indeed true, as true as the fact of your speaking.
51|24| Has the story of Abrahamճ honoured guests reached you, (O Prophet)?
51|25| On coming to him, they said: "Peace!" He said, "Peace, strangers!"
51|26| Then slipping away from them to his family, he brought a fat calf [to feast his stranger guests therewith.]
51|27| And he laid it before them, saying, "Would you not eat it?"
51|28| Then he was afraid of them. They said, "Fear not!" And they gave him the good news of a son endowed with knowledge.
51|29| His wife thereupon came forward crying. She struck her face and exclaimed, "A barren old woman am I!"
51|30| They said, "Your Lord has said so! Indeed He is the One Most Wise, All-Knowing."
51|31| Abraham said, "What is your mission then, O Messengers?"
51|32| They replied, "We have indeed been sent towards a sinning people."
51|33| "To throw stones of clay upon them."
51|34| "Targeted with your Lord upon those who go beyond all bounds!"
51|35| We then evacuated all of the believers who lived therein.
51|36| And We did not find therein any Muslims, apart from a single house.
51|37| And We left therein a sign for those who fear the painful punishment. 
51|38| And in Moses [there is a sign] - when We sent him with a clear authority to Pharaoh.
51|39| And he [Pharaoh] turned in arrogance on the strength of his support, and he said (to his council of elders), "He is a magician or a madman."
51|40| So then We seized him and his troops, and threw them into the sea. And he was to blame [for this fate].
51|41| And in Aad [there is a sign] - when We sent upon them a devastating wind
51|42| [The devastating wind] left nothing that it came upon without making it look like old and rotten bones.
51|43| And in Thamood [there is a sign] - when they were told, "Enjoy yourselves for a while."
51|44| They had behaved insolently towards the Command of their Lord! So then a thunderbolt struck them as they looked on.
51|45| They could not even stand up or help themselves!
51|46| And the people of Noah before them all — they were indeed a people immersed in transgression!
51|47| And the heaven - We made it powerful and We can certainly indeed expand it.
51|48| And the earth - We prepared its crust, and how well have We prepared it! 
51|49| And of everything We have created in pairs, so that you ponder over this and remember! 
51|50| "Flee, therefore, to Allah. I am indeed a plain warner to you from Him."
51|51| "And set up no other deity with Allah. I am indeed a plain warner to you from Him."
51|52| Never did a Messenger come to those that preceded them but they called him a magician or a mad-man. Likewise,
51|53| Do they persist with the same [canard]!? Nay, they are a people committing transgression.
51|54| So turn away from them; you are not to blame!
51|55| And keep on counselling them; for counselling does indeed benefit the believers!
51|56| And I created the jinn and the humans for nothing but that they worship Me.
51|57| I want from them no provision, nor do I want them to feed Me.
51|58| Indeed, Allah is the One Who provides all sustenance. He is Possessor of power that never fails!
51|59| And, indeed, the lot of those who do wrong is like the lot of their counterparts (of yore). So let them not hasten Me.
51|60| Woe, then, to those, who suppress the Truth, during that Day of theirs which they are warned against.
52|1| By the Mount [Sinai]
52|2| And by Record inscribed
52|3| On a writing material widely published.h 
52|4| And by the long-standing, frequently visited house [Kaabah]
52|5| And by the roof elevated high [of heaven]!
52|6| And by the sea in high tide
52|7| Punishment by your Lord is indeed inevitable.
52|8| None can ward it off.
52|9| When the sky [Universe] trembles
52|10| And the mountains move
52|11| Woe, then, to all those who had rejected the Truth!
52|12| Those who had wasted their time on vanities.
52|13| When they are pushed into Hell fire
52|14| "This is the Fire you had denied!"
52|15| "Is this, then, a delusion or are you blind to it?"
52|16| "Suffer it! Whether you bear it with patience or not, it will be all the same for you: you are but being paid back for what you were doing!"
52|17| The pious are in gardens among bounties
52|18| They rejoice in all that their Lord has granted them. And their Lord has warded off punishment through the blazing Fire from them.
52|19| "Eat and drink to your satisfaction as a reward for your [good] deeds."
52|20| "Reclining on couches ranged in rows!" And We shall give them Houris with lovely eyes as companions.
52|21| And those that believed and their offspring that followed them in belief, We unite them with their offspring. And We deprive them not of any of their deeds. Every human being is held in pledge for whatever he earns.
52|22| And We help them with fruit and meat — whatever they desire!
52|23| They have rounds of drinks which give rise to no nonsense, nor sin.
52|24| And waiting upon them will be boys — like pearls hidden in their shells — assigned to them.
52|25| And they turn to one another, enquiringly.
52|26| They say, "We were living with our families in fear, before!"
52|27| "So Allah has been good to us, and has warded off from us punishment of intense heat."
52|28| "We did indeed invoke Him before. He is indeed the One Ultimate in goodness, the Merciful!"
52|29| Proclaim the praises of your Lord, then! You [Muhammad] are, by His grace, neither a fortune-teller nor a madman.
52|30| Or do they say, "A poet! We await a change of fortune for him"?
52|31| Say, "Wait! I, too, am one of those who wait with you."
52|32| Do their visions dictate this to them — or are they people committing transgression?
52|33| Or do they say, "He himself has authored it"? Nay, they believe not!
52|34| Let them produce another discourse like it, if what they say be true!
52|35| Are they created out of nothing? Or, are they themselves the creators?
52|36| Or, have they created the heavens and the earth? And yet they are not certain of a Creator creating them!h 
52|37| Or, have they your Lord's treasures with them? Or are they in control?
52|38| Or, have they a link through which they could listen? Let him who has listened to them then come up with manifest proof!
52|39| Or, are there daughters for Him, and, for you, sons?
52|40| Or, do you [Prophet Muhammad] ask of them a reward, and so do they get burdened with debt?
52|41| Or, have they the knowledge of the Unseen, which they have written down? 
52|42| Or, do they want to hatch a plot? But then those who suppress the truth — they themselves are the victims of a plot!
52|43| Or, have they a deity other than Allah? Allah is too high in glory, above what they worship besides Him!
52|44| And if they were to see meteorites from the sky falling down, they would say, "Gathering clouds!"
52|45| Leave them alone then until they meet their Day in which they will be stunned.
52|46| The Day their scheming and plotting will be of no avail to them, and they will receive no help.
52|47| And, indeed, for those who do wrong, a punishment closer than that [in this world itself]! But most of them are not aware.
52|48| And await in patience for your Lord's Decree! We have indeed of course kept you within Our sight. And glorify your Lord with His praise when you are up on your feet!
52|49| And glorify Him at night, and when the stars retreat [at dawn]!
53|1| By the star when it perishes!
53|2| Neither is your comrade [Prophet Muhammad] astray, nor has he deviated.
53|3| And he speaks not for attaining any personal desire.
53|4| It is nothing but revelation divinely revealed!
53|5| Imparted to him by One [Angel] mighty in power
53|6| [The Angel] capable of passing [quickly from one form to another]. And he rose
53|7| And he was on the high horizon.
53|8| Then he drew near, and came down
53|9| To be within a distance of two bow-lengths.
53|10| And He then revealed to His devotee [Muhammad] what He revealed.
53|11| The mind lied not what it saw.
53|12| Would you then be engaged in an argument with him over what he saw!?
53|13| And he [Muhammad] did see him [Angel] descend another time,
53|14| Near Sidrat [a kind of tree] at the farthest frontier.
53|15| Near it [Sidrat] is the Garden Abode [Paradise].
53|16| When what covers the Sidr covered it
53|17| The sight swerved not, nor did it transgress
53|18| He did see some of the great signs of his Lord.
53|19| See you the Lat and the`Uzza ?
53|20| And Manat, the third, besides?
53|21| Are the males for you and for Him the females!?
53|22| This then is an unfair division!
53|23| They are but names you have given them — you and your fathers! Allah has sent no authority for them. They follow but conjecture and what they themselves desire. And, surely, the guidance from their Lord has come to them!
53|24| Or, is it ordained that man does [always] have what he wishes?
53|25| To Allah then belong the Hereafter and the present.
53|26| And how many angels are there in the heavens whose intercession shall be of no avail, unless and until it be by Allah's permission and pleasure in regard to those whom He wishes!
53|27| Those, indeed, who do not believe in the Hereafter give angels female names.
53|28| And they have no knowledge thereon [on creation of angels]. They but follow their conjecture and conjecture can avail nothing indeed against the Truth.
53|29| So keep away from those who turn away from remembering Us and who seek nothing but the life of this world.
53|30| That [life of this world] is all they know! Indeed it is your Lord Who knows those who have strayed away from His Path and it is He Who knows those who are guided.
53|31| And To Allah belong all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth to requite the evil- doers for their deeds and to requite those who have done good deeds with a good reward.
53|32| Those who avoid grave sins and shameful deeds, lesser offences notwithstanding — for those indeed your Lord abounds in forgiveness. He knows you since He raised you from the earth, and while you were unseen inside your mothersԠwombs. Consider yourselves not then as pure and highly born! He knows those that are pious.
53|33| Have you seen the person that turns away (from Allah's Path)?
53|34| And he/she gives a little, and then stops.
53|35| Does he have any knowledge of the Unseen, and is so aware of it?
53|36| Is he not informed of what is there in the Scripture of Moses?
53|37| And of Abraham, who was true to his word?
53|38| That no bearer of a burden shall bear the burden of another,
53|39| And that man gets nothing but what he strives for,
53|40| And that his striving shall be [critically] seen
53|41| And then he shall be fully compensated
53|42| And that to your Lord is the End,
53|43| And that He it is Who makes people laugh and cry
53|44| And that He it is Who causes death and gives life
53|45| And He it is Who created the couple of the male and the female
53|46| From fertilized ovum as and when [divinely] decreed.h 
53|47| And that He has ordained tne second life [for mankind in the Hereafter] to be obligatory upon Himself.
53|48| And that He is the One self-sufficient and self-preserving.
53|49| And that He is the Lord of Siriush 
53|50| And that He it is Who destroyed the ancient people of AAad
53|51| And Thamood [another ancient people], leaving no trace of them
53|52| And the people of Noah before them! They were all wicked people transgressing Allah- laden bounds.
53|53| And He destroyed the overturned cities [of the people of Lot]
53|54| And He covered them with what He covered.h 
53|55| So, which of your Lordճ means of power will you doubt?
53|56| It is a warning among the warnings of yore.
53|57| The approaching [Hour] has drawn near
53|58| None other than Allah can avert it.
53|59| Do you, then, wonder at what has been told to you here!?
53|60| Will you laugh at it and not weep!?
53|61| And you remain heedlessly engrossed in merriment!?
53|62| You should [rather] prostrate to Allah, and worship Him!
54|1| The Hour (the time when the present world will end and the Hereafter begin) has drawn near and the moon is visited.
54|2| And if they see a sign they turn away and say, "Another delusion!"
54|3| And they speak lies and follow their own desires. And every matter does come to a settlement.
54|4| And surely there has come to them some of the news containing lessons
54|5| In mature wisdom; but warnings avail not!
54|6| So turn away from them on the Day when the Summoner summons to a thing forbidding.
54|7| With downcast eyes, they come out of the graves as though they were locusts dispersed,
54|8| Hurrying on toward the Summoner, the suppressors of Truth say, "This is a hard day."
54|9| Before them, Noah's people had denied! They denied Our devotee and said he was a mad man! And thus rebuffed was he!
54|10| Then he prayed to his Lord, "I am defeated, so help me!"
54|11| We then opened gates of the sky with pouring water
54|12| And We caused springs in the earth to gush forth, so that the waters met for a predestined purpose.
54|13| And We carried him [Noah] upon something [Ark made] of planks and nails
54|14| That sailed under Our observation, in compensation for one [Noah] who was rejected.
54|15| And We did leave it [Ark] behind as a Sign for posterity; but is there any to take heed? 
54|16| And see how My punishment was — and My warnings!
54|17| And We have certainly made the Qur'aan easy for cultivating Firm Faith in and Remembrance of Me; but is there any to take heed?
54|18| (The anscient tribe of) AAad rejected [divine guidance]. How then was My punishment and My warnings!
54|19| We did indeed send upon them a furiously blowing wind on a day of constant calamity,
54|20| It [wind] swept away men as though they were trunks of uprooted palm-trees.
54|21| How then was My punishment and My warnings!
54|22| And We have certainly made the Qur'aan easy for cultivating Firm Faith in and Remembrance of Me; but is there any to take heed?
54|23| (The ancient tribe of) Thamood rejected warnings.
54|24| They said, "Is it an individual man, amongst us all, that we should follow? Then we are indeed into error and madness."
54|25| Is the Zikr [divine revelation] bestowed only upon him, amongst us all? Nay, but he is an insolent liar.
54|26| To-morrow they shall know who the insolent liar is!
54|27| We are indeed sending the she-camel by way of a test for them. Just watch them and have patience!
54|28| And tell them that the water is to be shared among them; every drink to be accounted for!
54|29| But then they prevailed upon one of their companions to take hold of and hamstrung (her).
54|30| How then was My punishment and My warnings!
54|31| We sent upon them just one loud, piercing sound, and they became as the dry twigs used by the builder of a cattle-fold.
54|32| And We have certainly made the Qur'aan easy for cultivating Firm Faith in and Remembrance of Me; but is there any to take heed?
54|33| Lot's people rejected warnings.
54|34| We did indeed send a violent storm upon them all save the family of Lot, whom We saved in the wee hours before dawn
54|35| As favour from Us. Thus do We reward a grateful one..
54|36| And he did warn them of Our Grip, but they had doubts on the veracity of the warnings!
54|37| And they did try to seduce him about his guests. So We blinded their eyes, "Taste now My punishment and My warnings!"
54|38| And the punishment decreed did befall them early in the morning.
54|39| "Taste then My punishment and My warnings!"
54|40| And We have certainly made the Qur'aan easy for cultivating Firm Faith in and Remembrance of Me; but is there any to take heed?
54|41| And warnings did come to the house of Pharao
54|42| They denied all Our Signs. Therefore We gripped them with a mighty, powerful Grip.
54|43| Are your Truth-suppressors better than those [mentioned above], or have you some immunity [decreed for them] in the Scriptures?
54|44| Or do they claim they are a united front?
54|45| The front will soon be routed and put to flight.
54|46| Moreover, the Hour (the time when the present world will end and the Hereafter begin) is their tryst with destiny, and the Hour shall be more grievous and bitter.
54|47| The sinners are indeed into error and madness.
54|48| The Day they are dragged into the Fire upon their faces to taste the feel of Hell!
54|49| We have indeed created every thing to a measure. 
54|50| And Our Command is just one! Like the twinkling of an eye!
54|51| And We did destroy the likes of you; but is there any to take heed?
54|52| And every thing they did is in the Records!
54|53| And everything, small and big, is duly recorded.
54|54| The pious indeed will be among gardens and rivers
54|55| Seated in honour near the Most Powerful King.
55|1| The Gracious One
55|2| HE has given the knowledge of the Qur'aan,
55|3| HE has created mankind.
55|4| He has taught mankind the art and skill of communicating with one another.
55|5| [HE has created] the sun and the moon on accurately measured dimentions, properties and positions. 
55|6| And the star and the tree prostrate!
55|7| And the sky He has raised high and set up the balance.
55|8| So that you breach not that balance!
55|9| And weigh things correctly, and cut not the measure short!
55|10| And He has made the earth suitable for living beings,
55|11| Therein is fruit, and the palm tree with its sheathed clusters of dates
55|12| And the grain in its husk, and the plants giving out fragrance.
55|13| So, which of your Lordճ Means of Power will you deny?
55|14| He has created mankind of clay, as [mankind make] pottery [out of it].
55|15| And He has created the invisible beings [jinns] out of radiation from fire. 
55|16| So, which of your Lordճ Means of Power will you deny?
55|17| Lord of the two Easts, and Lord of the two Wests 
55|18| So, which of your Lordճ Means of Power will you deny?
55|19| He has made the two streams of water flow side by side
55|20| Between them is a barrier which they do not transgress. 
55|21| So, which of your Lordճ Means of Power will you deny?
55|22| Out of these two come forth pearls, and precious corals.
55|23| So, which of your Lordճ Means of Power will you deny?
55|24| And it is He Who has made it possible for the ships to remain afloat like some signboards raised in the sea.
55|25| So, which of your Lordճ Means of Power will you deny?
55|26| Everything [every ship] thereon [on the sea] is passing
55|27| And, what is lasting is the Presence of your Lord, Majestic and Magnanimous!
55|28| So, which of your Lordճ Means of Power will you deny?
55|29| Every single thing in the heavens and on earth takes its orders from Him. Every day it is He Who manifests Himself gloriously [and there is none to overcome His Power!]
55|30| So, which of your Lordճ Means of Power will you deny?
55|31| We shall soon attend to you, O you sin-laden two [mankind and jinn]!
55|32| So, which of your Lordճ Means of Power will you deny?
55|33| O assembly of the jinn and mankind! If you think you can pass beyond the frontiers of the heavens and the earth, then pass! You cannot pass beyond, save by a sanction [from Allah]!.
55|34| So, which of your Lordճ Means of Power will you deny?
55|35| A trail of fire and smoke will be sent upon you, and you both will be left with no help!
55|36| So, which of your Lordճ Means of Power will you deny?
55|37| Then as the sky disintegrates it would appear a rose-coloured stretch of leather.
55|38| So, which of your Lordճ Means of Power will you deny?
55|39| And on that Day none — neither mankind nor jinn — will be questioned about his/her sins.
55|40| So, which of your Lordճ Means of Power will you deny?
55|41| All the sinners shall be recognised by distinguishing marks on them, and seized by their forelocks and their feet!
55|42| So, which of your Lordճ Means of Power will you deny?
55|43| This is the Hell that the sinners had dismissed as being a lie:
55|44| They wander to and fro between it [burning hot flame] and burning-hot water!
55|45| So, which of your Lordճ Means of Power will you deny?
55|46| And for those who fear their Lord's [Invincible] Position, two Gardens [of Paradise, each for mankind and jinn]
55|47| So, which of your Lordճ Means of Power will you deny?
55|48| [The two Gardens, each] having sections of various kinds.
55|49| So, which of your Lordճ Means of Power will you deny?
55|50| In those two [gardens] flow two springs.
55|51| So, which of your Lordճ Means of Power will you deny?
55|52| In those two [gardens] are pairs of every fruit.
55|53| So, which of your Lordճ Means of Power will you deny?
55|54| [The blessed inhabitants of the gardens] recline upon carpets lined with rich brocade; and the fruit of both those gardens is within easy reach.
55|55| So, which of your Lordճ Means of Power will you deny?
55|56| In those [gardens] are mates of modest gaze, whom neither man nor any jinn had touched ever before.
55|57| So, which of your Lordճ Means of Power will you deny?
55|58| [Those mates are] as though they were rubies and precious corals.
55|59| So, which of your Lordճ Means of Power will you deny?
55|60| Could the reward for good deeds be anything but good?
55|61| So, which of your Lordճ Means of Power will you deny?
55|62| And there are two gardens besides those two.
55|63| So, which of your Lordճ Means of Power will you deny? —
55|64| Both [gardens] deep green in colour!.
55|65| So, which of your Lordճ Means of Power will you deny?
55|66| In those two [gardens], two gushing springs!
55|67| So, which of your Lordճ Means of Power will you deny?
55|68| In both [gardens], fruits, dates and pomegranates!
55|69| So, which of your Lordճ Means of Power will you deny?
55|70| In these [gardens] are things excellent and beautiful.
55|71| So, which of your Lordճ Means of Power will you deny?
55|72| [In those gardens is companionship of] modest Houris in pavilions -
55|73| So, which of your Lordճ Means of Power will you deny?
55|74| [Houris] whom neither man nor any jinn had ever touched before
55|75| So, which of your Lordճ Means of Power will you deny?
55|76| [Dwellers of Paradise] recline upon green meadows and beautiful carpets
55|77| So, which of your Lordճ Means of Power will you deny? 
55|78| Blessed is the Name of your Lord, Majestic and Glorified!
56|1| When the Inevitable [the Hour i.e. the time when the present world will end and the Hereafter begin] happens
56|2| None would there be to deny its happening —
56|3| That will make those down (dead and buried in the dust) rise up.
56|4| When the earth will be shaken with a [terrible] shake
56|5| And the mountains will be crumbled with an [awful] crumbling.
56|6| And become scattered dust
56|7| And you shall be [divided] into three categories
56|8| Then those on the right (righteous people) — how will those on the right be!
56|9| And those on the left (unrighteous people) — how will those on the left be!
56|10| And those in the front — those will be in the front!
56|11| Those will be the near ones (near to their Lord),
56|12| In the Gardens of Bliss.
56|13| Many from the earlier peoples
56|14| And a few from later times.
56|15| On couches embedded with gold and precious stones
56|16| Reclining on them, face to face one with another
56|17| Ageless youths serving them
56|18| [Serving] with vessels, jugs and a bowl of a pure original drink
56|19| They will not have a headache or will get drunk therewit
56|20| And [they will also be served] with [a variety of] fruits to choose from
56|21| And with meat of any fowl they desire
56|22| And [there will be] Houris with beautiful eyes
56|23| [The eyes] like pearls hidden in their shells
56|24| All this theirs as a reward for what they did
56|25| No idle talk will they hear there, nor any sinful speech.
56|26| All talk being of good and peace.
56|27| And those people on the Right — how will those people on the Right be!
56|28| They shall be in the midst of trees [with fruit-bearing branches] bent down
56|29| And banana plants growing layers of fruit
56|30| And extended shade
56|31| And running water
56|32| And fruits abundant
56|33| Inexhaustive and unforbidden
56|34| And they shall be [comfortably seated on] raised couches.
56|35| We shall indeed have created them [female companions] into a new creation
56|36| And so shall have made them afres
56|37| Loving and of same age group
56|38| For the People on the Right
56|39| Many [of them will be] from the earlier peoples
56|40| And many from later times.
56|41| And those People on the Left — how will those People on the Left be!
56|42| In hot wind and boiling water
56|43| And under the shadow of black smoke
56|44| Neither cool nor soothing
56|45| They had indeed been in luxury before
56|46| And they had persisted in the Great Retraction
56|47| And they used to say, "Once we are dead and are reduced to dust and bones, shall we then be raised to a new life!?"
56|48| "And our fore-fathers too!?"
56|49| Tell them, "Indeed all — the forefathers as also the later generations!"
56|50| "They shall all be brought together on an appointed Day."
56|51| Then you — those gone astray and those that denied the Truth —
56|52| You shall all eat from the Tree of Zaqqum
56|53| And you shall fill your bellies with it;
56|54| And then you shall drink boiling water thereupon
56|55| And drink it as thirsty camels do.
56|56| This shall be their welcome drink on the Day of Judgment!
56|57| We have created you, so why do you not accept the Truth?
56|58| Do you see what you ejaculate?
56|59| Are you its creator, or are We?
56|60| We determine when and where any of you die and nothing can hinder Us
56|61| From replacing you by others like yourselves, or from transforming you into beings you know nothing about.
56|62| And you are well aware how you were brought into being the first time. Why, then, do you not sing the Creator's praises?
56|63| Do you see what you sow?
56|64| Do you cause it [seed] to grow or do We?
56|65| If We so wished, We could have reduced your harvest to rubble, and you would have been left exclaiming,
56|66| "We are certainly indeed ruined!"
56|67| "Nay; we are dispossessed!"
56|68| Have you seen the water that you drink?
56|69| Do you send it down from the rain cloud or do We?
56|70| Had We so willed, We could have made it bitter. So why are you not grateful?
56|71| Do you see the fire that you kindle?
56|72| Do you make the tree — which provided you with the firewood — grow, or do We?
56|73| We made it for a wayfarer in the desert to remember Allah [thereunder] and to get rest and refreshment.
56|74| Chant, then, the name of your Lord, the Almighty!
56|75| Then why should I [Allah] not swear by the existence of the [innumerable] stars [in the sky]?
56|76| — And it is indeed a mighty oath, if only you knew —h 
56|77| That this certainly indeed is a noble Qurաan
56|78| In a Book, well-preserved
56|79| None but the pure touch it
56|80| A bestowal from the Lord of the Worlds.
56|81| Do you, then, take this Hadeeth [Qur'aan] of such nobility lightly?
56|82| And you have made denouncing it [Qur'aan] as false, your bread and butter?
56|83| Why not then, when the last breath [of a dying man] comes up to the throat,
56|84| And you are at that time watching [helplessly]
56|85| And We are closer to him than you, and you do not see (Us)
56|86| Then if you are not to be brought to Judgment
56|87| [Why not then] you bring that [dead body] back to life if you are right?
56|88| So if he is one of those near [to Allah]
56|89| Then peace of mind and aromatic plants and Gardens of Bliss [are all his]!
56|90| And if he is one of the People on the Right
56|91| Then, "Peace to you" from the [other] Members of the Right.
56|92| And if he is one of those who deny [the Truth of this Message) and go astray
56|93| Then boiling water is his welcome drink
56|94| And scorching heat of the Fire [greets him].
56|95| That indeed is the Absolute Truth.
56|96| Chant, then, the name of your Lord, the Almighty!
57|1| Everything in the heavens and the earth extols Allah. He is the One Omnipotent, Wise.
57|2| Sovereignty over the heavens and the earth is His. He gives life and causes death. And He has power over all things.
57|3| He is the First, the Last, the Manifest and the Hidden. And He knows all things.
57|4| It was He who created the heavens and earth in six periods of time and then ascended the Throne. He knows what enters the earth and what comes out of it. He knows what comes down from the sky and what ascends into it. And He is with you wherever you are. And He sees all that you do.
57|5| Sovereignty over the heavens and the earth is His. All matters do return to Allah!
57|6| He passes the night into the day and the day into the night. And He knows all that is in the minds.
57|7| Believe in Allah and His Messenger and spend in charity from that of which He has made you trustees. Then those of you who believe and give alms — for them is a rich reward.
57|8| What is the matter with you that you do not believe in Allah — and the Messenger calls on you to believe in your Lord and has made a covenant with you — if at all you do believe in anything?
57|9| It is He who sends down clear Verses to His Devotee, so that He may take you out of the darkness into the light. And Allah is indeed Kind and Merciful to you.
57|10| What is the matter with you that you spend not for the cause of Allah, when Allah alone inherits everything that is in the heavens and the earth? Those of you who spent and fought before the Victory are not equal but higher in rank to those who spent and fought afterwards. Yet Allah has promised you all a good reward. He is aware of what you do.
57|11| Who is there to offer Allah a good loan? HE will double it for him. And he will have a rich reward.
57|12| The Day, you see the believers, men and women, their light streaming out before them and on their right, "Glad tidings for you today! Gardens with rivers flowing through them. You shall dwell therein forever. That is the highest success."
57|13| The Day, the hypocrites, men and women, say to those that had believed, "Wait for us, so we may have advantage of your light." They are told, "Turn back and look for light elsewhere." A wall then rises between them with a gate, on the inside of which is grace and mercy, and against the outside, punishment!
57|14| The hypocrites call out to the believers, "Were we not on your side?" The believers reply, "Yes, but you gave in to temptation, you wavered and doubted and you were deceived by your wishful thinking until Allah's will was done; and then the Deceiver [Satan] misled you about Allah."
57|15| So this Day no ransom can be accepted from you nor from those who suppressed the truth. Your home is the Fire; that is your companion, and it is a bad journey's end.
57|16| Has the time not come for those who believe that their minds should becaome humble in the remembrance of Allah and should submit to what is sent down [from Him] of the Truth, and that they should not become like those who were given the Book before them, whose minds with the passage of time became hardened and many of whom were depraved?
57|17| Know that Allah brings the earth back to life after its death. We have verily made Our Verses/signs clear to you, so that you may understand.
57|18| Indeed, the truthful men and the truthful women, who give a good loan to Allah, shall have it [the loan] doubled for them, and they shall have a rich reward.
57|19| Those who believe in Allah and His Messengers are the truthful ones and the witnesses in the sight of their Lord. They shall have their reward and their light. But those who suppress the Truth and reject Our signs — they shall be inmates of the Hell.
57|20| Beware! The life of this world is only a game and a pastime, a show, and mutual boasting and out-rivaling each other in riches and children. It is like the growth of vegetation after the rain, which makes the skeptic wonder, but which then withers away, turns yellow and becomes worthless stubble. And in the Hereafter, severe punishment, forgiveness from Allah and His Pleasure! And the life of this world is nothing but means of deception.
57|21| Vie with one another for your Lord's forgiveness and for Paradise, vast as heaven and earth and readied for those who believe in Allah and His Messengers. Such is Allah's bounty. He bestows it upon whom He wills. And Allah is the Fountainhead of the greatest bounty.
57|22| No affliction affects the earth or your own selves unless recorded in a Book, before We clear it. That is indeed easy for Allah!
57|23| So, may you not despair over what has eluded you, nor exult over what He has given you. And Allah loves not any self-conceited boaster.
57|24| Those [self-conceited boasters] who are miserly themselves, and urge others to be miserly! He who turns his back [from what Allah has ordained] should remember that Allah alone is self-sufficient and worthy of all praise.
57|25| We did send Our messengers with clear proofs and We sent down with them the Book and the Balance [code of conduct] for men to act in all fairness. And We sent down the iron — of great inherent capacity as weapon of destruction as well as of benefits for mankind — so that Allah might know who would stand up for Him — without seeing Him — and His messengers.h Allah is Powerful, Omnipotent!
57|26| And We did send Noah and Abraham and bestowed the prophethood and the Book upon men among their offspring. Some of the offspring were rightly guided, but many were depraved.
57|27| Then, in their wake, We followed with [others of] Our Messengers and We followed with Jesus, son of Mary. And We gave him the Injeel [Gospel] and created compassion and mercy in the minds of those who followed him. And they innovated monasticism — We did not prescribe it for them — just to please Allah. But then, they did not observe it the way it should have been observed. So We gave those who believed their reward. And many of them were depraved.
57|28| O those who believe! Fear Allah and believe in His messenger. He will show mercy upon you in double measure, provide a light for you to walk in, and forgive you. He is Forgiving, Merciful!
57|29| [Allah forgives the believers and is merciful to them] so that the People of the Book [Jews and Christians] should know that they have no power whatsoever over Allah's bounty and that His bounty is entirely in His Hand. He bestows it upon whom He wills. And Allah is the Fountainhead of the greatest bounty.
58|1| Allah has surely listened to what is said by the woman who disputeswith you (Muhammad) concerning her husband, and complains to Allah. And Allah listens to your dialogue. Allah does indeed hear, see everything.
58|2| Those of you who abstain from having conjugal relations with their wives by pronouncing them as their mothers (should know) they are not their mothers. None but those who gave them birth are their mothers. What they utter is most certainly wrong and a lie. And Allah is certainly indeed Lenient, Forgiving.
58|3| And those of you who abstain from having conjugal relations with their wives by pronouncing them as their mothers and afterward would go back on what they said — then freeing of a neck [slave] before they touch each other is what you are exhorted to do! And Allah is aware what you do.
58|4| Then he who finds not (a slave to free), let him fast for two successive months before they [husband and wife] touch each other. And for him who is unable to do so, the feeding of sixty needy persons [is the penance]. This, in order that you may believe in Allah and His Messenger. And this is the Law prescribed by Allah. And for those who suppress the Truth, there is a painful punishment.
58|5| Those indeed who work against Allah and His Messenger will be destroyed as those before them were. And We have surely sent down clear Verses/signs. And for those who suppress the Truth, a disgraceful punishment
58|6| On the Day when Allah will raise them all and give them an account of what they had done. Allah would have recorded it and they would have forgotten it. And Allah is Witness to all things.
58|7| Do you not see that Allah knows all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth? No three persons confer but He is the Fourth among them, nor five, but He is the Sixth. nor less or more but He is with them wherever they may be. And afterward, on the Day of Resurrection, He will give an account to them of all their deeds. Allah does indeed know all things!
58|8| Have thou not seen those to whom conspiracy was forbidden and who later returned to what they had been forbidden and indulged in conspiracy for crime and hostility and for rebelling against the Messenger? And when they come to you they greet you with a greeting wherewith Allah greets you not, and they say to themselves, "Why should Allah not punish us for what we say?" Hell will suffice them; they will burn therein. It will be an evil destination!
58|9| O you who believe! When you confer in secrecy, confer not for crime and hostility and for rebelling against the Messenger, but confer for righteousness and piety. And fear Allah, unto whom you will be gathered.
58|10| The conspiracy of the Satan is only to cause grief to those who believe; but he can harm them not at all unless by Allah's leave. And in Allah, then, let the believers put their trust.
58|11| O you who believe! When you are asked to make room in assemblies, then do make room. Allah will make room for you. And when asked to rise up, do rise up! Allah will exalt those who believe among you, and those endowed with knowledge, to high ranks. Allah is Aware of what you do.
58|12| O you who believe! When you hold a private talk with the Messenger, give a tax [sadaqah ] before your talk. That is better and purer for you. But if you do not have the means, then Allah is indeed Forgiving, Merciful!
58|13| Are you wary of giving sadaqaat before having private talks with the Messenger? Then, when you give it not and Allah has forgiven you, establish the Prayer and give the Zakaat and obey Allah and His Messenger. And Allah is Aware of what you do.
58|14| Have you not seen those who befriend a community with whom Allah is angry? They are neither of you nor of them, and they knowingly swear by what is false.
58|15| Allah has prepared a severe punishment for them. What they have been doing is evil indeed!
58|16| They take their oaths as their shelter and turn others away from Allah's Path. So then they shall have a disgraceful punishment.
58|17| Neither their wealth nor their children will be of any avail to them against Allah. They are the ones to inhabit the Fire, therein to abide.
58|18| The Day Allah will resurrect them all, they will swear to Him as they swear to you and think they are standing on something solid. Are they indeed not those who are the liars? 
58|19| The Satan has overpowered them and so has caused them forget remembrance of Allah. They are the Satan's party. Is not Satan's party indeed the losers?
58|20| Those who work against Allah and His Messenger, those will be the ones amongst the most humiliated!
58|21| Allah decreed, "I shall verily prevail — I and My Messengers!" Allah is indeed Strong, Omnipotent.
58|22| You will not find any community, believing in Allah and the Last Day, loving those who work against Allah and His Messenger, even though they be their fathers or their sons or their brethren or their [other] relatives. That [community] is such that He has decreed Faith in their minds and has strengthened them with a Spirit from Him. And He will admit them into Gardens underneath which rivers flow, wherein they will abide. Allah is pleased with them, and they are pleased with Him. Those are the ones in Allah's Party. Is it not members of Allah's Party that indeed are successful?
59|1| Everything in the heavens and on the earth extols Allah. He is the One Omnipotent, Wise.
59|2| It was He who drove those who suppressed the Truth from among the People of the Book out of their homes at an early stage of the siege. You did not think they would go, and they thought their strongholds would defend them against Allah. But Allah came upon them from an unexpected quarter and cast such terror into their minds that their houses were pulled down by their own hands as well as by the hands of the believers. Learn a lesson, then, O you endowed with insight!
59|3| Had not Allah decreed the exile for them, He would surely have punished them [like those ancient peoples of Noah, AAad and Thamood were] in this world. And they shall [of course] have the punishment by the Fire in the Hereafter.
59|4| That is because they cut themselves off from Allah and His Messenger. And anyone who cuts himself off from Allah — then [that one should know that] Allah is indeed severe in giving punishment.
59|5| The trees you cut down or left standing on their roots — it was all by Allah's leave, so that He might disgrace the depraved ones. 
59|6| And for that which Allah has given to His Messenger from them [the Jews against whom the Muslims had conducted the military operation], you spurred neither horse nor camel against them, but Allah gives power to His Messengers over whom He wills. And Allah has power over all things.
59|7| That which Allah has given to His Messenger from the inhabitants of that [Jewish] settlement is for Allah and for the Messenger and for his close relatives and for orphans and the needy and the wayfarer, so that wealth does not get circulated only within the rich amongst you. Whatever the Messenger gives you, take it; and whatever he does not give you, abstain from it! Fear Allah; Allah is indeed severe in giving punishment!
59|8| It [such windfall gain] is for the poor refugees driven from their homes and possessions. They seek favour and pleasure of Allah, and they support Allah and His Messenger. Those are the truthful ones.
59|9| Those who were settled in the city [Madinah] and had become believers before them [the refugees], love those who took refuge with them, and harbour no desire in their minds for what has been given [to the refugees]. They give them preference over themselves, even when they are themselves poor. And one who is protected against stinginess of one's own self — such are the ones truly successful.
59|10| And those who came after them say, "Our Lord! Forgive us and forgive our brothers who preceded us in the faith and let our minds have no malice towards those who believe. Our Lord! You are indeed Kind and Merciful."
59|11| Have you seen those who act hypocritically? They say to those who suppress the Truth from among the People of the Book, "If you are driven out we shall surely go out with you. And we shall not follow anyone ever against you. And if you are attacked, we shall help you." Allah bears witness that they are certainly indeed liars.
59|12| If they [the Jews] are driven out, they [hypocrites] will certainly not go with them. And if they [the former] are attacked, they [the latter] will not help them. And even if the hypocrites go to help the Jews, the former will turn their backs in flight, and then the latter will not get any help.
59|13| They are more afraid of you in their minds than of Allah. That is because they are a people who understand not.
59|14| They will fight you not all together but from within fortified strongholds or from behind walls. There is much animosity within them. You think they are united, but their hearts are divided. That is because they are unreasonable people.
59|15| Like those who [had to leave] just before them, they have tasted the evil consequences of their doings. And they shall have a painful punishment.
59|16| [The hypocrites are] like the Satan, when he tells man to suppress the Truth! But when man suppresses the Truth, he [Satan] says, "I do disassociate myself from you; I do fear Allah, the Lord of the Universe."
59|17| Then, the end of them both [man suppressing the Truth and the Satan] will be that they will be in the Fire, therein to abide. And that is the reward of evil-doers.
59|18| O those who believe! Fear Allah, and let everyone look forward to what one has sent ahead for the morrow [Hereafter]. And do fear Allah! Allah is indeed aware of all that you do.
59|19| And be not like those who forgot Allah, and so He caused them to forget themselves [their own true interests]. It is they who are the depraved ones.
59|20| People of the Fire and people of the Paradise are not equal. People of the Paradise are the winners.
59|21| Had We sent down this Quran on a mountain, you would certainly have seen it simply cracking down, out of the fear of Allah. And We give these examples for mankind to think over.
59|22| Allah is He save Whom there is no god — the knower of the unseen and the seen. He is the One Gracious, Merciful.
59|23| Allah is He save Whom there is no god — the Sovereign, the Pure, the Source of peace and security, the Guardian, the Omnipotent, the One Who can compel anything, the Supreme! Allah is far above what they worship besides Him.
59|24| Allah is He Who creates, originates, gives shape! His are the most excellent names. Everything in the heavens and the earth sings His Glory. He is the One Omnipotent, Wise.
60|1| O you who believe! Do not take My enemies — and your enemies — as close friends, treating them with affection. And they are bent on suppressing whatever Truth that has come to you. [And] they have driven the Messenger and you yourselves away, because you believe in Allah, your Lord! If you have set out to strive in My cause, seeking My pleasure, [then do not take them for your friends,] inclining affectionately towards them! And I am aware of what you conceal and of what you declare. And any of you who has done this [inclining affectionately towards enemies of Allah] — then he has surely strayed from the Right Path.
60|2| If they gain an upper hand over you, they would become your [open] foes. And they would stretch their hands and their tongues against you with evil intent. And they wish you to suppress the Truth.
60|3| Neither your relatives nor your children will be of any benefit to you on Resurrection Day. Allah will decide matters in between you. And He sees all that you do.
60|4| You did surely have a good example in Abraham and those who followed him, when they said to their people, "We have indeed nothing to do with you and with what you worship besides Allah. We renounce you. And between us and you enmity and hatred has arisen, to last until such a time as you come to believe in Allah, the One and Only! — Abraham's saying to his father, `I shall indeed pray for Allah's forgiveness for you, and I have it not in my power to obtain anything from Allah for you' being an exception — Our Lord! In You do we trust, and to You do we turn, and to You is the journey's end!"
60|5| "Our Lord! Make us not an object of trial for those who suppress the Truth. And forgive us our sins, our Lord! You indeed are Omnipotent, Wise!"
60|6| In them [Abraham and his companions], indeed, you have a good example for everyone who looks forward to Allah and the Last Day. And any, who turns away [from this divine admonition], [should know that] Allah is the One Self-sufficient, the One Praiseworthy."
60|7| It may well be that Allah will bring about affection between you [believers] and some of those whom you [now] are on inimical terms with. And, Allah has all the power! And Allah is Forgiving, Merciful!
60|8| Allah does not forbid you from showing kindness to and from behaving with full equity towards those [of the non-believers] as do not fight against you because of [your] faith, nor drive you out from your homelands. Allah does indeed love those who act equitably.
60|9| Allah forbids you from getting close in friendship only with such as fight against you because of [your] faith, and drive you out, and aid and abet in driving you out, from your homelands. And those [among you] who lean towards them in friendship — those then are the wicked ones!
60|10| O you who believe! When believing women — Allah knows how good (or bad) their belief is — come to you as refugees, put them to a test. And if you have thus ascertained that they are believers, return them not to the suppressors of the Truth. These [the refugee women] are not lawful to the non-believers, nor are the latter lawful to the former. And return to them [the non-believers] what they had spent [on their former wives by way of mehr or obligatory marriage gift]. And you will be committing no sin if you then marry them after giving them their mehr. And hold not to the marriage-tie with women who continue to suppress the truth, and you may ask for the return of mehr you had spent on them. And, certainly, the non- believers [whose wives have come over to you] have the right to demand the mehr they had spent. That is Allah's Decree! He decrees on matters between you. And Allah knows all; He is wise.
60|11| And if you lose anything, from your dues, to the suppressors of the Truth, then, as and when you get the opportunity, give to those whose wives have gone away the equivalent of what they had spent [on their wives by way of mehr]. And fear Allah, in whom you believe!
60|12| O Prophet! Whenever believing women come to you to pledge to you that they would worship none but Allah, and would not steal, and would not commit adultery, and would not kill their children, and would not indulge in any falsehood devised between their hands and their feet [self-devised], and would not disobey you in doing what is right, then accept their pledge of allegiance, and pray to Allah to forgive them. Allah is indeed Forgiving, Merciful.
60|13| O you who believe! Lean not in friendship towards people who have incurred Allah's wrath! They have no hopes at all in a life to come in the Hereafter just as the suppressors of the Truth from among those in the graves have no hopes of that life.
61|1| Everything that is in the heavens and the earth glorifies Allah. And He is the One Omnipotent, Wise.
61|2| O you who believe! Why do you say what you yourself do not do?
61|3| It is a greatly hateful behaviour in the sight of Allah that you say what you yourself do not do.
61|4| Allah does indeed love them who fight for His cause, in battle array, as if they were a solid structure.
61|5| And when Moses said to his people, "O my people! Why do you cause hurt to me, when you do know that I am Allah's Messenger to you?" So when they deviated, Allah deviated their minds. And Allah guides not the wicked people.
61|6| And when Jesus son of Mary said, "O Children of Israel! I am the Messenger of Allah to you confirming what was there in the Torah before me and giving good tidings of a Messenger to come after me. His name is to be Ahmed [Praised One]." Yet when he has come to them with clear evidences, they say, "This is magic manifest!"
61|7| And who does greater wrong than he who concocts a lie against Allah when he is invited to accept Islam as his Way of Life? And Allah guides not wrong-doing people.
61|8| They wish they could extinguish Allah's light with their mouths, and Allah perfects His light however much the suppressors of the Truth may dislike.
61|9| It is He Who has sent His Messenger with the guidance and the right way of life [Islam], that He may make it prevail over all other ways of life, however much those who worship others besides Allah may dislike.
61|10| O you who believe! Shall I familiarise you with a trade that will save you from a painful punishment?
61|11| Believe in Allah and His Messenger, and strive for the cause of Allah with your wealth and your lives. That is, if you but knew, what is good for you!
61|12| He will forgive you your sins and admit you into Gardens underneath which rivers flow. And [He will give you] clean good dwellings in Gardens of Eden. That is the highest success.
61|13| And (He will give you) another thing which you love: help from Allah and victory near at hand [in this world itself] ! And give the good news to the believers.
61|14| O you who believe! Be helpers of Allah, like when Jesus son of Mary asked the disciples, "Who are my helpers in the cause of Allah?" they said, "We are Allah's helpers." Then a section of the Children of Israel believed, and a section denied! Then We supported those who believed against their foe, and they [the believers] prevailed.
62|1| Everything that is in the heavens and the earth glorifies Allah, the One Sovereign, Holy, Omnipotent, Wise.
62|2| He it is who has raised among the Gentiles a Messenger, from among themselves, who recites His Verses to them, and purifies them, and teaches them the Book and the Wisdom. And, before that, they had indeed been in manifest error.
62|3| And [the Messenger for] others, from among them [the Gentiles], who have not yet joined them. HE is the One Omnipotent, Wise.
62|4| That is Allah's Favour; He bestows it on whom He pleases. And Allah is the greatest Bistower of Favours.
62|5| Those who were given the responsibility of bearing [following the instructions in] the Torah, but did not do so are like an ass carrying a load of books. Terrible is the example of those who deny Allah's signs/Verses! And Allah does not guide the wicked people.
62|6| Say, "O you Jews! If you presume that you, of all people, are the ones close to Allah, then do long for death, if what you say is true."
62|7| They will not wish for it [death] ever, because of what their hands have sent ahead! And Allah does well know the wicked people.
62|8| Say, "The death you run away from will indeed meet you. And then you will be reverted to the Knower of the unseen and the seen. HE will then inform you of what you have been doing."
62|9| O you who believe! When call to the prayer on Friday is sounded, hasten to [places of worship] for remembrance of Allah and leave the worldly business. That is good for you, if you but knew it!
62|10| Then as the prayer is ended, spread out on the earth to seek some of Allah's favours. And remember Allah much, so that you achieve success.
62|11| And when they see something of commercial or entertaining interest to them, they break away to go to it and leave you standing. Say, "What is with Allah is far better than any entertainment or merchandise. And Allah is the Best Provider."
63|1| When the hypocrites come to you, they say, "We bear witness that you certainly are a Messenger of Allah!" And Allah knows that you certainly are His Messenger. And Allah bears witness that the hypocrites are certainly indeed false. 
63|2| They take cover of their oaths to turn others away from Allah's Path. It is indeed evil what they do!
63|3| That is because they believe, and then suppress the Truth! Consequently, a seal has been set on their minds so that they can no longer understand.
63|4| And when you see them, their body language impresses you. And when they speak, you do listen to what they say. As if they were propped up puppets! They think that every cry is [directed] upon them. They are the real enemies, so beware of them! Allah's curse be on them! How very false are they!
63|5| And when they are told, "Come, Allah's Messenger will pray to Allah that you be forgiven", they shake their heads! And you see them turning arrogantly away.
63|6| It is all the same for them whether you pray that they be forgiven or you do not pray; Allah will not forgive them! Allah does indeed not give guidance to the transgressors.
63|7| It is they who say, "Do not spend anything on those who are with Allah's Messenger, until they break away from him." And Allah's are the treasures of the heavens and the earth. But the hypocrites do not understand this truth.
63|8| They say, "If we do return to the City, the honourable ones will surely drive out therefrom the downtrodden!" And all honour belongs to Allah, and to His Messenger, and to those who believe. But this, the hypocrites do not know!
63|9| O you who believe! Let not your wealth or your children distract you from remembrance of Allah. And if any do that — it is they, they who are the ones doomed!
63|10| And spend out of what We have provided for you, before the death approaches any of you, and that one then says, "My Lord! If only You would give me a little more time, so that I could pay due Sadaqah and be among the righteous!"
63|11| But Allah does not give a human being more time when his term expires. And Allah is well aware of what you do!
64|1| Everything that is in the heavens and the earth glorifies Allah. His is the Sovereignty and His, the praise. And He is the One able to do anything.
64|2| He is the One Who created you. Then there are those of you who suppress the Truth and those who believe! And Allah sees what you do.
64|3| He created the heavens and the earth and was His sole right to create. And He gave you shape and then made your shapes good. And to Him is the final destination.
64|4| He knows all that is in the heavens and the earth, and He knows what you conceal and what you reveal. And Allah is aware of what is in the minds.
64|5| Has not the history of those who suppressed the Truth in the past, and then tasted the consequences of their conduct, reached you? And a painful punishment is in store for them!
64|6| That is because their Messengers (from Allah) had come to them with clear signs, but they said, "Shall a mere human guide us?" So they suppressed the Truth and turned away! And Allah is in no need of anyone or anything. And Allah is Self-sufficient, Embodiment of Praise.
64|7| Those who suppress the Truth opine that they will not be raised again to life after death. Say, "Yes, verily, and by my Lord, you will be raised again! And then you will be told what you had done. And that is easy for Allah."
64|8| So believe in Allah and His Messenger and the light [Qur'aan] which We have sent down. And Allah is well aware of what you do.
64|9| The day He gathers you for the Day of Assembly [Resurrection], that will be a day of mutual disillusion. And he who believes in Allah and does good deeds, He [Allah] will efface his evil deeds from his account and admit him to Gardens underneath which rivers flow. Such people will abide therein for ever. That is the highest success.
64|10| And those who suppress the Truth and reject Our Verses/signs — they shall be inmates of the Fire. They shall abide therein. And it is a bad end to any journey!
64|11| No calamity befalls save by Allah's leave. And he who believes in Allah — He [Allah] guides his mind. And Allah knows all things.
64|12| And obey Allah and obey His Messenger ! But if you turn away, then the responsibility on Our Messenger is only to convey the Message plainly.
64|13| Allah — there is no god save Him. And in Allah, then, let the believers put their trust.
64|14| O you who believe! There indeed are enemies to you among your wives and your children. So beware of them! And if you forgive and overlook and seek Allah's forgiveness for them, then Allah is indeed Forgiving, Merciful.
64|15| Your wealth and your children are objects of trial only, for you. And with Allah there is a great reward. 
64|16| So fear Allah as best you can! And listen to, and obey, and spend on what is good for you! And one who is protected against stinginess of one's own self — such are the ones truly successful.
64|17| If you lend a good loan to Allah, He will double it for you and will forgive you! And Allah is Appreciative of gratitude, Kind.
64|18| [Allah is] Knower of the Invisible and the Visible, the Omnipotent, Wise.
65|1| O Prophet! When any of you men divorce your wives, divorce them with regard to their waiting period. And keep proper count of the period, and fear Allah, your Lord. Drive them not out of their homes [during the waiting period], nor should they themselves leave unless they openly commit an immoral act. And these are the bounds set by Allah. He who transgresses Allah's bounds, wrongs himself. You never know, Allah may well bring about some new situation after that!
65|2| Then when their waiting term gets over, either retain them [as wives] honourably or part with them in fair manner. Call to witness two reliable men from among you and keep your testimony upright for Allah. This admonition is given to one who believes in Allah and the Last Day. And one who fears Allah, He will make for him a way out [of his difficulties].
65|3| And Allah will provide for him [who fears Him] from an unexpected source. And one who puts his trust in Him — Allah suffices for that one. Allah does indeed bring to fruition what He decrees. He has surely set a measure for all things.
65|4| And, if you have any doubt in the case of those of your wives who have either passed the age of menstruation or [for any other medical reason] not menstruating, their waiting period is three months. The waiting period of those who are pregnant is until they deliver their burden [give birth]. Allah makes His Decrees easy for those who fear Him.
65|5| That is the Decree Allah has sent down to you. He who fears Allah, he shall have his evil deeds effaced from him and the reward enriched for him.
65|6| Allow the women [undergoing a waiting period] to live the same way you yourselves live as per your means. And harass them not to make their lives difficult. If they are pregnant, bear their expenses until they deliver. If they suckle your infants, pay them for it. Discuss things among yourselves honestly and honourably. And if you cannot bear with each other, let another woman suckle the infants for you.
65|7| May man of means spend in accordance with his means. And may him, with restricted resources, spend in accordance with what Allah has given him. Allah burdens not any person with more than what He has given him. Allah will soon bring about ease after hardship.
65|8| And how many a village/town did haughtily disregard the Decree of its Lord and His Messengers? And We sternly took it to account and punished it severely.
65|9| So it [village/town] tasted the evil consequences of its conduct; and its conduct ended in ruin.
65|10| Allah has prepared a severe punishment for them. So, O men of understanding, who believe, fear Allah! Surely, Allah has sent down to you a Reminder [the Qur'aan]
65|11| [Through] a Messenger who conveys to you Allah's clear Verses, so that he might take those, who believe and do good deeds, out of darkness into light. Allah will admit the one who believes in Him and does good deeds into Gardens underneath which rivers flow, where such people will remain forever. Allah has surely made excellent provision for such a one.
65|12| It is Allah who created the seven heavens and, of the earth, the like thereof. He sends His Decree down among them, so that you may know that Allah has power over all things, and that He does encompass all things with His knowledge.
66|1| O Prophet! Why do you make unlawful what Allah has made lawful to you, seeking pleasure of your wives? And Allah is Forgiving, Merciful!
66|2| Allah does enjoin upon you to deal with your oaths properly. And Allah is your Lordh Supreme, and He is the One Knowledgeable, Wise.
66|3| And the Prophet once told something in confidence to one of his wives. She then divulged it [to another wife]. And Allah made this known to him. He [the Prophet] let her know a part of it [what Allah had told him] and he wit eld a part. And no sooner he let her know partially what Allah had told him, she asked, "Who has told you this!?" He replied, "The One, Knowledgeable and Aware of everything, has told me." 
66|4| Would that you two [Prophet's wives concerned in this episode] turn to Allah in repentance, for the minds of both of you are so inclined! And if you help each other against him [the Prophet, know that] Allah Himself is his Protector, and [consequently] Gabriel, all the righteous among the believers, and all the other angels will then come to his aid.
66|5| Were he [the Prophet] to divorce you, Allah might well give him in your stead spouses better than you — women who surrender themselves to Allah, truly believe in Him, devoutly obey His will, turn to Him in repentance, worship Him alone, and who are dedicated — be they previously married or virgins.
66|6| O you who believe! Shield yourselves and your families from Fire that is fuelled by human beings and stones and guarded by Angels awesome and severe. They [the Angels] do not disobey Allah in whatever He commands them, and they do whatever they are ordered to do.
66|7| O you who suppress the Truth! Make no excuses today [Resurrection Day]. You are only being recompensed [this Day] for what you had been doing [in the world].
66|8| O you who believe! Turn to Allah in sincere repentance. It may well be that your Lord will efface from you your bad deeds, and will admit you into gardens underneath which rivers flow on a Day on which Allah will not put the Prophet, and those who believe with him, to any shame. Their light will run ahead of them, and on their right. They will pray, "O our Lord! Make this light of ours shine for us forever, and forgive us our sins. YOU do indeed have power over all things!"
66|9| O Prophet! Wage a struggle against [any bad influence or deed from] the suppressors of the Truth and the hypocrites, and deal strictly with them. And [if they do not repent,] their abode shall be Hell — and how vile a journey's end!
66|10| For those who suppress the Truth, Allah gives examples of the wives of Noah and Lot. They were under two of Our righteous subjects, and each betrayed her respective husband. And so, neither [of the two husbands] would be of any avail to the two women when they would be told [on Judgment Day], "Enter the Fire with all the other entrants therein!"
66|11| And for those who believe, Allah gives example of Pharaoh's wife as she prayed, "My Lord! Build for me a mansion close to you in the Paradise. And save me from Pharaoh and his deeds, and save me from all evil people!"
66|12| And Mary, daughter of Imran! She guarded her chastity, and We breathed into it of Our spirit. And she was testimony to the truth of her Lord's words and His Books. And she was one of those totally devoted to Allah.
67|1| Blessed is He in Whose hand is the Sovereignty! And He has power over all things.
67|2| The One Who has created the death and the life to test which of you is good in conduct. And He is the One Omnipotent, Forgiving.
67|3| The One Who has created seven heavens one over another. You shall not see anything amiss in the creation of the Gracious One! Then look again: can you see any incongruities?
67|4| Then look again and yet again, your sight will return to you humbled and tired.
67|5| And verily We have adorned the heaven near [the earth] with lamps [stars and planets], and We have made it a stonewall for the devils [beyond which they cannot proceed]. And We have prepared for them punishment of the blazing Fire [Hell].
67|6| And for those who suppress their belief in their Lord there is the punishment of Hell. And it is a bad journey's end!
67|7| When they are flung therein they hear it roar as it boils up.
67|8| As if it [Hell] would burst with rage! Whenever a crowd [of wicked people] is thrown therein the wardens thereof ask them, "Had not anyone come to warn you?"
67|9| They say, "Yes, verily, a warner did come to us, but we refused to believe him and said, `Allah has not sent down anything, you are not but under a great delusion!'"
67|10| And they say, "Had we but listened or had sense, we would not now have been among the dwellers in the blazing Fire."
67|11| So they acknowledge their sins! And so the dwellers in the blazing Fire are done away with!
67|12| Those who fear their Lord without seeing Him — for them is forgiveness and a great reward!
67|13| And whether you conceal your opinion or proclaim it, He [Allah] does indeed know all that is in the minds.
67|14| Would He not know what He created!? And He is the One Subtle, Aware.
67|15| He it is Who has made the earth subservient to you, so walk through its winding paths and eat of what He has provided for. And to Him will the Resurrection be!
67|16| Are you sure that One in the heaven will not cause the earth to swallow you while it is in a state of convulsion?
67|17| Or are you sure that the One in the heaven will not let loose on you a hurricane? But you shall soon know how terribly true My warning was!
67|18| And verily those before them refused to believe! And how severe in effect was My forsaking them!!
67|19| Do they not see the birds above them spreading and folding their wings? Holds them up none but the Gracious One! HE does indeed look to all things.
67|20| Who is it — other than the Gracious One — that will be like an army to help you out? Those who suppress the Truth are labouring under nothing but illusion.
67|21| Who is it that will provide for you if He should wit old His provision? Nay, but they are given to pride and aversion.
67|22| Is he who walks falling on his face [stumbling] better guided, or he who walks upright on a straight road?
67|23| Say, "He it is who has brought you into being, and has endowed you with the hearing, the sights and the intellect. But you are seldom grateful!"
67|24| Say, "He it is Who multiplied you on the earth, and to Him you shall be gathered."
67|25| And they ask, "When will this promise be fulfilled, if what you say is true?"
67|26| Say, "That knowledge is only with Allah, and I am but a plain warner."
67|27| Then as they see it close to them [in the Hereafter], the faces of those who suppress the Truth will be distraught, and it will be said to them, "This is what you had been asking for!"
67|28| Say, "Do you see, whether Allah causes me (Muhammad) and those with me to perish or He bestows mercy upon us, [it is His Will?]. But, then, who will protect those who suppress the Truth from a painful punishment!?"h 
67|29| Say, "He is the Gracious One. In Him we believe and in Him we put our trust. And you will soon know who is clearly astray."
67|30| Say, "Do you see if your waters should sink deep into the ground, who then could bring you flowing water?" 
68|1| Noon By the pen, and by what they write!
68|2| By your Lord's grace, you [Prophet Muhammad] are not mad.
68|3| And, indeed, a never ending reward is there for you.
68|4| And, indeed, you have a truly great character!
68|5| Soon you will see, and so they will
68|6| As to who of you is on trial.
68|7| Your Lord does indeed know who has strayed from His Path, and He knows those on right guidance.
68|8| Obey not then those who deny the Truth.
68|9| They want you to compromise and then they will compromise. 
68|10| And obey not any mean swearer of oaths
68|11| Or [obey not] any gossip-monger going about with malicious gossip.
68|12| Or [obey not] one who places obstacles in the way of good being done, transgressing with criminal intent
68|13| [And obey not] one who is cruel, besides being of no use to society
68|14| Just because he has wealth and sons.
68|15| When Our Verses are recited to him, he says, "These are just ancient tales."
68|16| Soon We will brand him on the nose [disgrace him].
68|17| We have indeed tried them as we tried the owners of the garden, who vowed to harvest its fruits the next morning
68|18| And they made no exception.
68|19| And then a calamity from your Lord befell it [the garden] as they slept!
68|20| And by morning it lay barren as if already harvested.
68|21| And at dawn, they [the owners] called each other out.
68|22| "Reach your field early, to gather all your fruits!"
68|23| And so they proceeded, whispering to one another,
68|24| "Let no pauper enter the garden and trouble you today."
68|25| And they went early, thinking they had the power to be firm.
68|26| Then as they saw it, they said, "We must have lost our way."
68|27| "But, [no], utterly deprived are we!"
68|28| A moderate among them said, "Had I not asked you to invoke divine mercy and blessings?"
68|29| They said, "Glory be to our Lord! We have indeed been wrong."
68|30| Then they started blaming one another.
68|31| They said, "Alas for us, we did indeed transgress!"
68|32| "May be our Lord will give us a garden better than this; we do indeed turn to Him now."
68|33| Such is the punishment [in this life]! And the punishment of the life to come is certainly more severe, if only they knew!
68|34| Indeed, for those who fear Allah, there will be the gardens of bliss with their Lord!
68|35| Would We then treat the believers like the sinners!?
68|36| What is the matter with you? How ill you judge!
68|37| Have you any book wherein you learn
68|38| That you will definitey have therein whatever you choose?
68|39| Or do you have Our solemn pledges, binding upon Us till the Day of Resurrection, that you shall have whatever you order?
68|40| Ask which of them will vouch for that [that there indeed are such solemn pledges divinely made]!
68|41| Or do they worship gods besides Allah? Let them then come up with their other gods, if what they say be true!
68|42| The Day the shin is laid bare, they will be called upon to prostrate themselves, but they will not be able to do so.
68|43| Their glances will be downcast and ignominy shall cover them; they were called upon to prostrate [in this world], when they were safe and sound, [but they did not obey].
68|44| So leave to Me those who reject this Message. We shall rein them in, by degrees, from whence they know not.
68|45| And I (Allah) give them a long rope. Indeed, My plan is fool-proof.
68|46| Or do you demand some reward from them that would weigh them down with debt?
68|47| Or, do they possess the knowledge of the unseen which they write down?
68|48| So wait patiently for your Lord's decree! And be not like the companion of the fish, calling out in distress. 
68|49| Had not his Lord's favour taken hold of him [Prophet Jonas], he would have surely been flung away in disgrace upon that desolate shore.
68|50| His Lord then chose him and made him one of the righteous men.
68|51| And when those who suppress the truth hear the Admonition [Qur'aan], they would almost make you stumble with their eyes! And they say, "He is indeed mad."
68|52| And it [Qur'aan] is not but an Admonition for all!
69|1| The Inevitable!
69|2| What is the Inevitable?
69|3| And what do you know what the Inevitable is?
69|4| The Thamood and the AAad denied possibility of the Striking Calamity happening.
69|5| Then as for Thamood, they were destroyed by an overpowering blast!h 
69|6| And as for the AAad, they were destroyed by a furious, violent storm.
69|7| HE let it [storm] loose upon them for seven nights and eight days in succession. You would have seen the people there then lying prostrate, as though they were uprooted trunks of palm trees.
69|8| Do you now see any trace of them?
69|9| And Pharaoh and those before him and the people of the overturned habitations [the people of Lot] committed the same sin.
69|10| And they followed not the Messenger of their Lord! So He seized them severely.
69|11| When the water rose to great heights indeed, We bore you upon a floating vessel.h 
69|12| So as to make it for you an event to remember, and so that an attentive ear commits it to memory.
69|13| So when the Trumpet is blown with a single blow
69|14| And the earth and the mountains are lifted and then crushed at one stroke,
69|15| On that Day shall the Event [the Hereafter, the Inevitable referred to in Verse above] come to pass;
69|16| And the sky will be rent asunder, so it becomes loose that Day,
69|17| And the angels will be at its edges. And eight of them will carry the Throne of your Lord that Day.
69|18| That Day you shall be presented (before Allah) and no secret of yours shall remain hidden.
69|19| He then, whose record will be given to him in his right hand, will say, "Here, read this record of mine!"
69|20| "I did indeed expect that I would come face to face with my record."
69|21| He shall then be living a life of bliss
69|22| In a lofty Garden
69|23| Clusters of its fruits will be within reach.
69|24| "Eat and drink to your satisfaction on account of what you did in the days gone by."
69|25| And he, whose Record will be given to him in his left hand, will say, "Would that I had never been given my Record!"
69|26| "And had I not come to know my account!"
69|27| "Oh! Would that [death in the worldly life] be the end of me!"
69|28| "My wealth has been of no use to me!"
69|29| "My authority is gone from me!"
69|30| [Divine Order for him whose record is given in his left hand:] Seize him and shackle him!
69|31| Then burn him in the Blazing Fire!
69|32| Then tie him to a chain, seventy cubits long!
69|33| He would not believe in Allah, the Almighty!
69|34| And he would feel no urge to feed the poor.
69|35| And so no friend for him here today!
69|36| And no food except from discharged wastes.
69|37| Eat it not but the sinners.
69|38| But no! I swear by what you see
69|39| And by what you do not see
69|40| This [the Qur'aan] certainly indeed is a noble Messenger's [Angel's] Word.
69|41| And not that of a poet! Little do you believe!
69|42| Nor is it the word of a soothsayer! Little do you reflect!
69|43| It is a reveation from the Lord of the Universe.
69|44| And had he [the Prophet] ascribed to Us some of his own sayings,
69|45| We would surely have seized from him by the right hand,
69|46| And then severed from him the life vein.
69|47| And none of you could wit old Us from doing this to him.
69|48| And, indeed, it [the Qur'aan] is a divine Counsel for those who fear Allah.
69|49| And We do indeed know that some among you deny this.
69|50| And, indeed, it [the Qur'aan] is certainly a cause of regret for those who suppress the Truth.
69|51| And certainly indeed it [the Qur'aan] is the absolute Truth!
69|52| Chant, then, the name of your Lord, the Almighty!
70|1| A questioner questions punishment that is bound to befall
70|2| Those who suppress the Truth. There is none to defend anyone
70|3| From Allah, Lord of the [many] ascents.
70|4| The time taken by the angels and the Spirit to ascend to Him is fifty thousand years [of man's reckoning]!
70|5| So, (O Prophet), be graciously patient [at the disbelievers' deliberate disbelief].
70|6| They do indeed see it [punishment] long in coming,
70|7| And We see it near.
70|8| That Day, the sky will be like molten metal,
70|9| And the mountains will be like wool.
70|10| And friend will not ask of friend
70|11| Although they would be able to see one another. The sinner would like to save himself from the punishment of that Day by offering (even) his children in ransom!
70|12| And [he would offer] his spouse and his brother,
70|13| And [he would offer] his kindred who sheltered him,
70|14| And [he would offer] all all that is on the earth, if only he could thus save himself.
70|15| But no! The fierce flame of Hell-fire it shall be
70|16| That would be stripping their scalds off.
70|17| It [the Fire] would summon him who had turned away and retreated
70|18| And had amassed and hoarded.
70|19| Man is indeed impatient by nature
70|20| When adversity touches him he bewails.
70|21| And when prosperity touches him, he is begrudging,
70|22| But those who pray are not [so impatient.]
70|23| Those that are constant in their prayers
70|24| And those in whose wealth there is a known right
70|25| For those that beg and for those that are deprived,
70|26| And [among those who are not impatient are] those who sincerely believe in the Day of Judgment,
70|27| And those that fear the punishment of their Lord.
70|28| — There is indeed no security against punishment of their Lord —
70|29| And those that guard their chastity
70|30| Except from their spouses or from those whom they rightfully possess. For indulging in sex with them, they are, of course, not to be blamed.
70|31| But whoever seeks to go beyond that — those are the ones that go beyond limits.
70|32| And [among those who are not impatient are] those who are true to their trusts and who keep their word.
70|33| And those who firmly stand by their testimonies
70|34| And those who guard their prayer.h 
70|35| All those shall be the honoured ones in Gardens of Paradise.
70|36| And what is the matter with those that suppress the Truth that they rush to you
70|37| From the right and from the left, in groups?
70|38| Does everyone of them hope to enter the Garden of Bliss [by following one's own man- made thought]?
70|39| No, not at all! They know what We have created them from.
70|40| By no means [can they enter the Garden of Bliss!] I swear by the Lord of the easts and the wests that We certainly are capable
70|41| Of replacing them by others better than they. And nothing can hinder Us.
70|42| Leave them then to their vain talk and to their amusements, till they meet with the Day promised to them —
70|43| The Day on which they will come hastily out of their graves, as though they had to run towards their goals,
70|44| Their eyes downcast and [their bodies] overwhelmed with disgrace! That is the Day they were promised! 
71|1| We did indeed send Noah to his people: "Warn your people before a painful punishment afflicts them!"
71|2| He said, "O my people! I am indeed sent to give you a plain warning"
71|3| "That you should worship Allah, and fear Him, and obey me!"
71|4| "HE will forgive you some of your sins, and give you respite till an appointed time. When the Allah appointed time comes, it cannot be deferred, if only you knew!"
71|5| [Noah later] said, "My Lord! I have indeed preached to my people night and day."
71|6| "My preaching however has only drove them farther away!"
71|7| "And, indeed, whenever I preached to them [to come to the Right Path] so that You might forgive them, they put their fingers into their ears, covered themselves up in their garments, grew obstinate, and became arrogant with false pride."
71|8| "And I did indeed preach to them loud and clear."
71|9| "And then I spoke to them in public; and I confided to them privately."
71|10| "And I said, `Ask your Lord to forgive you. He is indeed most forgiving!'"
71|11| "`He will make the sky pour rain on you in abundance.'"
71|12| "`And He will help you with wealth and children, and will make gardens for you, and will generate rivers for you.'"
71|13| What is the matter with you that you do not attribute Grandeur to Allah?
71|14| And He has surely created you [mankind] of diverse sorts and conditions.
71|15| Do you not see how Allah has created seven heavens one over another? 
71|16| And He has made within these, the moon a light [reflected], and the sun, a [radiant] lamp.
71|17| And Allah has grown you from the earth like a plant. 
71|18| Thereafter He will restore you to it [when you die]. And He will bring you out in resurrection.
71|19| And Allah has made the earth spread out for you,
71|20| So that you might thread thereon a network of spacious paths.
71|21| Noah said, "My Lord! They have disobeyed me all along, and they follow one whose wealth and children increase nothing but their loss."
71|22| "And they plotted a great plot!"
71|23| And they told [their followers], "Abandon not your gods: abandon not Wadd, Suwa', Yaghuth, Ya'uq or Nasr!"
71|24| "And they have verily led many astray. And [O Allah] increase nothing but their delusion for these wicked people!"
71|25| They [those wicked persons] were drowned because of their sins, and are doomed to enter the Fire [in the Hereafter]. And they found none to help them against Allah!
71|26| And Noah prayed, "My Lord! Leave not any of those who suppress the Truth to inhabit on the earth."
71|27| "If You do indeed leave them, they will lead those who worship You astray, and will give birth to none but wicked and ingrate progeny."
71|28| "My Lord! Grant forgiveness to me, to my parents, to everyone who enters my house as a believer, and to all believing men and women. And grant increase in nothing buttheir destruction for the wicked people!" 
72|1| Say (O Muhammad), "It is revealed to me that a group of the Jinn listened, and said, `We have heard an amazing Recital [Qur'aan]'"
72|2| "`It guides towards righteousness, so we believe in it. And we do not associate anyone else, in worship, with our Lord.'"
72|3| "`And (we affirm) that He has neither wife nor son; exalted is the Majesty of our Lord!'"
72|4| "`And that the foolish among us speak atrociously about Allah.'"
72|5| "`And that we had thought mankind and jinn would not speak lies about Allah.'"
72|6| "`And that individuals from mankind sought protection of individuals from the jinn, and so there was an increase in their evil disposition.'"
72|7| "`And that they [men] thought, even as you [jinn] think, that Allah would not raise anyone from the dead.'"
72|8| "`And that We did certainly touch [tried to reach out to] the heaven but found it replete with guards, strong and equipped with sharp, penetrating missiles of burning flame.'"
72|9| "`And that we did sit on seats therein to listen. But, now, he who listens finds a flame in wait for him.'"
72|10| "`And that we do not understand whether ill is intended for all those on the earth, or whether their Lord intends right guidance for them.'"
72|11| "`And that some of us are righteous and some of us are not. We have been following different ways.'"
72|12| "`And that we do think we cannot frustate Allah on the earth, nor can we escape from Him by fleeing.'"
72|13| "`And that when we heard the guidance, we believed in it. And he who believes in his Lord, he fears neither loss nor any prevalence of evil.'"
72|14| "`And that some among us have surrendered themselves to Allah and some are perverse. And whoso has surrendered to Allah, such have sought the right path.'"
72|15| And those who are perverse, they are fuel for Hell-fire.
72|16| And had they steadily stood by the right path, We would have given them plenty of water to drink (i.e. given them good peovision),
72|17| So that We may test them thereby. And he who turns away from the remembrance of his Lord, him He will make suffer ever-growing punishment.
72|18| And [remember] that the Masajid [places of worship for believers] are for Allah, so pray to Allah and not to anyone else with Him.
72|19| "`And that when the slave of Allah [Prophet Muhammad] stood up to pray to Him, they mobbed around him, almost stiflingly.'"
72|20| Tell (them, O Muhammad), "I pray only to my Lord. And I pray not to anyone besides Him."
72|21| Say, "I do indeed have no power either to hurt you or to put you on the right path."
72|22| Say, "None indeed can protect me from Allah, nor can I find any provider of shelter besides Him."
72|23| "(I have no power) but to convey Notifications from Allah, and His Messages. And he who disobeys Allah and His Messenger, for him is Fire of Hell! Therein such people dwell for ever."
72|24| Until they see what they are promised (the suppressors of Truth will remain deluded), but then they will come to know who is weak in support and less in number.
72|25| Say, "I am unaware whether what is promised to you is near, or my Lord has set a distant time for it."
72|26| He is the One Who knows the Unseen, and none else is privy to His [knowledge of] Unseen
72|27| Except those of His Messengers to whom He pleases [to convey any knowledge of the Unseen]. And then He appoints a guard to go before him and a guard behind him
72|28| So that He may know that they [Messengers] have truly conveyed the Messages of their Lord. He monitors all their doings from time to time, and He keeps account of all things one by one.
73|1| O you who are wrapped up [against cold or to go to sleep]!
73|2| Keep up at night, but a little.
73|3| Half of it [night] or a little less
73|4| Or a little more, and put the Quran in proper order.
73|5| Indeed, We are about to send down to you a message of great importance.
73|6| Indeed, rising up at night is most suitable for impression and retention of words.
73|7| [And] indeed, there are prolonged engagements for you during the day.
73|8| And keep remembering name [attribute] of your Lord, and devote yourself to Him exclusively.
73|9| He is the Lord of the east and the west! None is worthy of worship but He, so entrust all your affairs to His care.
73|10| Be patient on what they say, and graciously leave them alone.
73|11| And leave it to Me, and those who deny the Truth, living a life of comfort! And give them a little respite.
73|12| Certainly indeed, We have for them heavy fetters and a blazing Fire,
73|13| And food that chokes, and painful punishment,
73|14| On the Day the earth and mountains shake, and the mountains become sand dunes crumbling down.
73|15| We have indeed sent a Messenger to you who is a witness over you, just as We sent a Messenger to Pharoah.
73|16| But Pharoah did not obey the Messenger, so We seized him with a violent seizure.
73|17| If you deny the Day that will turn the children old, then how can you become righteous?
73|18| The sky will break apart whereat, as His promise is fulfilled!
73|19| This, indeed, is the divine Counsel. So let him who will, take the path to his Lord.
73|20| Your Lord does indeed know that you are up for nearly two-thirds of the night, sometimes one-half of it and sometimes one-third of it, as do a group among your followers. And Allah determines the duration of the night and of the day. He knows that you will not be able to keep count of it [your night vigil], so He has turned to you in mercy. Read [study], then, as much of the Qur'aan as is easy for you. He knows that some among you would be sick and some others would be travelling in search of Allah's bounty [livelihood], and yet others would be fighting for the cause of Allah. So, read, then as much of it [Qur'aan] as is easy for you. And establish the prayer, pay the Zakaat, and give Allah a good loan. And the good deed you send in advance for your souls, you will find it with Allah. That is better and greater in reward. And seek Allah's forgiveness! Allah is indeed Forgiving, Merciful.
74|1| O you folded up [in inactivity]! 
74|2| Arise and warn!
74|3| And proclaim the greatness of your Lord!
74|4| And keep your garments clean!
74|5| And shun the dirt!
74|6| And expect no [material] gain [for your own self]!
74|7| And, for your Lord, be patient!
74|8| And [warn that] when the Trumpet is blown,
74|9| That Day [the day when the Trumpet is blown] will be a difficult day!
74|10| Not [at all] an easy day for those who suppress the Truth.
74|11| Leave to Me what I Myself created [human being] without any help from anyone else!
74|12| And I created for him resources in abundance
74|13| And children present by his side
74|14| And I made things easy for him!
74|15| Yet he is greedy for more!
74|16| Nay! To Our Verses/signs he has been obstinately and illogically opposed!
74|17| Soon will I make him suffer hardship!
74|18| He did indeed think and decide.
74|19| May he be destroyed — how [very wrongfully] did he decide!
74|20| Again, be he destroyed — how [very wrongfully] did he decide!
74|21| Then he looked
74|22| And he frowned and he glowered with intense hatred!
74|23| Then he turned back and was proud!
74|24| Then he said, "This is nothing but traditional magic."
74|25| "— Nothing but word of the mortal man!"
74|26| Soon will I make him suffer Hell!
74|27| And what do you know what Hell is?
74|28| Neither does it let be, nor does it let go!
74|29| It burns the human skin so as to blacken it!
74|30| Nineteen [angels] to guard over it [Hell].
74|31| And We have appointed none but angels as Guardians of the Fire. And We have not fixed their number [], but only as a trial for those who suppress the Truth, and as a means of certainty for the People of the Book and increase in Faith for the Believers, so that no doubts are left for the People of the Book and the Believers, and that those in whose hearts is a disease and the suppressors of the Truth may say, "What intention does Allah have by this issue [of appointing only guards for hundreds of thousands of sinners put in Hell]?" Thus does Allah send astray whom He wills and guide whom He wills. And none but He knows [the enormity of] your Lord's forces! And this [Qur'aan] is nothing but Admonition/Reminder for mankind.h, 
74|32| Nay, verily, by the Moon!
74|33| And by the Night as it recedes!
74|34| And by the Dawn as it brightens!
74|35| This [Qur'aan] certainly indeed is the One Great Thing,
74|36| A warning to mankind.
74|37| To any of you who wishes to go forward [on the Right Path], or to fall back [into falsehood.]
74|38| Every soul is pledged against what it earns,
74|39| Except for the people on the Right.h 
74|40| In Gardens (of Delight), they will ask
74|41| The Sinners,
74|42| "What led you into Hell?"
74|43| They will say, "We were not among those who prayed;"
74|44| "And we were not among those who fed the poor;"
74|45| "But we used to indulge in vain talks in company of other people;"
74|46| "And we used to deny the Judgment Day,"
74|47| "Until there came to us the Certainty."
74|48| The intercession of the intercessors shall be of no avail to them then!
74|49| Then what is the matter with them that they turn away from the divine Counsel [Qur'aan]
74|50| As if they were scared donkeys
74|51| Fleeing from a fierce beast?
74|52| They would rather want scrolls (of revelation) rolled out to every one of them separately!
74|53| But no! They fear not the Hereafter.
74|54| Nay, this [Qur'aan] indeed is the divine Counsel!
74|55| Let any, who will, take heed!
74|56| And none takes heed unless Allah so wills: He is the Embodiment of the virtue of piety, and the embodiment of the virtue of forgiveness.
75|1| Nay, [man's negative thinking on Resurrection is not right!] I do swear by the Day of Resurrection!
75|2| And, nay! I do swear by the self-reproaching soul [that man's negative thinking on Resuuection is not right!]
75|3| Does man think that We shall not be able to collect his bones?
75|4| Yes, We have the power to restore [even] his fingertips.h 
75|5| But, man desires to go on doing evil in what lies ahead of him [in worldly life].
75|6| He asks, "When will the Day of Resurrection be?"
75|7| So when the sight is dazzled,
75|8| And the moon disappears,
75|9| And the sun and the moon are joined.
75|10| Man will ask that Day, "Where is the exit?"
75|11| No! No escape!
75|12| With your Lord that day is the journey's end!
75|13| Man will be informed that Day what he had sent ahead and what he had left behind [undone].h 
75|14| Man would rather be a witness against himself
75|15| Even though he may put up excuses.
75|16| Move not [O Prophet] your tongue with it [revelation] to make haste with it.
75|17| Its collection and recital does indeed rest on Us.
75|18| So when We recite it, attentively follow its recitation.
75|19| Then, indeed, it is for Us to make its meaning clear.
75|20| Nay, you [mankind] would rather love the fleeting present,
75|21| And neglect the Hereafter!
75|22| Faces that day will be bright,
75|23| Looking at their Lord expectantly.
75|24| And faces that day will be despondent,
75|25| Expecting a great disaster to befall them.
75|26| Behold! When in pangs of death,
75|27| And question raised, "Any magician [who could save him]?"
75|28| And he thought it was the time for parting,
75|29| And the leg was put close to the [other] leg,
75|30| To your Lord was the direction that day.
75|31| And neither did he stand by the truth nor did he pray,
75|32| And, on the other hand, he denied the Truth and turned his face away,
75|33| And then he went back to his people boasting [telling them how `bravely' he denied the Truth]!
75|34| [The Truth is drawing] nearer and nearer to you [O dying man],
75|35| To repeat, [the Truth is drawing] nearer and nearer to you [O dying man]! 
75|36| Does man think that he will be left to fend for himself? 
75|37| Was he not a tiny ovum fertilised by sperm emitted?
75|38| Then he became a leech-like clinging clot of curdled blood; and He created him and set his shape right.
75|39| Then He made from him pairs: male and female.
75|40| Is not That One [the Creator] powerful enough to give life to the dead!? 
76|1| There was — was there not? — a time when man [before he was created] was not yet a thing worth mentioning.
76|2| It is, indeed, We who have created man out of a mixed [fertilized] ovum, so that We try him out. And then We made him a being endowed with hearing and sight.
76|3| We do indeed guide him, whether he be grateful or ungrateful.
76|4| For those who suppress the Truth, We have readied chains, and shackles, and a blazing Fire!
76|5| The righteous indeed shall drink from a cup containing a camphor-flavoured beverage.
76|6| A fountain from which Allah's subjects shall drink, making it flow as and when required.
76|7| They fulfill their vows, and fear a Day the evil of which would be widespread,
76|8| And they feed — for the sheer love of Him — the needy, the orphan, and the victim of circustances.
76|9| "We feed you only for Allah's sake: we desire no recompense from you, nor thanks!"
76|10| "We do indeed fear from our Lord a distressful, disastrous Day!"
76|11| And then, Allah will save them from the woes of that Day, and will bestow on them brightness and joy.
76|12| And He will reward them, for their patience, with Garden [Paradise] and silk [garments].
76|13| They will be reclining on couches there. They will feel neither sunburn therein nor intense cold.
76|14| And its shadows will come down low over them, and its clusters of fruit will dangle within reach.
76|15| And silver vessels and glass goblets will be passed around them.
76|16| From silver [vessel] to glass [goblet] — [the drink will be poured out] in required quantity.
76|17| And in it [Paradise] they will be given to drink of a cup containing a ginger-flavoured beverage.
76|18| [The source of the beverage is a fountain] therein named `Salsabeel'.
76|19| And waiting upon them will be immortal boys. When you see them you would think they were pearls dispersed.
76|20| And when you look, you would be looking at bliss and a realm transcendent!
76|21| Upon them will be garments of green silk and brocade; and they will be adorned with silver bracelets. And their Lord will give them a pure drink.
76|22| "This indeed is a reward for you, and your struggle [in worldly life] is appreciated!"
76|23| Indeed, We have sent down the Qur'aan on you, in stages !
76|24| Await, then, your Lord's decree, and obey not any sinner or ingrate among them!
76|25| And do chant your Lord's name morning and evening
76|26| And during the night. And then prostrate before Him. And extol His glory during the long night.
76|27| These [who suppress the Truth] do indeed love this transitory life, and leave a hard and difficult Day behind their backs.
76|28| It is We who have created them and given them their strength. And when we so will, We can replace them with others of their kind.
76|29| This [Qur'aan] indeed is a Counsel. He then, who so wills, may take a way to his Lord.
76|30| But you cannot will it unless Allah so wills! Allah is indeed Aware, Wise.
76|31| HE admits to His grace whom He wills. And He has readied painful punishment for the wicked people.
77|1| By the emissaries [winds], recognized by feel [blowing gently], 
77|2| Then by the storms blowing violently,
77|3| By those [winds] that scatter [clouds] far and wide,
77|4| Then by those [winds] that make an uneven distribution [of rain-bearing clouds],
77|5| Then by those [winds] that bring down what is often talked of [rains]
77|6| As excuse for or harbinger of calamity,
77|7| What you are promised [Day of Resurrection/Judgment] is indeed inevitable.
77|8| So when the stars are extinguished,
77|9| And when the sky is torn asunder,
77|10| And when the mountains are brought down,
77|11| And when the Messengers are presented at the time appointed —
77|12| For what day is the time fixed?
77|13| For the Day of Decision.
77|14| And what do you understand what the Day of Decision is?
77|15| Woe that Day for those who had denied the Truth!
77|16| Did We not destroy the earlier generations?
77|17| And then caused the later generations to follow them?
77|18| Thus do We deal with the sinners!
77|19| Woe that Day for those who had denied the Truth!
77|20| Did We not create you from a filthy fluid?
77|21| And then placed it [fertilized ovum] in a safe abode [womb]
77|22| For a known period of time [nine months and some days, normally]?
77|23| We then fixed terms [for everything in man's life]. And We are the best in fixing terms!
77|24| Woe that Day for those who had denied the Truth!
77|25| Have We not made the earth, accommodating
77|26| The living and the dead?
77|27| And [have We not] placed therein lofty mountains and given you sweet water to drink?
77|28| Woe that Day for those who had denied the Truth!
77|29| "Proceed now to what (Hereafter) you had been denying!"
77|30| "Proceed now to the three-tier shadow [— of death, Resurrection, and divine Judgment]!"
77|31| (The shadow provides) no relief nor shelter from the Blazing Fire [of Hell].
77|32| It does indeed throw up sparks like burning logs of fire-wood,
77|33| [Or] like thick yellow ropes.
77|34| Woe that Day for those who had denied the Truth!
77|35| This Day they speak not,
77|36| Nor are they permitted to put up excuses.
77|37| Woe that Day for those who had denied the Truth!
77|38| This is the Day of Decision. We have brought you and the people living in the world earlier, together.
77|39| If now you have any scheme, dare to use it against Me!
77|40| Woe that Day for those who had denied the Truth!
77|41| Pious persons are amidst shades and fountains,
77|42| And [they get] fruits such as they desire.
77|43| "Eat and drink to your satisfaction as a reward for your [good] deeds."
77|44| Thus indeed do We reward the good!
77|45| Woe that Day for those who had denied the Truth!
77|46| Eat and enjoy but little. You are sinners indeed!
77|47| Woe that Day [Hereafter] for those who had denied the Truth!
77|48| And when they are told to bow down, they bow not down!
77|49| Woe that Day for those who had denied the Truth!
77|50| What hadeeth would they then believe in after this?
78|1| What are they asking one another
78|2| About the most important topic [of Resurrection]
78|3| Concerning which they differ?
78|4| No, they will soon come to know!
78|5| No, no, they will soon come to know [the Truth]!
78|6| Have We not made the earth specially prepred [for sustenance of life],
78|7| And the mountains as stabilisers ? 
78|8| And We created you in pairs.
78|9| And We made your sleep a means of rest.
78|10| And We made the night as cover.
78|11| And We made the day for earning a livelihood.
78|12| And We have built above you seven strong [firmaments/heavens/atmospeherioc layers].
78|13| And We have made a blazing source of light.
78|14| And We send water pouring down in abundance from the rain-bearing clouds,
78|15| So that We may produce therewith grain and vegetation.
78|16| And gardens luxuriant.
78|17| Indeed, the Day of Decision is a divinely appointed time.
78|18| When that Day the trumpet is blown, you come out in droves,
78|19| And the heaven is opened as if it were gates,
78|20| And the mountains are moved away, as if they had been a mirage.
78|21| Indeed, Hell is waiting,
78|22| As home for the transgressors.
78|23| They shall remain therein for ages.
78|24| They shall taste therein neither coolness nor any drink,
78|25| But boiling water and a pus-like thing.
78|26| An appropriate recompense!
78|27| They never expected to be called to account.
78|28| And they falsely rejected Our signs/Verses.
78|29| And We have recorded everything in a Book.
78|30| "So taste now [the punishment;] for, now, We shall increase on you nothing but punishment!"
78|31| Indeed, for the pious ones, there is salvation.
78|32| [They shall be in] gardens and vineyards,
78|33| And [with] likeable companions,
78|34| And cups filled to the brim.
78|35| They shall not hear any idle talk, or any lies, therein.
78|36| [Their life in the Hereafter] will be a reward from your Lord, a measured gift.
78|37| The Lord of the heavens and the earth and all that lies between them, the Gracious! None shall have it in their power [in His presence] to address Him.
78|38| The Day the Spirit and the angels stand in rows, none shall speak except those whom the Lord of Mercy permits, and who will say only what is right.
78|39| That Day is sure to come. So let him, who wishes to, take the right path to return to his Lord.
78|40| We have warned you of Punishment that is near. The Day when it comes, man shall see what his hands had sent ahead, and he who has suppressed the Truth shall say, "Oh, would that I were dust!"
79|1| By those that dive and extract, 
79|2| And by those [winds?] that briskly pass by,
79|3| And by the floaters [clouds?] that float by
79|4| And then overtake others, leaving the latter behind,
79|5| And then execute a [divine] Order [to rain.]
79|6| [There shall come] a Day when a violent convulsion will convulse [the world]!
79|7| The subsequent convulsion shall follow the first.
79|8| Hearts that Day will be throbbing.
79|9| Sights that Day will be lowered.
79|10| They ask, "Shall we be brought back to life [after death?]"
79|11| "Even when we are crumbled bones!?"
79|12| They say, "This in that event would be a damaging return."
79|13| It will but be a single blast!
79|14| And then they all will come awake [from their deep slumber of death].
79|15| Has Moses' story come down to you?
79|16| When his Lord called out to him by the sacred valley of Tuwa,
79|17| "Go to Pharaoh! He has indeed exceeded all bounds,"
79|18| "You then ask him, `Would you like to reform?'"
79|19| "`Would you allow me to guide you to your Lord, so that you fear Him?'"
79|20| Moses then showed him the great Sign [staff turning into snake and hand turning white].
79|21| But he [Pharaoh] refused to acknowledge the divine Sign and obey Allah.
79|22| He then turned his back hastily
79|23| To summon and collect his people.
79|24| He then proclaimed to them, "I am your lord supreme!"
79|25| Allah then seized him for punishment both in the Hereafter and here.
79|26| There is indeed a lesson in this for those who fear Allah.
79|27| Are you more difficult to create or the heaven to construct?
79|28| HE raised its structure and then balanced it aright.
79|29| And made its night dark and its day bright.
79|30| And the earth thereafter — He spread it out.
79|31| He brought out from it its water and its pasture.
79|32| And He made the mountains firm.
79|33| [He has provided] means of sustenance for you and your animals?
79|34| So when the great event occurs,
79|35| That Day man would recount what he strove for,
79|36| And the Hell would be made manifest for all to see.
79|37| And then anyone who had transgressed divinely set bounds,
79|38| And had preferred the life of this world,
79|39| That one's abode shall indeed be in Hell.
79|40| And one who had been afraid of standing before his Lord and had restrained one's self from carnal desires,
79|41| That one's abode shall indeed be in Paradise.
79|42| They ask you [Prophet] about the Hour (the time when the present world will end and the Hereafter begin), "When is it coming?"
79|43| What have you to do with the mentioning of it [the time of the occurrence of the Hour]?
79|44| With your Lord rests the final and only Authority to know when the Hour would happen.
79|45| You [Prophet] are but a warner for those who fear it [the Hour].
79|46| The Day they see it [the Hereafter], they will feel as if they had stayed for only one evening or one morning thereof. 
80|1| He frowned and turned away
80|2| That the blind man came to him.
80|3| And what do you know? He might reform [to become a righteous man].
80|4| Or, he might deliberate and the deliberation might benefit him.
80|5| Now he who is well-to-do,
80|6| To him you pay attention!
80|7| And [even when] it is not your responsibility if he would not reform!
80|8| And he who comes to you in earnest,
80|9| And fears (Allah),
80|10| By him then are you distracted! 
80|11| No! [Your resentment at the blind man's intrusion is not right.] This [Qur'aan] is only an open source of divine Admonition to recite.
80|12| So whoso wills may recite it and take heed from
80|13| In records honourable,
80|14| Exalted and purified,
80|15| By hands of scribes,
80|16| Noble and virtuous!
80|17| Man be damned, how ungrateful is he!
80|18| Out of what thing did He create him?
80|19| HE created him out of fertilized ovum and then moulded him in due proportion.
80|20| And then made the path of life convenient for him.
80|21| And then He caused him to die and consigned him to dust.
80|22| And then, whenever He wishes, He will raise him back to life.
80|23| No! Man did certainly not carry out what Allah had asked him to do.
80|24| Let man just look at his food.
80|25| [To enable man to get his food] We poured water [rain] in showers,
80|26| And We pierced the soil, so that it got soaked [with rain water].
80|27| Then We caused grain to grow therein,
80|28| And grapevines and vegetables,
80|29| And olive-trees and palm-trees,
80|30| And luxuriant orchards,
80|31| And fruits and fodder
80|32| As provision for you and your cattle.
80|33| Then as the deafening blast occurs
80|34| On the Day when every man would flee from his brother,
80|35| And his mother and his father;
80|36| And his spouse and his children.
80|37| On that Day everyone among them will be preoccupied with his own individual concerns.
80|38| Faces that Day would be beaming,
80|39| Cheerful and joyous.
80|40| Faces that Day would be gloomy,
80|41| Darkness covering them.
80|42| Those would be the ones suppressing the Truth, the ones wicked!
81|1| When the sun is folded up,
81|2| And when the stars lose their lustre,
81|3| And when the mountains are moved,
81|4| And when the ten-months pregnant camels are abandoned,
81|5| And when the wild beasts are gathered,
81|6| And when the seas overflow,
81|7| And when the souls are rejoined (with their bodies),
81|8| And when the girl-child buried alive shall be asked,
81|9| For what sin was she killed?
81|10| And when the scrolls [of human deeds] are laid open,
81|11| And when the sky is stripped off,
81|12| And the Hell stoked,
81|13| And the Paradise brought near,
81|14| Every person comes to know what he has brought along. 
81|15| No! [The misgivings of the people that do not believe in these revelations are not correct, and] I swear by the stars
81|16| That retreat and hide, 
81|17| And by the night as it moves,
81|18| And the morning as it breathes,
81|19| This is indeed the word of a noble [Angel] Messenger.
81|20| A mighty One with the Lord of the Throne;
81|21| One to be obeyed besides being trustworthy.
81|22| And your companion [Prophet Muhammad] is not mad.
81|23| And he did certainly see the Angel Messenger on the clear horizon.
81|24| And he [Prophet] does not grudge (conveying what has been revealed to him) of the Unseen.
81|25| And it is not a word of accursed Satan.
81|26| Where then are you going?
81|27| This is nothing but Good Counsel for the worlds.
81|28| For any of you who wishes to follow the Straight Way;
81|29| And you wish not unless Allah, the Lord of the Universe, so wishes!
82|1| When the sky breaks,
82|2| And when the stars disperse,
82|3| And when the seas overflow,
82|4| And when the graves are uncovered, taken out and examined,
82|5| Every soul comes to know what it had sent ahead and what it had left behind.
82|6| O human! What has deluded you away from your Lord, the Most Noble?
82|7| HE is the One Who created you, then moulded you, and then gave you a good poise.
82|8| HE cast you into an appearance He willed.
82|9| And, yet, you refused to believe in the Judgment Day!
82|10| And certainly indeed Guards are appointed to keep watch on you and protect you,
82|11| Noble recorders are they [recording all your omissions and commissions]!
82|12| They know what you do.
82|13| Indeed, the righteous will be in bliss,
82|14| And certainly indeed, the wicked persons will be in Hell.
82|15| They will enter it on the day of Judgment.
82|16| And they will not be absent from it.
82|17| And what do you understand what the Day of Judgment is?
82|18| Repeat, what do you understand what the Day of Judgment is?
82|19| That Day no creature shall be of any avail to another. And Allah's shall be the sole command that Day! 
83|1| Woe to those who defraud!
83|2| Those who, when they take anything by measure from others, take it in full,
83|3| And who, when they measure or weigh things to give to others, give fraudulently less.
83|4| Do they not think they will be raised to life again, after death,
83|5| For a great Day?
83|6| The Day when mankind shall stand before the Lord of the worlds!
83|7| No indeed! [Mankind shall not be left unjudged.] The record of the the wicked persons is in Sijjeen. 
83|8| And what do you understand what Sijjeen is?
83|9| It is a written record! 
83|10| Woe that Day to those who had denied the Truth!
83|11| Those who had denied the Day of Judgement.
83|12| None but those transgressing with criminal intent deny it.
83|13| When Our Verses are recited to them, they say, "Fables of the ancient peoples!"
83|14| No! On the contrary, what they have been earning with their own deeds has made their minds dirty.
83|15| No indeed! On that day they shall certainly be shut out from the presence of their Lord.
83|16| And then they shall indeed suffer the blazing Fire of Hell!
83|17| And then they will be told, "This is what you had been denying!"
83|18| But the record of the righteous peope is in Illiyyeen.
83|19| And what do you understand what Illiyyoon is?
83|20| It is a written record!
83|21| Those closest to Allah are witnesses thereto.
83|22| The righteous people will indeed be in bliss.
83|23| [From their seats] on couches, they will look around them.
83|24| In their faces you shall recognise the glow of bliss.
83|25| They will be given to drink of sealed nectar,
83|26| Sealed with [fragrance of] musk. And for this let the aspirants aspire.
83|27| And it will be a blend with [the waters of] Tasneem,
83|28| A fountain from which those who are closest to Allah will drink.
83|29| Indeed those who do sinful acts laugh at the believers.
83|30| And they [mischievously] wink at one another as they pass by them.
83|31| And when they go back to people of their own kind, they go back cracking jokes about them (believers).
83|32| And when they see them [their own people], they tell them, "These people [believers] have indeed gone astray!"
83|33| And they [non-believers] are not sent as guardians over them [believers].
83|34| This Day [of Judgement] then the believers will laugh at those that had been suppressing the Truth,
83|35| As they [believers] look around them [seated comfortably] upon their couches [and ruminate,]
83|36| "Are not the suppressors of Truth duly requited for what they used to do?"
84|1| When the sky splits asunder,
84|2| And responds to its Lord, and it is bound [to respond.]
84|3| And when the earth is levelled,
84|4| And it throws out its contents, and becomes void,
84|5| And responds to its Lord, and it is bound [to respond.]
84|6| O human! You do indeed have to put in hard labour to go to your Lord, and then you meet Him.
84|7| And as for him whose book of deeds is placed in his right hand,
84|8| He will then face his accounting with ease,
84|9| And he will turn to his own people in joy.
84|10| And as for him whose book of deeds is given to him behind his back,
84|11| He will pray for [his own death and] destruction.
84|12| And he will burn in blazing Fire.
84|13| He had indeed been living happily engrossed [on earth] among people of his own kind.
84|14| He had indeed thought he would never return [to life].
84|15| Yes indeed! His Lord had kept a watch over him.
84|16| But no! [He shall not continue to remain dead.] I swear by the afterglow of sunset,
84|17| And by the night, and what it veils in its darkness,
84|18| And by the moon, at its full,
84|19| You [humans] do move from stage to stage.
84|20| Then how come they believe not [in a life to come]
84|21| And when the Qur'aan is read out to them, they prostrate not!?
84|22| On the contrary, they who suppress the truth dny it [this divine writ]!
84|23| And Allah knows what they keep to themselves.
84|24| So give them the prospect of grievous suffering [in the life to come],
84|25| But not to those who believe and do good deeds. For them is there a reward unending!
85|1| By the sky, with its constellations of stars!
85|2| And by the Day [of Judgment] promised,
85|3| And witness [giving evidence in favour of or against anything on the Judgment Day] and those for or against whom the witness is giving evidence!
85|4| Damned are the owners of the ditc
85|5| Of the fuel-filled fire,
85|6| When they sat by it
85|7| And witnessed what they did to the believers! 
85|8| And they took vengeance on them for nothing else but that they believed in Allah, the Omnipotent, the Embodiment of Praise,
85|9| To Whom belongs the Absolute Sovereignty of the heavens and the earth. And Allah is Witness to all things.
85|10| Surely indeed, those who persecute believing men and believing women and repent not — for them will be the punishment of Hell, and for them the punishment by the Fire.
85|11| Surely indeed, those who believe and do good deeds — for them will be Gardens underneath which rivers flow. That is the Greatest Success.
85|12| Indeed, the Hold of your Lord is certainly severe!
85|13| It is He indeed Who does the original creation, and Who is capable of resurrecting His original creation when it is dead.
85|14| And He is the One Forgiving, Loving.
85|15| Lord of the Glorious Throne,
85|16| HE does what He wills.
85|17| Have you come to know the story of the armies
85|18| Of Pharaoh and of (the ancient tribe of) Thamood?
85|19| Yet, [despite knowing the story of how those ancient peoples were destroyed for their transgressions] those that suppress the Truth live in denial!
85|20| And Allah surrounds them unawares.
85|21| Nay, [non-believers' denial notwithstanding,] this is a glorious Qur'an!
85|22| In a well-protected format.
86|1| By the sky and the Taariq,
86|2| — And what do you understand what the Taariq is?
86|3| It is the shining star —
86|4| Not a soul but has a protector over it. 
86|5| Let man then see how he is created.
86|6| He is created by means of fluid [blood] spurting
86|7| Out from between the spine and the ribs.
86|8| It [blood] is certainly indeed capable of its return.
86|9| The Day secrets are disclosed,
86|10| For him [man] there will then be no power, and no helper.
86|11| By the sky, ever returning [revolving],
86|12| And by the earth with its surface cracking open again and again with new growth of plants and vegetation,
86|13| It [Qur'aan] is indeed a decisive Word.
86|14| And it is not for just sport and amusement.
86|15| They [suppressors of Truth] are indeed hatching a plot,
86|16| And I [Allah] am devising a plot.
86|17| So let those who suppress the Truth go their way; let them go for a little while.
87|1| Glorify the name of your Lord, the Most High,
87|2| Who created and gave the things created good shape;
87|3| And Who determined [the span of existence for the things created] and guided them,
87|4| And Who brought out the verdure [on the earth],
87|5| And then made it into dark rubble,
87|6| We shall make you recite and then you will not forget
87|7| Except for what Allah wills. HE knows what is manifest and what is hidden.
87|8| And We shall make things easy for you.
87|9| Should the divine Words of the Qur'aan benefit them, do recite these to them!
87|10| He who fears (Allah) shall take heed therefrom,
87|11| And he who is wicked will shun it;
87|12| He who will burn in the Great Fire.
87|13| Then he will neither die in it, nor live.
87|14| He will surely attain salvation who keeps himself pure [in worldly life],
87|15| And oft-remembers his Lordճ name and then prays to Him.
87|16| But no, you prefer this worldly life!
87|17| Whereas the Hereafter is better and enduring.
87|18| This fact, indeed, was [also stated] in the earlier Scriptures —
87|19| The Scriptures of Abraham and Moses.
88|1| Have you heard about the Overwhelming Event?
88|2| Faces that Day will be down,
88|3| Wrought-up, weary,
88|4| Burning in Fire intensely hot,
88|5| Made to drink from a boiling hot spring.
88|6| No food for them but of thorns,
88|7| That neither nourishes nor satisfies hunger.
88|8| Faces that Day will be blissful,
88|9| Pleased with their efforts,
88|10| In lofty Garden,
88|11| Wherein no vain talk will you hear!
88|12| Therein a fountain flowing,
88|13| Therein thrones raised high,
88|14| And cups placed conveniently,
88|15| And cushions in rows,
88|16| And carpets spread out.
88|17| Do they not see how the cloud is created? 
88|18| And the sky, how it is raised high?
88|19| And the mountains, how they are rooted?
88|20| And the earth, how its surface is made ? 
88|21| So recite the divine Verses to the people at large. Your only responsibility is to recite!
88|22| You have no control over them.
88|23| But he who turns back and suppresses the Truth,
88|24| Allah will give him the greatest punishment!
88|25| To Us indeed is their return,
88|26| Then it is for Us to call them to account.
89|1| By the dawn,
89|2| And the ten nights,
89|3| And the even and the odd,
89|4| And by the night as it passes.
89|5| Is there in this an oath for one with understanding? 
89|6| Have you not seen how your Lord dealt with AAad
89|7| [The anscient people] of Iram, [city of] lofty-pillared buildings,
89|8| Like which no city had ever been created on the lands,
89|9| And [another ancient people of] Thamood who hewed the rocks in the valley [to carve out buildings therefrom],
89|10| And Pharaoh of the many tent pegs (i.e. with means and power),
89|11| Who committed transgression in the lands?
89|12| They often spread anarchy in them.
89|13| Then their Lord lashed them with whip of punishment.
89|14| Indeed, your Lord is ever watchful!
89|15| Then as his Lord tests him by bestowing honour and bounties upon him, man says, "My Lord has honoured me!"
89|16| And as He tests him by restricting his provision, he says, "My Lord has humiliated me!"
89|17| No! On the contrary, you do not treat the orphan honourably,
89|18| And urge not one another to feed the poor,
89|19| And devour the inheritance — devouring it all!
89|20| And love the worldly wealth — loving it immensely.
89|21| [And] no, [the Lord does not restrict His provisions to man to humiliate him]! When the earth is pounded to make it level,
89|22| And when your Lord reveals Himself with rows upon rows of angels,
89|23| And Hell brought near, that Day will man remember [what the Qur'aan had told him]! Of what avail will that remembering be to him?
89|24| Man will say, "Would that I had sent ahead for this life of mine!"
89|25| Then, on that Day, Allah will punish him as none other can,
89|26| And bind him as none other can.
89|27| "O you contented soul!"
89|28| "Return to your Lord pleased [with yourself], pleasing (to your Lord)."
89|29| "Enter then to be among My devotees!"
89|30| "And enter My Garden!" , 
90|1| No! I do swear by this City,
90|2| — And you are a free citizen of this City —
90|3| And by father and that which he begets,
90|4| We have certainly created man for hard work.
90|5| Does he think that no one has any control over him?
90|6| He claims, "I have squandered much wealth."
90|7| Does he think no one is keeping a watch on him?
90|8| Have We not made two eyes for him,
90|9| And a tongue and two lips,
90|10| And shown him the two ways [right and wrong]?
90|11| But he ventures not up the steep road;
90|12| And what do you understand what the steep road is?
90|13| Freeing a slave,
90|14| Or feeding on a day of extreme hunger,
90|15| An orphan closely related,
90|16| Or miserable poor man.
90|17| Then he becomes of those who believe and exhort one another to patience, and exhort one another to mercy.
90|18| These are the people of the right hand.
90|19| And those who suppress the Truth in Our Verses, those are the people of the left hand.
90|20| On them is Fire closing in.
91|1| By the sun and its brightness,
91|2| And by the moon as it reflects it [brightness of the Sun],
91|3| And by the day, when it displays it [brightness of the Sun],
91|4| And by the night, when it veils it [brightness of the Sun].
91|5| And by the sky and what it constitutes, 
91|6| And by the earth and what makes it spread [prolong] its existence,
91|7| And by the soul and what shapes it.
91|8| Then inspired it with knowledge of what is wrong for it and what is right.
91|9| Certainly, the one who keeps it [soul] pure is successful,
91|10| And, certainly, the one who corrupts it is ruined.
91|11| The people of Thamood denied the Truth by committing transgression,
91|12| When the most wicked man among them came forward [to disobey divine directive].
91|13| Allah's Messenger had then warned them about Allah's she-camel and her [allotted time of] drink.
91|14| But they rejected him, and crippled her. For this sin of theirs, their Lord let loose His anger upon them, and razed their dwellings to the ground.
91|15| And He has not to be afraid of its consequences.
92|1| By the night as it veils,
92|2| And by the day as it unveils!
92|3| And by the Power that created the male and the female!
92|4| Indeed, your [mankind's] work is in divergent fields of activity!
92|5| And, he who gave [things in Allah's Path] and feared Him,
92|6| And stood firmly by what was good and right,
92|7| For him shall We make things easy!
92|8| And he who was miserly [in giving things in Allah's Path], and considered that he needed no divine help,
92|9| And belied what was good and right,
92|10| For him shall We make things difficult!
92|11| And his wealth shall avail him not when he drops dead.
92|12| It is certainly indeed for Us to give the guidance;
92|13| And, certainly indeed, the Dominion over both the Hereafter and the present world is Ours.
92|14| I then warn you of the flaming Fire
92|15| None shall burn in it [the Fire] but the wicked person.
92|16| He who belies the Truth and turns away [from it].
92|17| And, he will be distanced from it [Fire] who fears Allah,
92|18| He who spends his wealth [on others] to keep himself pure.
92|19| — And he has none with him to be recompensed of favours received —
92|20| And he spends for nothing but to seek the pleasure of his Lord, the Most High:
92|21| And such persons, certainly, shall in time be well-pleased.
93|1| By the morning brightness,
93|2| And by the night when it is still,
93|3| Your Lord has not forsaken you [Prophet Muhammad], nor does He hate you.
93|4| And, surely, the latter part [of your life] will be better for you than the earlier.
93|5| And surely your Lord will give you [stability, security and authority], and then you will be happy.
93|6| Did He not find you an orphan and give you shelter?
93|7| Did He not find you wandering and give you guidance?
93|8| Did He not find you poor and make you overcome poverty?
93|9| Oppress not the orphan then!
93|10| And scare not the beggar away!
93|11| And recount then the bounty of your Lord.
94|1| Have We not opened for you your head,
94|2| And lifted your burden off you,
94|3| Which [burden] weighed upon your back,
94|4| And raised high the esteem, (in which) you (are held), for you?
94|5| With every difficulty then, indeed, there is a way out!
94|6| Indeed, with every difficulty there is a way out!
94|7| So then, when you get free (of your difficulty or from your worldly task), rise up,
94|8| And turn to your Lord in complete devotion and submission!
95|1| By the fig and the olive,
95|2| And by Mount Sinai,
95|3| And by this city (Makkah) of peace,
95|4| Surely, We created the human in the best of forms!
95|5| Then We reverted the human to the lowest of the low,
95|6| Except for those who believed and did righteous deeds. For them, an unending reward!
95|7| What, then, do they deny you [O Prophet] for, post this Judgment [in Verses and above]?
95|8| Is not Allah the Best of all judges?
96|1| Read in the name of your Lord who creates — 
96|2| Creates man from a clinging substance.
96|3| Read and your Lord is most Liberal,
96|4| Who taught by the pen —
96|5| Taught mankind what it knew not.h 
96|6| Man, on the other hand, is certainly indeed prone to transgression,
96|7| As he sees himself independent of any divine help!
96|8| Indeed, to your Lord is the return.
96|9| Have you seen him who forbids
96|10| A devotee when he prays?
96|11| Do you see if he [the devotee] is on the right guidance,
96|12| Or enjoins piety?
96|13| [And] do you see if he [who forbids the devotee from praying] denies [Guidance] and turns away [from it]?
96|14| Does he not know that Allah does indeed see [his wickedness]?
96|15| Nay! If he does not desist, We will drag him by the forelock —
96|16| A lying, sinning forelock!
96|17| Then let him call those who would help him,
96|18| We will call the guardians of Hell.
96|19| Nay! Obey him not, but prostrate and get near (to Allah).
97|1| We have indeed bestowed it [the Qur'aan] in the night of Divine Decree.
97|2| And what do you understand what the night of divine Decree is?
97|3| The night of divine Decree is better than a thousand months.
97|4| The angels and the Spirit, by their Lord's leave, descend in that night with all His decrees.
97|5| Peace it is, until the break of dawn.
98|1| It could not be that those suppressing the Truth from among the people of the Book [Jews and Christians] and the polytheists were abandoned [by Allah], until there came to them the clear evidence:
98|2| A Messenger from Allah, reciting scripts freed of all impurities.
98|3| In it are rulings sound, clear and ever applicable.
98|4| And those who have been given the divine Book [earlier] differed not but after the clear evidence had come to them!
98|5| And they were enjoined not but to worship Allah, keeping their way of life exclusively for Him, turning away from all that was false; and to establish the prayer ; and to give the Zakaat. And this is the way of life sound, clear and ever applicable.
98|6| Indeed, those who suppress the Truth from among the peoples who had been given the divine Book earlier and the polytheists — those will be in the fire of Hell, therein to abide: they are the worst of all creatures.
98|7| Indeed, those who believe and do righteous deeds — it is they who are the best of all creatures.
98|8| Their reward with their Lord: gardens of perpetual bliss, underneath which rivers flow, wherein to abide forever. Allah will be well-pleased with them, and they with Him. All this for him who fears his Lord!
99|1| When the earth is shaken with its earthquake
99|2| And the earth brings out its burdens,
99|3| And man wonders, "What is the matter with it?"
99|4| That Day it [the earth] will relate its stories,
99|5| Because your Lord inspires it.
99|6| That Day mankind will proceed in groups to be shown their deeds.
99|7| Then whoever does [even] an atom's weight of good deed will see it,
99|8| And whoever does [even] an atom's weight of bad deed will see it. 
100|1| By the chargers [horses ridden by warriors] panting,
100|2| Then striking the sparks of fire, 
100|3| Then raiding at dawn,
100|4| Then raising the dust therewith,
100|5| Then charging into the midst collectively therewith,
100|6| Man certainly indeed is ungrateful to his Lord! 
100|7| And he certainly indeed bears witness on this (that he is ungrateful);
100|8| And he is certainly indeed extremely fond of wealth.
100|9| Does he not know that when the contents of the graves are taken out and examined,
100|10| And that which was in (human) minds recovered,
100|11| Their Lord shall have been well-aware of them, that Day?
101|1| The Sudden Calamity!
101|2| What is the Sudden Calamity?
101|3| And what do you know what the Sudden Calamity is?
101|4| It is a Day when mankind shall be like the scattered moths,
101|5| And the mountains like fluffed up wool.
101|6| That person, then, who weighs heavy [with good deeds] on the scales,
101|7| [That person] shall have a pleasant life.
101|8| And that person, who weighs light [because of bad deeds] on the scales,
101|9| The Abyss then shall be his home.
101|10| And what do you understand what it [the Abyss] is?
101|11| A Fire intensely hot.
102|1| The craving for more [worldly wealth and power] keeps you engrossed
102|2| Until you embrace the graves.
102|3| Nay! You shall soon come to know.
102|4| Nay again! You shall soon come to know.
102|5| Nay, if you but knew with certain knowledge! 
102|6| You shall surely see the Hell!
102|7| Then you shall surely see it with eye of certitude!
102|8| And then, on that Day, you shall surely be questioned about the bounties you enjoyed!
103|1| By the time!
103|2| Indeed, mankind is surely in loss,
103|3| But not those among them who believe and do good deeds, and exhort one another to Truth, and exhort one another to patience.
104|1| Woe to everyone who taunts, slanders, or backbites others,
104|2| Who hoards wealth and keeps on counting it [avariciously].
104|3| Thinking his wealth will last forever for him.
104|4| Nay! He will surely be thrown into the Crushing Disaster.
104|5| And what do you know what the Crushing Disaster is?
104|6| It is the Fire kindled by Allah,
104|7| That which would ride over human minds.
104|8| It would be closing in on them from everyside,
104|9| In extended columns.
105|1| Have you not seen what your Lord did to the companions of the elephant ?
105|2| Did He not bring their plan to naught,
105|3| And send upon them swarms of birds,
105|4| Pelting them with stones of baked clay,
105|5| And then making them look like chewed husk?h 
106|1| For the welfare of the Qurays
106|2| Their welfare during winter and summer journeys [of their trading caravans].
106|3| So let them worship the Lord of this House,
106|4| Who provided them food against hunger and security against fear.
107|1| Have you seen the one who denies that there is a just divine system in place for mankind?
107|2| Such a one it is that pushes the orphan away,
107|3| And does not motivate others on feeding the poor.
107|4| And, woe to those who pray —
107|5| Those who are neglectful of, and/or inattentive in, their Prayers,
107|6| Those who show off,
107|7| And refuse to give even trifling things to others!
108|1| We have indeed given you the amplitude.
108|2| So pray to your Lord and offer sacrifice for Him!
108|3| Your enemy is the one to be cut off. 
109|1| Say, "O you who suppress the Truth!"
109|2| "I worship not that which you worship,"
109|3| "And you worship not Him Whom I worship,"
109|4| "And I shall worship not that which you worship,"
109|5| "And you worship not Him Whom I worship."
109|6| "For you your way of life and for me, mine."
110|1| When Allah's help and the victory have come,
110|2| And you see people entering Allah-ordained way of life for mankind, in large numbers,
110|3| Then glorify your Lord with His praise, and seek His forgiveness. HE is indeed the One to accept repentance.
111|1| Abu Lahab's hands are perished; and he too!
111|2| His wealth and what he earned was of no avail to him.
111|3| [In the life to come] he shall burn in a Fire of blazing flames
111|4| Along with his wife, carrier of (thorny) wood —
111|5| A rope of twisted strands in her neck!
112|1| Say, "He is Allah, the One and Only!"
112|2| Allah, the eternal and independent Lord and Master on Whom everything in the Universe depends!
112|3| He begets not nor is He begotten.
112|4| And there is none comparable to Him.
113|1| Say, "I seek refuge in Lord of the dawn."
113|2| "From the evil of what He has created," 
113|3| "And from the evil of darkness when it sets in," 
113|4| "And from the evil of those who blow on knots,"
113|5| "And from the evil of the envious person when he envies."
114|1| Say, "I seek refuge in the Lord of mankind,"
114|2| "King of mankind,"
114|3| "One Whom mankind should worship,"
114|4| "From the evil of the temptations, doubts and suggestions of the stealthy whisperer,"
114|5| " — One who puts the evil things in minds of mankind — "
114|6| "From among the jinn and mankind." 

{
    "author": "Mohammad Shafi"
}